aN 


Nieves 


eee ay ; oN 
ees Ret 


ay at tle * Bheotoyet Sey 
= a PRINCETON, N. J. Y, 


BE 9k? eer. 
Peters, George Nathaniel 
| Henry, 1825-1909. 
| SA The theocratic kingdom of 


t 
WAR ee 
Vira, 3. 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 with funding from 
Princeton Theological Seminary Library 


https://archive.org/details/theocratickingdoO2pete_0O 


AUsie. 


THEOCRATIC KINGDOM 


OF OUR 


LORD JESUS, THE CHRIST, 


AS COVENANTED IN 


THE OLD TESTAMENT, 


THE NEW TESTAMENT. 


BY 


GEO. N. H. PETERS, A.M, 


Evane. Luts. MINISTER. 


“A wise man will hear, and will increase learning.” —Prov. 1: 5. 
‘‘ Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will increase 
in learning.’’—Proy, 9: 9. 


Ve Coden LL. 


FUNK & WAGNALLS 


NEW YORK 1884 LONDON 
10 AND 12 Dry STREET 44 FLEET STREET 
All Rights Reserved 


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1884, by 
FUNK & WAGNALILS, 
In the Office of the Librarian of Congress at Washington, D. C. 


ra | RM AN oY 
A RA AA NT A 
T O « 
Va YY 


REV. 8. SPRECHER, D.D., LID. 


THIS VOLUME IS RESPECTFULLY 


spevicated. 


Rev. AND Dear Sir: As a token of personal regard, of due appreciation for coun. 
sel received and words of encouragement given in hours of deep despondency, of indebted- 
ness for valuable instruction in Theology, rich suggestions in friendly and Christian con- 
verse, and for a true brotherly treatment (when needed because of the views presented within 
the following pages), you will excuse the liberty taken in dedicating the following volume to 
yourself. The esteem and love of years urge me to manifest my gratitude in this manner. 
Besides this, to your instructions are many indebted for being impressed with the maxim 
given by Bacon: “I hold every man to be a debtor to his profession, from the which, as men 
of course do seek to receive countenance and profit, so ought they of duty to endeavor 
themselves by way of amends to bea help and ornament thereto.” The feeling thus expressed, 
honorable since it manifests a proper love, you have constantly instilled, and which, if 
even exhibited in weak and imperfect efforts, must prove a source of gratification to you, 
being, at least, evidence that your precepts are remembered by your pupils. These volumes, 
and others in course of preparation, are only an outgrowth of the spirit inculcated by your- 
self, and as such will meet with your favorable notice. Not that I presume that everything 
contained in this work will meet with your approval, for in a work abounding with somany 
topics (all in the- field of controversy), it is scarcely likely that we should be of the same 
opinion on every point ; but I presume on that enlightened and Christian spirit which 
prompted you frequently to assert that truth never will suffer when investigations after rt 
are carried on with reverence and submission to the paramount authority of Revelation. 
For, as you once ingeniously remarked, even if the result of such discussion should be one- 
sided, or to some extent erroneous, it will lead others to enter into a renewed examination of 
the subject and to a more correct statement of the matter. In your official and private rela- 
tions you have exemplified, what is justly regarded as a happy sententious saying, ‘‘ In essen- 
tials, wnity ; in non essentials, liberty ; in all things, charity ;” and therefore I feel assured 
that my present tender of affection, with the imperfections attached to it, will not prove an 


exception .to your uniformly charitable regard. 


With deep respect and brotherly affection I subscribe myself 
Most fraternally yours, 


GEO. N. H. PETERS. 


“Hobo nccessible is the language of Scripture, although felo ca penetrate into its 
depths. Ghat it contains, open to all, it utters like un intimate friend, to the heart 
of learned and unlearned alihe, And what it concenls in mysteries it does not present 
in lofty language, which the sluggish and untanght mind dare not approach, like a 
panper before a man of foewlth; but inbites all iv simple speech, Whom it nourishes, 
not only by munifest truth, but excites by concealed truth—the sume truth being some- 
times more manifest, sometimes more concenled.”—Augustine Hpis. 137 to Volusi- 
anus, sec. 18.—Quoted by Dr, NEANDER, p. 214, Mem. of Ch. Life. 


“Something of the future must hbe im bint foho foould beneht bis age.”—Rorus, 
in Stille Stunde. 


“Ge stand upon the position thut there is w positibe rebelation, Hobhich is not the 
most distinguished product of reason, but 4 dibine fork of redemption by bim Mhom 
foe appeal to us the Son of Man and the Sow of God, tho ‘died for our sins and 
rose again for our justification.’ tis im the Poly Scriptures that foe find the rebe- 
lation fobhich supplies the immortal bunts of onr conscience. Apostolical Christianity 
Does not come to ns us the first theological elaboration, the first system im w series. 
St is Christianity itself und consequently the primitive type, from Mbich toe ought neber 
to Wander. Jf is the norm and rule of Theology. Within these limits fe freely 
ndmit the liberty of thought.  Wariety of opinions has nothing Mbhich frightens us; 
and foe fould regard uniformity and umumimity on secondary points as a fearful ebil,” 
—M. DE PRESSENSE. 


PSBUE OH CONTENTS. 


Proposition 107.--The passages referring to heaven in connection with the saints, 
do not conflict with, but confirm, our doctrine of the Kingdom 


eoeeere se ene seooeeas 


Prop. 108.—The formula, ‘‘Kingdom of heayven,’’ connected with the parables, con- 
firms our doctrine of the Kingdom 


oeeereereexre eee eee se ee eee Se ee ee eee eee se ee ees 


Prop. 109.—An examination of the passages of Scripture, supposed to teach the 
Church-Kingdom theory, will confirm our doctrine of the Kingdom 


eeeeceee eran se 


Prop. 110.—The passage most relied on to prove the Church-Kingdom theory, utterly 
disproves it 


coe eee eee tr ee ese ese eneeese eer ver eereeceoe ese eee eee ee ere er eee seer et eoees eee 


Prop. 111.—The Kingdom being identified with the elect Jewish nation, it cannot be 
established without the restoration of that nation.........c.ccecceccoeceseces 


Prop. 112.—The Kingdom, if established as predicted, demands the national restora- 
tion of the Jews Tey TINS G TROY OATS RDS ol ae A a ea 


Prop. 113.—The connection of this Kingdom with Jewish restoration necessitates 
the realization of their predicted repentance and conversion... .............5 


Prop. 114.—This Kingdom being identified with the elect Jewish nation, its estab- 


lishment at the restoration embraces the supremacy of the nation over the 
RR UM CNOAT UIE ca dda te exe ge eiv as ele ccc s ec tieeieeasive ta oactnwascecsncens 


Prop. 115.—The Kingdom is not established without a period of violence and war.. 


Prop. 116.—This Kingdom is a visible, external one, here on the earth, taking the 
Pe OPA TEI MEAT OC OTIS: 5 95.50! Main cceiig a in''s oe oie o'ejp tases ele 'sle hein e eleg ce ode e)eie'as 


Prop, 117.—The Kingdom of God re-established, will form a divinely appointed, and 
Pao pemen ib oelod  DREOCTACY: 2. 105. ans cciw since slo easels pase sewees bees cane cee 


Prop. 118.—This view of the Kingdom is most forcibly sustained by the figure of the 
Sia RA ESTRELA TOP PC eh ae Riya Nahe: We dusel otdigiian Se lg ahalie o whel'ela\e 


Prop. 119-—The Kingdom of God is represented, in the Millennial descriptions, as re- 
storing all the forfeited blessings... 1.00... ccc ee csc ce cs cr cece ee eceseecscnee 


Prop, 120.—This Kingdom, with its Millennial blessings, can only be introduced 
through the power of God in Christ Jesus. ........ cee ee eee eee eee enter eee 


Prop. 121.—This Kingdom, of necessity, requires a Pre-Millennial Personal Advent 
Meare Cb CHTISG | oss. wees ce cle slp cle cee tes aeisie teases wise sense else eee 


Prop. 122.—As ‘‘Son of Man,’’ David’s Son, Jesus inherits David’s throne and king- 
dom, and also the land of Palestine,...... Wives ightie ale chet sg ora aumlmeet ate picets. semana ee 


11 


16 


130 


141 


152 


161 } 


S CONTENTS. 


Prop. 123.—The Pre-Millennial Advent and accompanying Kingdom are united 


with the destruction of Antichrist. ..........0..202 se ece reser sc cee srenccrcecs 208 
Prop. 124.—This Kingdom is delayed several thousand years, to raise up a nation or 
people capable of sustaiming it............ cece cee e eee cece ence tenseeeues 224 
Prop. 125.The Kingdom to be inherited by these gathered saints requires their 
Testrrection from the Goad. Jo... cde cece benvereunescovees chest she on 227 
Prop. 126.—In confirmation of our position, the Old Testament clearly teaches a 
Pre-Millennial resurrection of the saints... ....... cece cece ee cee ceeeceeness 244 
Prop. 127.—In support of our view, the Apocalypse unmistakably teaches a Pre- 
Millennial resurrection of the saints................ cin CB ahd Sone 5 pee eee 264 
Prop. 128.—The language of the Gospels and Epistles is in strict accord with the _ 
requirements of a Pre-Mill. resurrection)... .......0.0c eee c ces sscscsam oe » a ee 
Prop. 129.—The Jewish view of a Pre-Mill. resurrection, requisite for the introduction 
of the Messianic Kingdom, is fully sustained by the grammatical sense of the 
PR Wig A CRITE Bit cso ceary aio la %o "o's hans ens elalie Sp Ps Waleed okt tes VN en 311 
Prop. 130,—This Kingdom is also preceded by a translation of living saints......... 314 
Prop. 131.—This Kingdom embraces the visible reign of Jesus, the Christ, here on 
BEG, vice Rite. ove tei WRK S 4 Wye Sd Seas sb dalpicia ohh st ee es ee 340 
Prop, 132.—This view of the Kingdom confirmed by the judgeship of Jesus........ 352 


Prop, 133.--This view of the Kingdom fully sustained by the ‘‘ Day of Judgment.’’.. 362 


Prop. 134.—-Our view of the Judgment (and, as a consequence, that also of the King- 
dom) is fully sustained by the passage of Scripture, Matt. 25: 31-46.......... 372 


Prop. 135.—The doctrine of the Kingdom in full accord with the scriptural doctrine 
pL the jndgmaent of Helievera i. in. es Sees co e's ed ageeae's 0s 6445 Cee ee 385 


Prop. 136.—The doctrine of the Kingdom in agreement with the doctrine of the in- 
CeO IONS BEALE, Riise} cons ced Vics usvy is cdderseccteets Se oe . 394 


Prop, 137.—This doctrine of the Kingdom sustained by the phrase ‘‘the world to 


ONS, ek Soak wn Paes a N'do wien © is 'kcus wees ca sk ayie a ohne een 404 
Prop. 138.—This doctrine of the Kingdom fully corroborated by ‘‘ the day of the 

ROGRAS ORM, LEG CEG is wb) s v5» n'e 6 6605 Vos Vat «ving ode eed Sis wtp Oe 409 
Prop. 139.—The Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, as covenanted, is sustained by what 

is to take place in ‘‘the morning”’ of ‘‘ the day of the Christ’’................ 414 
Prop. 140.—The doctrine of the Kingdom confirmed by the phraseology of the New 

Testament respecting ‘‘the end of the age”... 0... ....cccccssccccccescccautce 420 
Prop. 141.—This Kingdom necessarily united with the perpetuity of the earth...... 427 \ 


Prop. 142.—The Kingdom being related to the earth (extending over it), and involy- 
ing the resurrection of the saints (in order to inherit it), is sustained by the 
promise to the saints of inheriting the earth. ............. 0c. cccc cw uce es Oe 


Prop. 143.—The early church doctrine of the Kingdom is supported by ‘‘the Rest,”’ 
or the keeping of the Sabbath, mentioned by Paul........ ........... vin deaws 448 


Prop. 144.—This Kingdom embraces ‘‘the times of refreshing,” and ‘the times of 
the restitution of all things,’’ mentioned Acts 3: 19-21....... slab Gree «. 461 


CONTENTS. 9 
Prop. 145.—-This Kingdom includes ‘‘the regeneration” of Matt. 19: 28............ 473 
Prop. 146.—This Kingdom is associated with the deliverance of Creation........... 479 


Prop. 147.—This Kingdom is preceded by a wonderful shaking of the heavens and 
RUMBA EU IO Ya f011d she, sad de lo dons oar dental Svein stn oils A The! s <i ET ie GAEL OR igh Ci ee 494. 


Prop. 149.—This Kingdom is preceded by the conflagration of 2 Pet. 3 :10-13.... 506 


Prop. 150.—The establishment of this Kingdom is not affected by the extent of 
Ue Se O TING Te COU myer eee hoes a aslo wg inlays Oey vc U4a d's owls sieec be cascs’s 510 


Prop. 151,—This Kingdom is identified with ‘‘the New Heavens and New Earth’’ of 
PeaeOdne Ls AN Ob): 2a memmctiroen das and Key. 20 5d... fle bac cake wn 524 


Prop. 152.—This Kingdom is connected with the perpetuation of the human race.. 535 
Prop. 153.—This view of the Kingdom, with its two classes (viz., the translated and 
resurrected saints, glorified, forming one class, and mortal men the other), is for- 


MUON epees OR CSL 46 Crane OULAUIOIY, |. 2.15.0 os sew git 24s ao ss) 0s oo niesie's bevels gee 554 


Prop. 154.—This Theocratic Kingdom includes the visible reign of the risen and 
Peariite dh Solita MOLE tiepenretia tng We attety os ar. voldate Ghiciaed sco Glas bow eeceogee 570 


Prop. 155.—This Kingdom exhibits Jesus not only as ‘‘the King,” but also as ‘the 
[GE chine ent Elma Aue ey gees Br U0) Sa Re la a 601 


Prop. 156.—The doctrine of the Kingdom enforces the future priesthood of the 
I eee ae gees Ca AONE at oo sie) o's slag che v4 0°4ied wi a.aid eine 6 siee's ad ews 607 


Prop. 157.—This doctrine of the Kingdom enforces the future ministrations of 
ne ee ae ee OR ee OOM Se SCS sic a6 wise ones eed eee. Rere ae ks 618 


Prop. 158.—The doctrine of the Kingdom aids in locating the Millennial period.... 622 


Prop. 159.—This Theocratic Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, the Christ, will never 
Set OLE are NT eer SSN Ratt e Snag) cietase aw Accs ¢.y'ss/o¥ia s oh t s whoo dena ee elaces 630 


Prop. 160.—This Kingdom will be set up in the divided state of the Roman Empire. 639 
Prop. 161.—This Kingdom will not be re-established until Antichrist is overthrown. 668 


Prop. 162.—This Kingdom will be preeeery by a fearful time of trouble, both in the 
SPT TRITON OL laos ciale sis cio fap Oe os ie se co Se hi sled a aie sie eens eee e see 731 


Prop. 163.—This Kingdom revealed will be preceded by the predicted ‘Battle of 
Puen ay AOL OM AIMIO NEY 5 214 saw ce Cece asin geese cian oslo Csiv eles Sea geees 751 


Prop. 164.—This Kingdom ends the Gentile domination............ Mas atbioh sora 773 


An ae ‘ 
Ct eee ia 


THEOCRATIC KINGDOM 


OF OUR 


DOWD SESUS THE CHRIST. 


Proposition 107. Zhe passages referring to heaven in connection 
with the saints do not conflict with, but confirm our doctrine 


of the Kingdom. 


In urging this Kingdom it is said that such promises as Matt. 
5 : 12, Matt. 19: 21, etc., refer to the third heaven, and from 
thence it is inferred that the Kingdom is the state of the saved, 
triumphant Church in heaven. But we have already shown (Prop. 
108, etc.) that Covenant and prophecy describe a Kingdom here on 
the earth ‘‘ wnder the whole heaven’; that for wise purposes the 
Kingdom has been postponed ; that Christ now remains in heaven 
until the period of manifestation arrives; that He comes from 
heaven and the Kingdom is inherited—these and other reasons 
indicate that there is no conflict between the two, but that, as 
specifically announced (as e.g. Zech. 14: 5) the saints come with 
Him, and ¢hen follows the reign over the earth (as e.g. Zech. 14: 
9)—hence such passages must not be understood as embracing or 
inferring the Kingdom itself. 


Obs. 1. That large class of writers who concede the renewal of the earth 
and its occupancy by the saints, etc., do not, of course, press these pas- 
sages to an eternal inheritance and Kingdom in the third heaven. ‘The 
concessions that they make are all that are requisite for our view (Props. 
140-152). 

Obs. 2. The meaning of the phrase ‘‘ Kingdom of heaven,’ and its 
derivation have already been given (Props. 19, 45, etc.); we now only add 
that those nearest to the latter, viz., the Jews, disciples, and the early 
Church, found no difficulty in the phrase in applying it toa Kingdom 
here on earth established under Divine auspices and power. 


. 


y WAL 
12 _& \ HE THROCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 107. 


It was only when'men proceeded to forsake the Covenant and to spiritualize the prom- 
ises that ‘“ heaven” (ive. the third heaven) was substituted for the Kingdom, and even 
applied to present: believers in the Church.’ When Augustine, Ambrose, and others (Cum- 
ming’s Lec. on Romanism, p. 206) could interpret the word ‘‘ heaven” in the Lord’s 
Prayer to mean “‘ the souls of all believers,” it was very easy to erect the Papal views 
upon the same.. It is surprising, however, that eminent Protestant theologians should 
follow such a perversion of Scripture,:so that even Knapp (Ch. Theol., S. 159, 2, (2) ete.) 
transfers the Kingdonr to heaven, thus expressing the opinion of a vast multitude, but 
forgetting his own concessions (S., 155, 2, (2) ) of the renewal of the earth for a ‘‘ beauti- 
fied abode of man” and ‘‘'a’ Kingdom at the end of the world.’’ It certainly is contra- 
dictory to adopt botk views, for if the Kingdom is in the third heaven it cannot be on 
the earth, and if it is on the renewed earth, it certainly is not in heaven. The pure Pop- 
ish view does not involve such an antagonism (seeing that it places the Kingdom forever 
in heaven), while this Protestant application, half Popish and half Chiliastic, is palpably 
contradictory. 


Obs. 3. In the consideration of this subject it must not be overlooked, 
that ‘‘ heaven”’ is employed as a symbol or figure of honor, station, author- 
ity, power, and political or civil supremacy. ‘This is admitted by numer- 
ous writers, thus e.g. Horne (Index to Symb. Lang., Introd., vol. 2, p. 
465) makes it denote in Isa. 51:16 ‘a political universe,” ‘a Kingdom 
and polity ’’; Alexander, Com. Isa., 84:4, refers 1t to political states or 
authorities and Kingdoms ; several Coms. explain ‘‘ the war in heayen,”’ 
the casting out of heaven into the earth of Rev. 12 : 7-9, to denote the 
overthrow of Satan from power, etc.; Barnes, Rev. 6 : 14, makes it equiva- 
lent to ‘‘ the high places of the earth,’’ and explains this to mean places 
of power, station, etc.; many writers regard the ‘‘ new heavens’’ of Isa. 65 
and 66, as indicating prosperity, honor, exaltation, and others as delineat- 
ing anew civil and religious union, etc. Such references, which can be 
found in every variety and form, show that the word is also employed to 
denote things ow the earth. Hence, Prof. Bush and others define it when 
thus used, a symbol of ‘‘ a state or position of great conspicuity ’’; but we 
incline rather to that of others which explain it as ‘‘ a position or state of 
authority or dominion.’”’ In Luke 10:18 ‘‘ J beheld Satan as lightning 
fall from heaven,’’ Neander explains: ‘‘from the pinnacle of power 
which he had thus far held among men.’’* This Observation is corrobora- 
ted by the use made of the word in connection with Satan, as in Eph. 6: 
12 where he is represented as being in ‘‘ the heavenly places,’’ or ‘* heaven- 
lies.’? See the marginal reading, and notice that it is the same place pre- 
cisely that the saints shall occupy, Eph. 1:3. Satan now has the King- 
doms or heavenlies of this world (hence the offer made at temptation); he 
is ‘‘ the Prince of this world ’’; he is ‘* the Prince of the power of the air’’ 
(referring to the fact that the*political powers, etc., typified by Sun, Moon, 
and Stars, are in his power); and we are assured that the time is coming 
when this power shall be taken from him and be bestowed upon the 
saints. It is promised to believers that they shall possess the greatness of 
the Kingdom under the whole heaven; that they shall occupy the high 
places of the earth ; and this again is represented as an occupancy of the 
‘ principalities and powers in the heavenlies’’? (Eph. 3:10, 11), and as 


* Barnes’s note Com. loci, is unsatisfactory, making the lightning fall from heaven in- 
stead of Satan. Saying nothing of the quibble which destroys the force of Satan’s falling, 
we find that in other places Satan is spoken of as in heaven, as e.g. Rey. 12 : 7-9 ; Eph. 
6 : 12, marg. reading, etc. 


PRop. 107. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 13 


being “‘ blessed in the heavenlies in Christ,’’ Eph. 1:3. Keeping in view 
that future blessings are spoken of (Prop. 65, Obs. 9) as present owing 
to the present heirship of these heavenlies in Christ and to the certainty ot 
attaining to them when the appointed time comes for the overthrow of 
him who has usurped those heavenlies, there is no difficulty in determin- 
ing the general design of such passages. It throws additional light upon 
the phrase *‘ Kingdom of heaven,’’ as indicative of a Kingdom of power 
and dominion, a Kingdom manifesting, like that of heaven itself, the high- 
est stations of honor and irresistible power over the earth. We are now 
sitting “‘ together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus,’’ just as we have ar- 
rived at the New Jerusalem (Heb. 12:22), that is prospectively, and this 
will be shown under the Prop. (154) of the reign of the saints. The re- 
conciliation of things in heaven (Col. 1:10), and the gathering of all 
things in the heavenlies in Christ (‘‘ in the dispensation of the fulness of 
times,’’ Eph. 1:10), are also in a great measure to be applied to the restora- 
tion of authority and dominion over the world ; for, as all prophecy unhes- 
itatingly directs, it is still some time in the future when these Kingdoms, 
these heayenlies, mov in the possession of Satan, shall become the King- 
dom of our Lord and of His Christ. These ‘* heavenlies’’ also may thus 
be called, because the authority in them rightfully belongs to God, which 
authority is now fettered by them and remains more or less unacknowl- 
edged. 


Obs. 4. The predicted Kingdom of the Messiah, David’s Son, is no- 
where specified to be a Kingdom 77 the third heaven (Prop. 103), but ‘‘ of 
heaven’’ or rather ‘ of heavens’’ or ‘* of heaventies.’’ According to the Cove- 
nant it could not be im heaven, but it is of heaven ; that is, given by God, 
made as God designs it, fashioned after the will of heaven, and containing 
in itself ‘‘ heavens,’’ or *‘ heaveniies,’’ i.e. most eminent stations of power 
and dominion. Besides this, whatever might be allowed in this intermedi- 
ate (always excepting the Kingdom itself) state, we find that at the period 
of time designated for the setting up of this very Kingdom, Christ Him- 
self, as the Inheritor, the Son of man, /eaves heaven and with His saints 
proceeds to establish this identical Kingdom of heaven, and His saints 
inherit it. The fact that He thus leaves heaven and appears on earth, 
that a Kingdom specially His is connected with His appearing, etc.—this 
should impress us not to draw inferences from passages and directly oppose 
them to the general current of the Word. Thus e.g. that class like the 
following: ‘‘ Rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven,’’ Matt. 5:12, and 
others of similar import. Aside from the plural form ‘‘ in heavens’’ or 
‘‘ heavenlies’’ which is in accord with what has been stated, we might dis- 
miss this with the remark that what ‘‘ heavens’’ are denoted is simply taken 
for granted. But grant that the third heaven is meant, and that the 
plural form is used to impart grandeur, etc., even then it is easy of ex- 
planation without confining the parties themselves to the third heaven to 
obtain the reward of the Kingdom. God in heaven takes cognizance of 
actions and it is represented that a book of remembrance is kept (Daniel 
informs us that some Books are opened when the Kingdom 1s established), 
and that at the Coming of the Judge the award will be assigned. ‘The 
reward of every one then in view of conduct, is awarded, and that award is 
kept in heaven, as in the case of the seventy returning who were (Luke 
10 : 20) ‘‘ rather to rejoice because your names are written in heaven,”’ and 


14 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 107. 


of the disciples (Luke 12:32) to whom it was said “it is your Father’s 
good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.’”’ The reason of this resolves 
itself in a reward determined on Jdefore the period of its reception, a princi- 
ple that all theologians adopt. Christ who is our life is in heaven, and 
what we shall do or endure for His sake, shall elevate us as joint heirs with 
Him at His Coming; the reward itself being increased or diminished, so 
far as mere rank, position, etc., is concerned, proportioned to our use of 
talents, privileges, etc. But these positions are predetermined for certain 
characters ; hence Jesus said, that no one should occupy His right or Jeft 
hand, excepting him to whom the Father may give the honor. ‘This is the 
key-note to all such passages. All positions, according to the will and 
foreknowledge of God, are prepared for this manifestation of the Sons of 
God, Mark 10:40. This inspires hope; hence in Col. 1:5 we read of 
‘*the hone which is laid up for you in heaven,’’ and which hope is to be 
realized when Christ shall appear, 1 John 3:2, 3; Tit. 2:18, etc. Just as 
the hope does not remain in heaven but descends to earth a blessed reality, 
so we find by a comparison of Scripture that in every case the reward de- 
signed for us is only realized at the Sec. Advent upon earth. Thus to 
illustrate: in Phil. 3:20, ‘‘ owr conversation (citizenship, community, 
political society, Parkhurst, Wahl, Bloomfield, ete.) is i heaven’’—the 
predetermined order or arrangement or ‘‘ administration’’ is there, the 
title or award that gives adoption or heirship or judgeship, but to avoid 
the very inference that so many make and to remove any objection that 
any might allege from the stand-point of the Covenant, the Apostle adds, 
‘* from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ,’’ ete., 
thus uniting i/s realization with the Advent of Christ (comp. Meyer’s 
Com. loci). So the Hebrews (Heb. 10 : 34-37) are told that in view of 
their enduring sufferings and spoilings “* ye have in heaven a better and an 
enduring substance,’’ but well-knowing ‘‘ the hope of Jsrael,’’ he guards it 
by adding: “ for ye have need of patience, that, after ye have done the will 
of God, ye might receive the promise. For yet alittle while, and He that shall 
come will come and will not tarry.’’ Thus placing the reception of the 
promise where the entire tenor of the Record does, viz., at the Second 
Advent. In 2 Tim. 4:8, the crown laid up in heaven for Paul is to be 
given only in the day of the Lord’s appearing ; in 1 Pet. 1. : 4, 5, 7, the 
inheritance ‘‘ reserved in heaven’ is *‘ ready to be revealed in the last 
time,’ ‘* at the appearing of Jesus Christ ;”’ in 2 Cor. 5:2 it is ‘* the house 
which is from heaven,’ and which when exalted to the heavenlies is eter- 
~ nally in the same ; and in Rey. 21:2 the New Jerusalem, itself in heaven, 
is ‘‘ coming down from God out of heaven,’ and the Bible leaves it here 
without a withdrawal. ‘Taking these and other illustrations, all pointing 
to the future, not in heaven but here on earth, for a realization of reward, 
crown, etc., awarded, we see the force of the express passages which refer 
this period to the time when the Son of man sits on the throne of His 
glory, and the inheriting of the Kingdom, the reception of the peculiar 
stations of honor and authority, the bestowment of ‘‘ the heavenlies,’’ once 
usurped by Satan, shall be duly and happily experienced. 


The inferences drawn from the most simple passages (as e.g. ‘‘ For of such is the 
Kingdom of heaven,’’ i.e. those accounted worthy of the Kingdom have a childlike, ete , 
disposition, making it equivalent to entrance now into the Church or after death into 
heaven), of an inheritance received immediately after death in heaven, etc., has led to - 
various extravagances. It forms e.g. the foundation upon which the Popish doctrine of 


Prop. 107. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 15 


the intercession of saints is erected. This is forcibly illustrated in the case of Pope John 
XXII., who raised the question of ‘‘ the beatific vision,’’ declaring that none of the dead 
saints would enjoy it until after the Judgment Day. He was accused of heresy and of 
taking a course opposed to the interests of the Church. For the question was at once 
raised, ‘‘ If the saints stand not in the presence of God,#of what use is their interces- 
sion? What is the use of addressing prayers to them?” (Draper’s Intel. His. Europe, p. 
394.) It is the basis of the canonization of saints, the profuse and intemperate exalta- 
tion (i.e. rewarded, crowned, etc.) of believers in Protestant funeral discourses, and the 
ten thousand unscriptural works on heaven as the Christian’s home, inheritance, etc. 
The reader will find additional reasons for our position under Props. 120, 131, 132, 135, 
136, 137, etc., so that the clearer and express language, the explanatory, must give us the 
proper conception of such passages. When this earth has a God-man for its Ruler, a 
Theocratic ordering manifested in its glory, a God again dwelling with man and dissem- 
inating His blessings, the will of God done on earth as in heaven, etc., then we have 
“* the heavenly country’? which (Heb. 11 : 16) the Patriarchs sought, and this is consistent 
with the inheritance covenanted to them,which then is “ filled with the glory of the Lord.’’ 


16 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 108. 


Proposrrion 108. The formula “Kingdom of heaven” connected 
with the parables confirms our doctrine of the Kingdom. 


The contrary is asserted by all opposed to us, and as the Church- 
Kingdom view mainly obtains as a Scriptural basis its rise and 
defence from it, it deserves attention. 


Obs. 1. A few preliminary thoughts are, however, in place. (1) The 
reader will recall our Prop. concerning the mysteries of the Kingdom. 
The parables were given respecting the secrets of the Kingdom and were in 
themselves designed ¢o conceal some things that were necessary. Lange 
(Com., Matt. 13) correctly shows that the common notion (viz., that they 
were adapted to weak and carnal understandings) entertained, is erro- 
neous. But Lange does not go far enough, for if we are to take the testi- 
mony of Jesus Himself, they were far from being designed for popular in- 
struction, being in point of fact employed to conceal some very important 
truths.’ Jesus says that He spoke plainly to. His disciples, but im para- 
bles to the people, clearly distinguishing between plain and hidden truth. 
In Matt. 13:13; Mark 4:11; Luke8 : 10, Hesays that the parable is used 
that the people may not comprehend. ‘The reason for this hes in their 
foreknown depravity and rejection of the Messiah, in their being wnadble to 
receive the intended postponement of the Kingdom and contemplated in- 
grafting of the Gentiles. T’o appreciate the parables in all their fulness it 
is absolutely necessary to keep in view the Covenant and the Divine Pur- 
pose in its fulfilment, as shown in previous Propositions.? (2) The depth 
of these parables cannot be apprehended unless we especially keep in mind 
what afterward occurred, viz., the postponement of the Kingdom, which, im- 
pressed by the foreknowledge of Jesus, gave a coloring to them highly marked 
and distinctive. By doing this, we avoid the perplexity of commentators 
in reconciling the one with the other (as e.g. the parable of the Leaven with 
that of the 'l'ares) ; and we make them accurately correspond with Covenant, 
prophecy, and the actual history of the Church. The parables having re- 
ference to the Kingdom of God must, as is the case, have reference to the 
rejection of Jesus and the consequences resulting therefrom, otherwise 
they would not be adapted to meet the exigencies of Christ’s position.* (8) 
If the parables delineate the Kingdom of God in the Church as now cur- 
rently believed, why is it that the Apostles did not ascertain this fact and 
use them as now popularly employed? If e.g. the parable of the Leaven, 
or of the Mustard Seed means what Neander and a multitude inform us, 
how comes it that those under special instruction and guidance did not so 
understand them, as admitted by Neander and these writers, and as proven 
beyond all dispute by Acts1:6? Why did they still labor under ‘a 
sensuous interpretation,’’ ‘‘ Jewish opinions,’’ etc., when as we are con- 
fidently told, ‘‘ the reference to the Kingdom is so plain ;’? and why was 
this ignorance of the Apostles perpetuated in the churches founded by 


Prop. 108.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. i 


them ; and why was it left for an uninspired man (such a doubtful source) 
as Origen to present the leverage by which the parables were lifted to their 
generally accepted position? Strange that it took several centuries before 
men arose who were able to obtain a correct understanding of them! In 
this estimate of the Apostle’s knowledge of the parables—for we take that 
given by eminent men—no account is taken of the special private instruc- 
tion of the Apostles, but because these, as they concede, did not militate 
against the notion of the Kingdom as entertained by the pious Jews (wit- 
ness Acts 1:6), did not prevent the retention of ‘‘ Jewish conceptions,”’ 
they are not to be regarded. If the parables really mean what so many 
popular works ascribe to them, the Thessalonians and others might have 
received a ready and crushing answer to their views of the Kingdom ; 
and the Apostles themselves could not have consistently preached a near, 
expectant Advent. Let any man with unprejudiced mind consider the 
opinions that the Disciples, Apostles and early Church entertained, and 
then compare them with those now so prevalent, and he will see abundant 
- reason for a most careful re-examination of the whole subject, for between 
the two there is @ most decided conflict. Ifthe parables were designed, as 
some assert (Lange Com., Matt., vol. 1, p. 237), to show the difference 
between the true Kingdom of Christ and ‘‘ the carnal’’ expectations of the 
Jews ; how comes it then that they did not restrain such ‘‘ carnal’’ antici- 
pations—with private instruction and the express declaration that they 
shouid understand them added—in the disciples and Apostles themselves ? 
This must be satisfactorily answered, or else the very preachers of the 
Kingdom stand before us self-deceived and ignorant. Our doctrine, how- 
ever, clears them of such inconsistency, and places them in a position of 
correct knowledge and proper appreciation of the parables.* (4) In this dis- 
- eussion, the vital difference that exists between our view and that of others 

is, that we hold that the parables teach what is preparatory or introductory 
to the Kingdom, whilst they maintain that the parables refer directly to a 
Kingdom already in existence, and describe its condition, etc. The latter 
opinion is brought out in the general affirmation (Lange’s Com., cap. to 
Matt. 18), that Christ presents in them ‘‘ the founding and development 
of His Kingdom through all its phases, from its beginning to its end.”’ 
Aside from the fact that they themselves tell us that the Church was 
founded previously and hence could not, on their own showing, be founded 
then, this caption affirms more than can be proven, but nevertheless is taken 
for granted, without decisive—only inferential—proof, and forms the key- 
note of the entire interpretation. ‘The former idea, forced upon us by the 
exact promise of the Theocratic:Davidic Kingdom, prophecy, history of the 
Shurch, example of the disciples, etc., forms, on the other hand, the guide 
for our interpretation of the parables. In the application of these two 
principles we now propose to test the language of the parables themselves 
and see to which one they most accurately correspond. ‘There is no differ- 
ence, of account, between us as to the definition of a parable, and with 
them we hold that the main thing to be sought for is the truth pointed 
out, or taught by the narrative, or course of action presented.* (5) We are 
not to be understood as basing our doctrine on the parables, for we cheer- 
fully adopt the rule given by Horne (vol. 1, Jntrod., p. 395) and others, 
that no doctrine, or article of faith, is to be established from a parabie, 
simply because all such, however illustrative and confirmatory, in order to 
be understood and appreciated, presuppose and require a previous acquaint- 


18 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 108. 


ance with doctrine. It isin this respect that so great a man as Neander 
fails to give satisfaction. In the introduction to his admirable Church 
History, he founds his doctrine of the Church-Kingdom upon the parable 
of the Leaven ; and the entire History and other works are pervaded by its 
influence. It was in this direction that his sincere mind sought to escape 
from difficulties alleged against Christianity ; but whatever the motive, it 
certainly was a mistake to draw so important an inference from so slight a 
source. <A doctrine permeating such noble monuments of learning and re- 
search should have had a stronger foundation underneath it than a para- 
bolic one.® (6) Covenant and prophecy promise only one, and that a per- 
manent, Kingdom to the Messiah, David’s Son. Nothing is said of an 
inferior and then superior one, of one existing before the Sec. Advent as 
a prelude to another, of several successive stages in a progressive direction ; 
for the decided impression made is, that one Aingdom alone is described as 
existing under ‘‘ the reign of the Messiah.’’ Hence, this theory of succes- 
sive stages, etc., so conveniently grafted on the parables to make them, if 
possible, consistent with each other, ought, if correct, to find corroborat- 
ing evidence in its support outside of the parables, either in Covenant or 
prediction. Bnt unfortunately the only proof adduced in its behalf comes 
from two of the parables themselves. The parabolic form 1s a convenient 
refuge for all mystical interpretations, being admirably adapted to secure, as 
some do, a Kingdom in the visible Church, or, if necessary, in the invisible, 
or even in both, owing to its caption. (7) Again, it must be borne in 
mind that quite a number of the parables, as many writers (especially Gres- 
well) have shown, are prophetical in their nature. ‘They predict matters 
which relate to the Kingdom of God. ‘This prophetical meaning is so self- 
evident that it needs no discussion. We only refer to it to add that, if 
they possess such a characteristic (as any good classification at once indi- 
cates), then they ought to be explained, not isolated but 7m accord with the 
general tenor of prophecy. 


1TIn addition to what was said under Props. 11-15, it may be advisable, in view of the 
important bearing on the subject, to introduce other writers who fully indorse our 
position. Thus Lange (Com. Matt., pp. 235 and 239) also contends that they (the para- 
bles) were designed in a measure to conceal the truth. Storr (Diss. on Parables, s. 10) 
fully admits that they ‘‘also answer the end of clothing them (the subject) in ob- 
security, and become obscure allegories or enigmas if propounded without any explana- 
tion.’’ After stating that many were thus uttered, he assigns the reasons, that the Jews 
were not then prepared for appreciating the doctrine of the Kingdom, and that it was 
done to prevent them from deriding Christ, etc. (Smith, New Test. His., p. 284) rejects 
the idea that parables were designed as ‘‘ a condescension to the ignorance of the great 
mass of mankind,” and points out the fact that Christ first taught without a parable, and 
only when met with unbelief and scorn does He teach in a parabolic manner. The ques- 
tion of the disciples (Matt. 13 :10) implies their astonishment at this change, which in- 
dicated that ‘‘ He was speaking to the multitude in the parables and dark sayings which 
the Rabbis reserved for their chosen disciples.’’ He also says: ‘‘ He had chosen this 
form of teaching because the people were spiritually blind and deaf (Matt. 13 :13), and in 
order that they might remain so (Mark 4 :12).” He adds, that parables were given to 
reveal ‘‘ the seekers after truth.” Kleuker (quoted by Lisco, Introd. p. 17, to Parables), re- 
marks : ‘* It was the design of the parables of Christ, like the old prophetical delinea- 
tions of His coming, to describe things, indeed, according to the whole compass and in- 
ternal truth, yet still, like the former, to carry with them a certain darkness, so that 
those alone could see into the spirit of them who sought it with full sincerity of mind ; 
no others understood anything of it, and what they understood they made no other use 
of than to fret themselves and oppose Christ.” Gerlach (Lange’s Com., vol. 1, p. 242) 
says: ‘‘ the parables are like the pillar of the cloud and of fire, when darkness was pre- 
sented to the Egyptians, but light and brightness to the Covenant people. They resem- 


PRop. 108. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 19 


ble the husk which preserves the kernel from the indolent, and for the earnest and dili- 
gent.” A multitude of such references, indicating that the parables are not so easily 
comprehended but require study and application to understand their meaning, might be 
presented, thus paving the way for what follows. 

? As has been abundantly proven in previous Propositions, the foreknown and actually 
realized rejection of the tender of the Kingdom, conditioned by repentance, making a new 
ordering requisite in order to prepare for the Kingdom, gives that peculiar and distinc- 
tive aspect to the parables which was so perplexing to the Jewish hearers who anticipated 
an immediate setting up of the Messianic Kingdom, a hope from which even the disciples 
could not at once divest themselves. ‘lo comprehend the parables, therefore, the stud- 
ent must observe what Kingdom is covenanted and predicted ; why it was not estab- 
lished at the First Advent, what was the mode of Divine Procedure during the postpone- 
ment, etc., as presented in Props. 19-73. The parables cannot be opposed to the oath- 
bound Covenant. 

’ Hence it is that the peculiar teaching of the parables, in the form given, is strong 
proof of Divine inspiration. Reference is not now made simply to the exact fulfilment 
of the prophetic element in them, but to the manner in which Jesus evidences the exceeding 
delicate position in which He was placed. For, foreknowing the rejection of the King- 
dom by the representative men of the nation and the consequent postponement of the 
Kingdom until a people are gathered (repentant and believing) and until His Sec. Advent, 
He now vindicates His foreknowledge and presents the result (that has happened thus 
far) in a form least repellent to the Jewish mind and expectation. We assert, in view of 
what has already been proven respecting the Kingdom, that no mere human intellect 
could have devised such a skilfully arranged mode of conveying the most unpalatable (i.e. 
to Jews) truths. 

4 The student is requested to ponder Mark 4 : 34, etc., where it is said that ‘‘ He ex- 
pounded all things to His disciples” so that it might be fulfilled (v. 11), “ Unto you it is given 
to know the mystery of the Kingdom of God ; but unto them that are without, all these things are 
done in parables.” Now the parables are given to illustrate things pertaining to the King- 
dom ; is it reasonable to suppose that the principal thing, viz., the Kingdom itself, would 
be left untouched in this private expounding, especially when these disciples were sent out 
to preach the Kingdom? No; and yet all this private teaching and explanation of the 
parables only confirmed them in the covenanted Messianic Kingdom (so e.g. Acts 1 : 6, etc.). 
Hence we affirm, that if the parables and the expounding of them privately by Jesus did 
not remove the Jewish conception of the Kingdom out of the minds of the disciples spe- 
cially favored and appointed as preachers of the Kingdom, the parables ought not to have 
that influence to-day ; for if it does (as many contend), it lowers the authority of the 
Apostles (accusing them of gross misconception and of having preached a Kingdom never 
to be realized), and it represents the teaching of Jesus and His sending them forth as 
such preachers in an invidious ight. This also sets aside a favorite theory of some 
European and American writers, who think the parables describe ‘‘ a Kingdom of God in 
mystery,’ i.e. a hidden Kingdom, because the mysteries of the Kingdom were given to 
the disciples. But we have shown (Props. 11-15) that the Kingdom is one thing and the 
mysteries pertaining to it quite another. Neither Covenant nor prophecy present us a hid. 
den Kingdom ; for, as we shall logically show, its re-establishment as a Kingdom is de- 
pendent upon the restoration of the fallen-down Davidic tabernacle. The disciples and 
Apostles knew nothing of such “ a Kingdom in mystery ”; and so also the early Church 
were ignorant of it. 

> Farrar (Life of Christ, vol. 1, p. 324) makes the parables illustrate the reception, value, 
results, and extension of the Gospel of the Kingdom, i.e. the truths pertaining to the 
Kingdom. To this no particular exception might be taken, but when he afterward makes 
the Gospel of the Kingdom the exact equivalent of the Kingdom itself, then serious ob- 
jection arises. Sirr (The First Resurrection, p. 37) presents a view that is deserving the 
attention of the critical student. He makes the Kingdom of heaven as employed in the 
parables to be equivalent to ‘‘ the Supernal rulers,” because (according to Scapula, 
Schleusner), the word kingdom (in Greek) often denotes ‘‘ supreme power’ or ‘‘ king,”’ 
etc. Since the plural form ‘‘ heavens,”’ or ‘‘ heavenlies,” is used, we then have “‘the 
supreme power or rule of the heavenlies’’ as thus illustrated through the parables. How- 
ever this may be, it is not requisite to adopt it, being in some respects different to the 
general usage respecting the phrase (comp. Props. 22, 23, and 45). 

€ Trench’s remarks (On Parables, Introd. p. 39), as corroborative, may well be quoted. 
*¢ Once more, the parables may not be made the first sources of doctrine. Doctrines 
otherwise and already grounded may be illustrated or indeed further confirmed by them ; 
but it is not allowable to constitute doctrine first by their aid. They may be the outer 


20 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 108. 


ornamental fringe but not the main texture of the proof. For, from the literal to the 
figurative, from the clearer to the more obscure, has been ever recognized as the law of 
Scripture interpretation. This rule, however, has been often forgotten, and controver- 
sialists looking around for arguments with which to sustain some weak position, one for 
which they can find no other support in Scripture, often invent for themselves supports 
in these.” He refers to Irenzus, Tertullian, etc., as entertaining the same opinion. 


Obs: 2: Ifthe Royedom of God is what is 50 aay ri represented, viz., 
** God's rule,” 0 ‘God's reign in the heart,’ ‘the body of believers,”’ 
then, as a ace of course, if they are Be tciea it would be appro- 
priate to substitute one or the other of these in the place of the heading 
of the parables. Let any one test this, and he must see by its evident wa- 
Clee that such is not the case. Hence having found by Covenant and 
prophecy in the Old Test. the Kingdom of God, let us come to the parables 
and regard them from this position, and see whether they do not fully cor- 
respond with the one Kingdom promised and predicted. In this way we 
avoid making the unfounded distinction of a select higher measure of in- 
formation for the initiated and an inferior degree for the unlearned, which 
Fairbairn justly condemns ; and at the same time preserve the more pri- 

rate instruction afforded to the dis sciples from degenerating into substan- 
tially (Acts 1:6) what all received, i.e. they remained, with their special 
advantages (according to our opposer) just as ignorant. This removes the 
notion that there are secret doctrines imparted by them that should not be 
made known to all over against the precise declaration, Matt. 10:27. And 
also, it proposes to correct the idea entertained by many writers, that the 
parables ‘‘ tended virtually with the mass of His hearers fo increase their 
ignorance and misapprehension of the truth’? (Fairbairn, note to p. 26, 
Introd. to Lisco’s Parables). This sadly reflects on the ministry of Jesus. 
If the Kingdom is what Fairbairn pronounces it to be, a purely spir- 
itual affair, then indeed we admit this was the case, and Christ the 
Light appears with an obscured disk. But take our doctrine of the King- 
dom and apply it, and the Light is untarnished, for then, instead, the 
Kingdom is truthfully and correctly represented, its postponement intima- 
ted, the preparatory stage of gathering out portrayed, and the unbelief and 
rejection of the truth by the Jews is rendered the more culpable. We un- 
hesitatingly say that, if the ae the main leading covenanted sub- 
ject preached, 1s what so many style it, then it was the duty of Christ to so 
plainly proclaim tt that, at least, His own disciples should not.say what 
they did, Acts 1:6. Having already vindicated Christ’s preaching, it is 
not necessary to enlarge. Therefore, we only add: that the Jews did not 
receive the truth because a spiritual Kin gdom was presented in it for their 
acceptance, but for the reason that these parables, before the setting up of 
the Kingdom, imposed upon them preparatory duties and intimated a 
period of time to intervene, which was unpalatable to their hearts and ex- 
pectations. Ilence the parable itself, the real truth contained in it, proved 
to be instrumental, just as Paul indicates 2 Cor. 2:14-17. ‘Truths 
hitherto concealed may indeed be found in them, reference to higher truths 
still future may be indicated, but never is the leading subject, ‘that of the 
Kingdom, thus concealed. Covenanted as it is, firmly bound by ¢he oath of 
the Almighty, it cannot be transmuted into a mystical or spiritual Kingdom 
by a hidden process, without a violation of unity, language, and Covenant. 


Attention is again called to the fact that the peculiar teaching of the parables in the 
form given is strong proof of Divine inspiration. Reference is not now made simply to 


Prop. 108. ] THE TITEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 21 


the exact fulfilment of the prophetic element in them, but to the delicate position of 
Jesus and the extraordinary tact evidenced by them. The Jews expected the Messianic 
Kingdom ; Jesus foreknew His rejection by them and the subsequent postponement of 
the Kingdom ; now in these parables this foreknowledge is clearly shown, and the result is 
presented in aform least repellent to the Jewish mind. The change from the direct form 
of teaching to the parabolic which excited the astonishment (Mark 13 : 10) of the dis- 
ciples is readily accounted for in view of this contemplated postponement, especially when it is 
considered that the parabolic form was introduced (so numerous Harmonies) after the rep- 
resentative men of the nation had commenced consulting and conspiring against Jesus. 
Because of the moral obliquity (Matt. 13 : 13) evidenced by the nation, He now teaches 
in parables in order that they may remain in it (Mark 4 : 12), and carry out their plans 
to the end ; the parabolic form being intended only for those who humbly sought the 
truth, believing in Jesus. The direct appeal being rejected, repentance being refused by 
the nation, the postponement of the Kingdom and the processes in preparation for its 
ultimate re-establishment demand the veilment of the parabolic—a form admirably 
adapted to the contingencies then sprung up. For, aside from other considerations, the 
caution thus exercised by Jesus avoided an unnecessary persecution by the Roman 
power ; the Kingdom being thus veiled under a form and preparatory measures that had 
the least tendency to excite jealousy and animosity. 


Obs. 3. In passing over the parables we shall only select that class which 
have the formula ‘* Kingdom of heaven’’ attached to them, being supposed 
specially to favor the prevailing view. If these are satisfactorily explained, 
the rest will need none. 

1. The parable of the Tares and Wheat, Matt. 13 : 24-30 and 37-48. 
Keeping in view the covenanted Kingdom as it was promised, the peculiar 
position of hearers and the Speaker, the former expecting this Kingdom 
and the latter foreknowing its rejection and postponement, we have the 
only practical key to the formula itself. Something is understood, which 
the then present general expectations of the Jewish hearers (Prop. 20, etc.), 
supplied, viz., the Kingdom you expect is to be introduced as follows ; or 
the Kingdom of heaven that you anticipate requires the following. Asa 
preacher of ‘* the Gospel of the Kingdom,’’ the parables fall within His 
Mission, and above all things His hearers desire to know when it will be 
established. The call to repentance leaves it indefinite and dependent ; 
hence Jesus, as the Divine Teacher, proceeds to satisfy a pious curiosity or 
laudable desire, and in this parable locates the establishment of the King- 
dom at the period of the harvest. To obtain the force of the parable it is 
requisite to supply the idea of the setting up of the Kingdom as to manner 
and time and then notice what things Jesus teaches are required efore this 
will be done. The Kingdom is mot likened to any particular one thing in 
the parable but to the final result, the end. For if it were, then it would be 
likened to ‘‘a man,”’ for, taking the theories prevailing, that is expressly 
asserted. But it is 2o¢ likened to ‘‘ a man’’ or to his acts, or to ‘‘ the good 
seed’’ which grows into wheat, or to ‘‘ the field’’ which is the world, or to 
‘“ the tares’’ which are mixed with the wheat, or even to ‘‘ the harvest ;’’ 
but all these are used to indicate how certain things must be accomplished 
until ‘the end of the age,’’ when the righteous, the gathered wheat, shall 
‘shine forth asthe Sun’’ in the Kingdom. That this is a correct interpre- 
tation of the parable will appear from the following: (1) by linking the 
Kingdom only with the harvest as do Joel and John; (2) by expressly 
mentioning the Kingdom as following the harvest ; (3) by locating the 
Kingdom at the end of the age ; (4) by the correspondence existing between 
the parable and Matt. 25 :31-46 ; (5) by otherwise making the Kingdom 
(if the Church) a mixed one, wtterly opposed to covenant promise ; (6) a 


22 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 108. 


mixed condition of tares and wheat down to the very end of the age itself, 
forbids the fulfilment of Millennial descriptions, as e.g. ‘‘ all shall be 
righteous,’ etc. The positive manner in which Christ puts His langnage 
is also expressive of what Paul says Rom. 4:17, ‘‘ calleth those things which 
be not as though they were,’’—the present tense is employed, as the King- 
dom, although future, is regarded by the Divine Mind as a certainty, a 
determined realization. Hence the Kingdom of heaven, an ordained, fixed 
arrangement, is to be obtained in this way and time. ‘This is the meaning 
of Jesus, a meaning in accord with all other Scripture. ! 

2. Then follows the parable of the Mustard Seed, Matt. 13 : 31, 32, to 
which the same principle must be applied. According to our position it 
would denote that the promised Kingdom of heaven is not brought into 
existence at once as they, the hearers, expected ; it demands time and 
preparation ; it requires small beginnings, a small seed, a Christian Church, 
or first an individual, then a family, then a nation, then a people adopted 
into that nation, until finally, when all this preparative growth has been 
experienced, the tree, i.e. the Kingdom appears and it will be found 
greater than all herbs (i.e. other kingdoms), affording abundant shelter. 
The tree alone represents the Kingdom, and this Kingdom is shown 70 be 
the result of an intervening growth or work, a constant accretion or 
gathering. <A tree too is significant of a Kingdom, Dan. 4:10, 20; 
Ezek. 31:3. he small flock by constant accessions to its number will 
ultimately at the manifestation of the Sons of God become a mighty 
nation, a strong people, etc. ‘“* When it is grown’’ it *‘ becometh a tree.”’ 
If we turn to Mark 4:34 in immediate connection with this parable, it is 
said, ‘‘ and when they were alone He expounded all things to His disciples.”’ 
_ Inthis private explanation, the interpretation suggested by us was wndoudt- 
edly the one impressed upon the disciples as their preaching the Kingdom 
proves, for they knew nothing of the modern ideas grafted on this 
parable, as Acts 1:6 clearly indicates. Hither the expounding of Jesus 
amounted to nothing or ayailed nothing, or else it confirmed the disciples 
in the covenanted Kingdom as believed in by them. The latter is the’ 
truth, honorable both to Jesus and Apostles.’ 

3. The most important of the parables is that of the Leaven. Matt. 
13:33; Luke 13 : 20-21; it being employed more than any other in the 
development Church-Kingdom theory. ‘The opinion that this refers to 
the Church is beset with difficulties, for then this parable contradicts that 
of the Tares and Wheat, which asserts that instead of the whole being 
leavened there shall be down to the Advent a mixed condition. Many 
passages corroborate this, that neither the world nor the Church shall be 
Thus leavened. Besides this, if the leavening process is carried out, it is 
constantly progressive, and does not accord with the relapses, retrogressions 
that history records. In the efforts to reconcile this parable with a 
theory, one (ange, vol. 1, 248) says: ‘‘ the woman is an apt figure of the 
Church ;”’ another (as Trench, Lisco, ete.) makes the leaven the Kingdom ; 
another (Lange, /oct) informs us that the three measures of meal is the 
visible Church (Welt-Kirche). Many find refuge in the invisible Church, 
others in the Gospel Kingdom, or the Gospel truth, or Christianity. 
Some, to avoid a contradiction of the parable of Tares and Wheat, confine it 
exclusively to a delineation of piety in the heart of the individual believer, 
and make the Kingdom existing in the individual. Another class (as e.g. 
Vitringa, Gurtler, Teelman, Cyril, Darby, Paine, Seiss, etc.) make this 


Ror. :108:| THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 23 


leaven used in a bad sense, equivalent to error, false doctrine, corruption, 
and apply it in the history of the Church. Thus a variety of views are 
entertained concerning its meaning, indicating that, from the desire of 
nearly all to unite it in some way with an existing Kingdom, the Church 
is selected, either visible or invisible, either in its aggregate or individual- 
ity, as the Kingdom denoted. 

But remove the notion, taken for granted, that the Kingdom must now 
be found and the parable corresponds with the preceding ones. As in 
usage the leavening process is only a preparatory one, so it is here; the 
leaven is the Divine Word of the Kingdom, it leavens a definite measure 
of meal, i.e. a predetermined number who are to be adopted as the Sons 
of God. The gathering out process, and the detention of the Kingdom 
until this is accomplished, is thus presented, preserving the wnity of Script- 
ure. ‘The leavened meal is initiatory to the formation of bread, so this 
Divine Process is introductory to the Divine Purpose of establishing the 
Kingdom. The people and the disciples are taught, that previous to the 
setting up of the Kingdom a definite number of the elect must first be 
obtained, and the manner in which this is done, by gradual appropriation 
through Divine truth, is also intimated. If it denotes, what so many 
believe, is it not strange that the disciples, preachers of the Kingdom and 
having the advantages of private instruction concerning tt, should not be 
able to comprehend its meaning to be, as alleged, a complete overthrow of 
their expectations of a covenanted Kingdom. It is true, that Christ most 
delicately, and thus vindicating His Divine foreknowledge, teaches them 
that their hopes cannot be at once realized, that a postponement or prepara- 
tory stage or leavening process 1s necessary, but He does not, and cannot as 
a Covenant-sealing Saviour, destroy their hopes of the Kingdom. The 
confidence with which they preached the Kingdom proclaims this fact. 
With this view we can adopt and incorporate many valuable remarks 
recorded by the various writers on the parables, discarding the engrafted 
Origenistic Church-Kingdom idea, and adhering to the one that the King- 
dom of heaven will appear when the certain number, represented by the 
three (sacred number) measures of meal, are obtained by the power of the 
truth. In this manner we preserve the unity of Scripture, the consistent 
preaching of instructed disciples. Again, by reference to the connection of 
this parable in Matt. 13 : 34, 35, we find that it embraces ‘‘ things which 
have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.’’ Now it is 
taken for granted that ‘‘the secret thing’’ pertains to the nature, the 
spirituality of the Kingdom, but that this is a wrong inference is apparent 
from the declarations of the Apostles who found this secret or mystery in 
the postponement and consequent call of the Gentiles, asis proven by Eph., 
3:4-6; Col. 1 : 26, 27, ete., thus fully according with our interpretation.* 

-4, The parables of the Treasure and of the Pearl, Matt. 13 : 44-46, need 
no special notice, as the simple idea running through them is this: that as 
men exhibit their interest in, and willingness to sacrifice all for, some- 
thing that is very precious and costly, so we ought to do the same i behalf 
of the Kingdom of God. It again indicates a preparatory stage in the 
individual and that he can obtain an abiding interest, inheritance, in the 
Kingdom itself. No one but can see that if we press the captions of these 
two parables, as is done in others, they become at once contradictory — for 
the one likens the Kingdom to the treasure and the other likens the King- 
dom, not to the pearl but to the merchantman, thus indicating that Christ’s 


24 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 108. 


design was only to show what spirit should actuate us in seeking His 
Kingdom. This excludes all those forced and constrained expositions 
which abound in several writers, especially in Vitringa. Faith seizes upon 
the treasure God offers, and is willing to surrender all to obtain the abiding 
hope which it inspires, and its ultimate enjoyment.* 

5. The parable of the Net, Matt. 13 : 47-50, resembles that of the Tares 
and Wheat, and therefore requires no explanation. The design of this dis- 
pensation is represented, the postponement indicated in a preparatory 
gathering which shall continue wntil the end of the age. ‘The mixed con- 
dition until the final separation is a prominent feature. The Kingdom, 
owing to its rejection by the nation, requires this previous casting of the 
net and its results.° 

6. The parable of the King and his Servants, or of the Unmerciful Servant, 
Matt. 18 : 23-35, shows the correctness of our deductions concerning the 
heading of the parable ; for owr entrance into the Kingdom of heaven is 
here conditioned on our brotherly forgiveness. As the servants render their 
account to the King, so shall we also finally to the great King. A prepara- 
tory qualification 18 requisite. Of the same tenor is the one of the 
Laborers in the Vineyard, Matt. 20 : 1-16, showing that previous to the 
bestowment of the reward a preparatory service is demanded, and that all 
thus engaged will receive their just dues. Lange, and others, make the 
vineyard the Kingdom of God, but it is likened to the householder who is 
represented as following a certain course of action, illustrative of what God 
will also do in the final settlement. We are taught that certain things are 
necessary Jefore we can enter into that Kingdom, and that the principle 
actuating the householder will eventually influence the Judge in his arbi- 
tration of affairs. The parable of the Royal Wedding, or the Wedding Gar- 
ment, Matt. 22 : 1-14, clearly points out that the Church is not the King- 
dom of God, because the parties are represented merely as invited to the 
wedding. Before the Kingdom is introduced, represented under the figure 
of the Son’s wedding, a preliminary stage 1s introduced ; and owing to the 
conduct of the guests first invited a further postponement is indicated until 
a certain gathering is obtained, thus accurately corresponding with our line 
of argument. ‘This dispensation of grace, resulting from the perverse 
refusal of the invited Jewish nation, is designed to secure the requisite 
guests for the marriage feast at the end of the age. 

7. As we proceed the parables become still more distinctive of our posi- 
tion. The parable of the Ten Virgins, Matt. 25 : 1-13, refers us by the 
word *‘ then’’ directly to the period of the Second Advent, as is admitted by 
all our best critics. We are by its peculiar arrangement and connection 
limited to a certain period of time when such a separation of the wise and 
foolish shall be made. ‘The time of the Kingdom and that of the coming 
of the Bridegroom and marriage are the same ; and in view of an indefinite 
(i.e.to man) postponement of the same, and of a preparatory state of prepa- 
ration, we are exhorted to be watchful, occupying the position of wise 
virgins.” The parable following, that of the Talents, Matt. 25 : 14-13, 
inculcates still more forcibly this preliminary, intervening period before 
the Kingdom can be established. or we have (1) the allotment of specific 
duties, (2) the withdrawal of the person into ‘‘ a far country,’’ leaying his 
servants behind, (3) ‘‘ after a long time the lord of these servants cometh 
and reckoneth with them,’’ (4) the reward of the faithful seryants is the 
assignment of rulership in the Kingdom, (5) and its connection with what 


PRop. 108. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 25 


follows, verses 31-46. Here is a pointed and significant delineation of the 
postponement of the Kingdom as various Propositions inculcate. 

8. Thus we might pass over all the parables and in each case show how 
they fully correspond with the interpretation given. This, however, is 
unnecessary in view of the ample illustrations already presented. But we 
cannot in justice to ourselves close without directing marked attention to 
the parable of the ‘Ten Pounds, Luke 19 : 11-27, which most forcibly con- 
jirms our position. ‘This parable was introduced as follows: ‘‘ He added 
and spake a parable, because He was nigh to Jerusalem, and because they 
thought that the Kingdom of God should immediately appear.’’ It is rea- 
sonable to suppose that the parable will throw light on the anticipated 
appearance of the Kingdom, especially as it was supposed to be connected 
with His ¢hen visit to Jerusalem. Now let any unprejudiced reader study 
this Divine utterance, expressly given to meet the notion of a speedy estab- 
lishment of the Kingdom, and he must, 7f language has any force, arise 
from such a contemplation of it with a deep conviction that it teaches dis- 
tinctly and vividly a protracted postponement of the Kingdom, the identi- 
cal postponement so repeatedly advocated in these pages. We have (1) a 
nobleman going into a far country ; (2) the design of going is to obtain the 
title, right, etc., to a Kingdom ; (3) then he will return ; (4) but his stay 
is a prolonged one, for time is given for trading, etc. (as in the parable of 
the ‘Talents “‘ after a long time the lord of those servants cometh,”’’ etc.) ; 
(5) the Kingdom that he receives is located where the nobleman lived, ‘‘ his 
citizens,’’ etc. ; (6) he returns, having received the right of ruling; (7) 
during his absence his servants are required to be faithful to an imposed 
trust ; (8) when he comes back to reign he has a reckoning with his ser- 
vants ; (9) and assigns to the faithful a rulership in his received Kingdom. 
Here is a decided answer to the theory that the Kingdom was established 
at the First Advent or shortly after, for we have in the nobleman an wn- 
doubted representation of Jesus, of His removal, of His injunctions upon 
His servants during the period of His departure, of His return with author- 
ity to appear as the covenanted King, of *‘ His appearing in His Kingdom’”’ 
(2 Tim. 4:1), and of His awarding stations of honor and ruling to the 
faithful.’ 

1 The parable has reference to the ultimate Theocratic purpose, and hence Krummacher 
(quoted by Trench, On Parables, p. 42), however he vitiates his utterance by making the 
parables illustrative of the Kingdom’s (i.e. Church's) ‘‘ progressive development,” is cor- 
rect in saying : ‘‘ The parables of Jesus have not primarily a moral but a politico-religious, 
or Theocratic purpose.’? Our position fully indicates this and makes them teach, in view 
of the intended postponement, what are the preparations for the Theocratic Kingdom. 
Let the reader now observe how utterly antagonistic this parable is to the Church-King- 
dom theory. The prevailing view is that the Kingdom is now within the hearts of be- 
lievers, but how reconcile it with this mixture, as e.g. Driseke says (Lange’s Com. Matt., 
p. 249) : * what a strange mixture in the Kingdom of heaven,’’—yes, indeed, strange if it 
were true. Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 397, foot-note) remarks : ‘‘ The parable of the Tares 
and Wheat represents the Divine Kingdom as continually to the end, more or less, inter- 
mingled with corrupt principles and false members.’’ We know that this is true of the 
Church (for alas! experience and history as well as prediction proclaim it), but how does 
Fairbairn explain this when, in other places, he makes the Kingdom equivalent to God’s 
reign in the heart, and how does he reconcile it with the purity, universal righteousness, 
etc., ascribed to Christ’s Kingdom, or even to the preparatives, as given to Nicodemus, es- 
sential to entrance therein? How can they reconcile it with their leaven theory of pro- 
gressive development? Every one who indorses a Church-Kingdom theory comes to 
this parable to find insuperable difficulties, as e.g. seen in Olshausen’s exposition (Com. 
loci), to whose help Dr. Ebrard comes with this aid by way of explanation : ‘‘ The King- 


26 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 108. 


dom of God exists not in visible separation from the world, but as mingled with the 
world asa Church. Hence again, the Church is not identical with the Kingdom of God, 
but a blending of the Kingdom of God and the world.” Comment is unnecessary at 
such a wide departure from primitive simplicity, and the less so in view of the comments 
of these men on the text, “ My Kingdom is not of this world.” In the days of the Don- 
atist contest the Catholic party (Augustine, etc.) declared the field to be the visible 
Church, and the tares and wheat were mixed in it, while the Donatists held that the field 
was the world and the tares and wheat were mixed, not in the Church but in the world. 
Neander (His. Dogmas, vol. 2, p. 395) remarks that ‘“‘the distinction in the idea of the 
Church as visible and invisible might have led to an agreement.” Scarcely ; but the 
idea of the world having the Church in it and the same thing being predicated of the 
Church in the world, might have produced it. 

Three points connected with this parable are worthy of attention by the student. 1. 
Dr. Brown (Ch. See. Com., ed. 1879, p. 276), after claiming that the parable teaches “a 
simultaneous judgment of all the wicked and righteous both dead and living,’’ acknowl- 
edges in a foot-note that there is ‘‘ a defect’’ in the parable because it could not properly 
represent the dead tares of past ages, and this defect he assumes (in view of the Saviour’s 
deficiency) to supply: ‘‘ The defect here is that it cannot represent those corrupt mem- 
bers of the Church visible who have been in the field (to use the figure of the parables), 
but are removed out of it by death, generation after generation, before Christ comes. 
And yet we have seen above’”’ (viz., his opinion of a simultaneous res. and judgment of 
all with which comp. Props. 125-129, etc.) “that all these are meant as the tares to be 
gathered and burned when Christ comes. Though the figure represents only the wicked 
then living, the parable as a whole teaches that the tares represent the children of the 
devil at large.’’ We presume that the Saviour used language sufficiently precise to convey 
His intended meaning, and this is corroborated by the numerous statements of the actual 
result at the Sec. Advent which this parable illustrates. 2. Again, Dr. Brown (part 2, ch. 2) 
objects to our use of the parable on the ground that we have tares, more or less, existing 
in the Mill. age, as seen e.g. in Isa. 65, Zech. 14, and in the admissions of Pre-Millena- 
rians as McNeile, Elliott, etc., which, he claims, involves an inconsistency, viz., that the 
tares ought to cease. But (1) we claim the parable as specially teaching the following 
points : (a) the non-conversion of the world during this dispensation ,; (b) the general ad- 
mixture of tares and wheat until the harvest , (c) the exhibition of such a mixture at the 
time of the harvest ; (d) the separation at Sec. Advent, (e) the time when this is done, not 
sooner than the harvest ; (f) the exaltation of the righteous, following the harvest ; (g) the 
destruction of the tares ; (h) and claim that, with McNeile, Elliott, etc., there is no Mil- 
jlennium as predicted and described during this dispensational mixture of tares and 
wheat, as proven e.g. by the condition of the field at the time of the harvest, and by the 
harvest itself. And (2) in reply to Brown’s objection that tares also exist in the Mill. 
age ; (a) allow them to be there, this parable and its application is limited by the harvest ; 
(b) we show that so far as the Jewish nation is concerned (whatever may be the 
initiatory result) “all are righteous,’’ and that as the Kingdom extends its sway (Zech. 
14, Isa. 60, etc.), righteousness is extended over the nations ; (c) that in the Kingdom it- 
self no such admixture of tares and wheat as now exists is admissible ; (d) that under- 
the Theocratic sway the ultimate outcome is a universal righteousness over the whole 
earth ; (e) that the results of the present dispensation and of the Millennial are widely 
different as represented by the Holy Spirit ; (f) that if, as Dr. B. holds, the parable rep- 
resents the condition—mixed down to the end of the Mill. age and then a transference 
to an eternal state, there is no possible way for the fulfilment of Mil]. descriptions as 
written, and the predictions must be set aside as exaggerated ; (g) that in justice to our 
views, our opponents must distinguish—as we do—between the glorified and unglorified 
conditions coexisting. 3. For the advanced student (thus forestalling a point cleared up 
in some of the last propositions), attention is called to the statement of the Teacher that 
the tares are to be gathered first. Now how can this be reconciled with a previous gath- 
ering of the saints, the first-fruits, who escape the tribulation, etc. There is no discrep- 
ancy, but a beautiful harmony, simply because the parable relates to the time of the harvest 
and not to the gathering of the first-fruits. After ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ are gathered the tares 
continue and the wheat also, as seen by those coming out of the tribulation ; the mixed 
condition is not changed by the taking out of the 144,000, but exists down to the time of the 
harvest, at which time this parable is realized both in the Church and in the Jewish 
nation. We have no occasion for Barbour’s mental ideal gathering, for the plain, direct 
teaching of the Scriptures is that before the Messianic Kingdom is exhibited in the place 
of manifested royalty, before the Kingdom is established in visible power and glory and the 
righteous shine forth as the sun in that Kingdom, the wicked are first removed and de- 


Prop. 108. ] THE TILEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 27 


stroyed. This is the divine order as illustrated e.g. in Mal. chs. 3 and 4, Rev. chs. 19 and 
20, etc. Jesus in the parable only brings forth the general results and does not intro- 
duce every particular. Barbour’s theory (making this the time of the harvest, wicked 
churches the bundles, himself and others the wheat driven out and thus separated) is a 
perversion of the parable, a misapplication of its teaching, and an ignoring of the general 
analogy on the future separation at the Sec. Advent. 

Graff, in Lay Sermons, No. 8, says : ‘‘ The Kingdom of heaven—which literally signifies 
the rule of the heavens—-is the phrase em} loyed in the Scriptures to denote the Church 
in its earthly relation, composed of good and bad.” We may well ask where? For (1) 
we have proven in detail that the phrase has a definite distinctive meaning relating to the 
express covenanted Kingdom (which Graff admits 1s still future) ; (2) such an application 
overrides the reasons assigned against it under the previous Propositions, and is itself 
opposed by multitudes of those who reject this admixture in the Kingdom ; (3) if derived 
from the parabolic teaching it makes a parable the foundation (and not illustrator) of 
doctrine ; (4) it makes the parables contradictory, tor the same formula is applied to the 
parable of the Mustard Seed, Leaven, etc. The fact is noticeable that these things in the 
parables illustrate how ultimately this rule of the heavens predicted by Daniel (as given 
at aset time by the Father) and enforced by the Covenant, is to be manifested. All these 
things relate to (as in parable of the Sower “‘ the seed” is ‘‘ the word of the Kingdom,” 
i.e. a word which tells of and prepares for the Kingdom ; and in that of the tares ‘‘ the 
seed are the children of the Kingdom”-—a Jewish phrase—i.e. children pertaining or re- 
lating to. —i.e. such as shall receive --the Kingdom) the Kingdom. It will be well to con- 
sider that in the interpretation the seed is sown nof in the Church but in the world, that the 
tares come up afterward among the wheat (thus descriptive not of the world but of a cer- 
tain class), but it is not requisite to push it to the extreme (as Barbour, etc.) that ‘‘ the 
bundles” are Church organizations, etc. We insist thatas Jesus positively interprets ‘‘ the 
field is the world’’ (and as a consequence the implication follows, that the Church is in 
this field), it is vain for persons (as e.g. Calvin, Lisco On Par., p. 69) to make “‘ field and 
Church’’ synonymous. It is simply a perversion of the parable to interpret it as Fowle 
(Conten:p. Review, May, 1872), viz., as foretelling the fall of Judaism : ‘‘ the good seed are 
the children of Christ’s Kingdom, the bad seed is perverted Judaism, the harvest is its 
coming complete downfall,’’ (he adds that ‘‘ perhaps” the destruction of Paganism was 
also foreshadowed). The ‘‘ harvest ”’ has a far more definitive future Scriptural applica- 
tion than this one imposed. 

* The early Church, thoroughly Millenarian, understood the Tree to be manifested under 
Christ at His Sec. Coming. Somewhat similar figures were introduced, as e.g. the Vine 
mentioned by Clement (First and Sec. Epis.) the ripened fruit of which they only hoped 
to enjoy in the age to come. One of the earliest writers who made the tree equivalent to 
the Church in its present state, was Nicetas. In the Fragments (Ante-Nicene Lib., sec. 
4), we learn something of the fanciful manner in which this parable was treated, thus : 
** Matt. 13 : 31, 32, The word which proclaims the Kingdom of heaven is sharp and pun- 
gent as mustard and represses bile, that is, anger, and checks inflammation, that is, pride, 
and from this word the soul’s true health and eternal soundness flow. To such increased 
size did the growth of the word come, that the tree which sprang from it (that is the 
Church of Christ established over the whole earth), filled the world, so that fowls of the 
air—that is, divine angels and lofty souls, ‘ dwelt in its branches,’ ” (so comp, Vitringa’s 
medicinal allusions to mustard and his fanciful comparisons, which others, possessing 
but little taste and sense of propriety, have imitated). While more recent commentators 
have justly rejected the nonsense engrafted upon the parable, yet many of them infer 
from it a condition of things that was never intended when e.g. Lange applies it to “ the 
visible Church generally” or Barnes to ‘‘ piety in the renewed heart or the Church,” or 
Alford to the inward Church-form. (They differ also concerning the seed, some making 
it Jesus, others piety, and others the Christian Church, without observing that piety and 
the Church existed previously, ete.) Much better is the interpretation of Alford that 
‘‘ we must beware of imagining that the outward Church-form is meant,’’ or of Judge 
Jones, ‘‘ it is the tree which represented the Kingdom, but the tree was the slow product 
of the seed then about to be planted,’’ or as a learned divine (Dr. Sprecher, in personal 
conversation), that “the seed was not necessarily the Kingdom, for the tree, when it was 
grown, was more likely to represent it.” The consistent interpretation must be one that 
applies the seed and growth to a preparative process by which from small beginnings— 
insignificant to many—a Theocratic ordering will ultimately be realized. The Divine 
Purpose has planted that which will finally, when all things are ready, stand forth in 
manifested power and glory. i : 

Brown (the evangelist) and others make the whole parable illustrative of the progress 


28 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 108. 


of evil, the birds also being symbolical of evil, and the tree, like Daniel’s, is to be cut down 
and extirpated. Whatever force such a view may have we are not prepared to receive 
the same, preferring the good sense usually attributed to it rather than the bad one thus 
engrafted. For the Kingdom of heaven cannot be either likened to, or be introduced by, 
that which only is evil. Hence when Lincoln (Lec. on Rev., vol. 2, p. 103), as the Plym- 
outh Brethren generally do, makes the tree ‘‘ the great Babylonish tree,” and the birds 
‘* clericals,” it is done more to enforce preconceived views than to sustain harmony be- 
tween the relation of the Kingdom idea and the parable. Dr. Tregelles (On Dan., p. 202) 
suggests the correct train of thought when he points out that such a tree should spring 
from so small a seed. This is true: the seed was in the Theocracy which history almost 
entirely ignores (and at which unbelief makes itself merry) in contrast with the mighty 
empires of the Gentiles—it is in the Church, gathering out by degrees its rulers, which 
men now deride, etc., but it will spring up into the tree with its sheltering branches. 
Brookes (Maranatha, p. 267) has well observed: ‘‘ No interpretation of the parable of 
the Mustard Seed, or of any subsequent parable can be sound which makes our Lord 
utter a flat contradiction to His own testimony as given in the two first parables which He 
Himself explained,’’ for as Trench (On Par.) has pertinently stated, Jesus in explaining 
the two first ‘‘ intended to furnish us with a key for the interpretation of all.’’ This is 
eminently correct as to the application of the whole (i.e. they cannot be contradictory to 
each other, etc.), but it certainly cannot apply to the imagery and details of every other 
parable, seeing that they introduce others. Hence we need not, if so minded, to follow 
Brookes in making the birds of the air to represent wicked ones, and thus introduce 
into the parable the notion of a mixed condition of good and evil, because wicked ones 
are thus represented as seeking and obtaining a place or lodgment in the Church. It 
does not necessarily follow that because something is used in a bad sense it must inva- 
riably retain, whenever employed, the same sense, not being susceptible of a good one. 
The introduction of such a principle and a persistent adhesion to it would introduce 
confusion, as every student of the Bible knows. The usage of a word, etc., must be de- 
termined by the general design or scope of the passage. 

3 Drs. Seiss, Brookes, Tregelles, etc., make the Leaven the emblem of evil, and certainly 
introduce weighty reasons worthy of consideration arising from the scriptural usage of 
the word. These are the only ones that affect the position taken here, seeing that the 
others proposed against the prevailing view (such as, that the world is not thoroughly 
leavened or converted, and not continuously, to the Advent, that it must be explained not 
in conflict with the parable of the Tares, etc.), do not exist against us. We-prefer the 
good sense of leaven, simply because of its connection with the Kingdom idea as stated 
under the previous parable. The same principle must in consistency be applied to both. 
Aside from this, ‘‘ leavening the whole lump” can only be applied in the way indicated or 
as next in preference to the individual believer (the three measures of meal being sup- 
posed by some to have a reference to the threefold—spirit, soul, and body—-nature of 
man), because evil does not leaven all, even at the Second Advent, for this would contra- 
dict two of the parables, that of the tares and that of the drag-net, seeing that wheat and 
good fish exist down to the end. If applied to the period of tribulation even when Anti- 
christ is triumphant and the Church driven to dire extremity by persecution, even then 
the multitude coming out of tribulation shows that not all are leavened by evil. Not- 
withstanding, as the opinion preserves the unity of teaching (i.e. does not make them 
contradictory as to the conversion of the world through the Gospel), and has strong rea- 
sons in its behalf, it is worthy of attention. Indeed, the one given by us, or the upplica- 
tion to grace in the individual (which gives a good meaning), or this reference to evil, 
must be accepted as most consistent with the express covenanted Kingdom. 

4 Tregelles (On Dan., p. 206), denies that this parable of the Treasure hid in the field 
can be individualized, for then, he alleges, the doctrine is taught, opposed to Christian 
faith, that if we give up all for Christ we procure salvation, saying : it ‘‘ shows us what 
Christ did for His people ; they were in the world, and because they were given into His 
hands to redeem, He bought the whole for their sake.” We prefer the common view, 
making it equivalent to take up the cross, denying ourselves, forsaking all for Christ, 
which is the practical evidence of an exercise of Christian faith. So Tregelles (p. 207) 
makes the Pearl the elect Church and Christ the purchaser. Brookes (The Truth, vol. 4, 
No. 9), makes the Saviour the seeker (leaving the ninety-nine, etc., Luke 15 : 4 and 
19 : 10), the saints being the Pearl. Rev. Fox (The Truth, vol. 4, No. 3) interprets : 
** The Pearl of pre-eminent value is the ransomed Church. The Purchaser is the Lord 
of Glory. The price was His own blood. He gave up all and bought the field, and now 
the treasure remains hidden until the redemption of the purchased possession. Rom. 8. 
Then will be the glorious manifestation, Eph. 5 : 25-27,”’ 


FROpP? 108. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 29 


5 The Kingdom is not (as Heubner) “ the apostolic or ministerial office in the Church,” 
or (as another) ‘‘ the Church as an institution of grace,” etc., but it is, as covenanted, the 
Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom to which men are called by the Gospel, and for which they 
are gathered in the Church, and the fitness for which is finally to be tested at the end of 
the age. 

6 Lange (Com. Matt., p. 447) correctly makes this parable to be verified at the beginning 
of the thousand years, and in this he is sustained by the early Church and a multitude of 
interpreters. Even Neander (Life of Christ, s. 258) admits that it was designed to set 
vividly before the disciples the necessity of constant preparation for the uncertain time 
of Christ’s Sec. Advent, but he fails to see how much this concession opposes his favorite 
Church-Kingdom theory, seeing that such a constant looking for the Advent is hostile to 
his universal leavening process, etc. Barnes (Com. loci) concedes the validity of our 
position, when he makes the phrase ‘‘ then the Kingdom of heaven shall be likened,’’ to 
be applicable only to the period of the Sec. Advent of the Son of man. We add, the 
lowest possible form of interpretation is that employed by many, who take portions of 
this parable (e.g. v. 13) and, wresting it from its connection, apply it to death—a proced- 
ure utterly misleading and calculated to injure the truth. Compare Prop. 181. 

1 This parable alone conclusively proves the strictly scriptural and logical attitude of the 
early Church (whose faith is now derided by the substituted wisdom of man), and, if re- 
ceived in its entire connection, repudiates the far-fetched inferences that it taught (so 
Lisco, etc.) that no ‘‘ earthly and visible Kingdom” would be established. How can 
such a doctrine be possibly engrafted on it when (1) it forms a reply to the immediate 
establishment of such a Kingdom and contains no repudiation of it, (2) but (as Calvin 
admits, quoted by Lisco, against his own theory) teaches (a) that there is no ‘‘ hope of a 
present Kingdom,” (b) that it is postponed by his departure, (c) that, without any change 
of meaning but, in continued answer to the inquiry, at his return the Kingdom antici- 
pated will be set up. The whole parable enforces (1) that during this postponement 
there is no Kingdom here (as Lisco, Calvin, etc.), (2) but that it will appear at His Sec. 
Coming. The treatment that this parable has received under the influence and prejudice 
of a preconceived Church-Kingdom dogma is certainly a remarkable one in the history 
of interpretation. Judge Jones (Hssays, Literalist, vol. 3, p. 41) remarks: ‘‘ in reference 
to this parable Greswell (On Parables, vol. 4) says, ‘ that the difficulty or rather the im- 
possibility of explaining it satisfactorily and consistently, upon any other principle than 
that of a reference to the Millenary dispensation, contributed as much as anything else 
to confirm his own belief in the futurity of that dispensation and in fact, first to draw 
his attention seriously to this subject. The difficulty which was felt by himself he is 
persuaded will be felt by any other person who shall attempt to explain the parable with- 
out doing violence to it, and to find a counterpart for it in any economy or in reference 
to any Kingdom of Christ whether past or to come but that.’’’ Waggoner (Ref, of Age), 
to build up his theory of a thousand years’ reign in heaven lays much stress on the 
phrase ‘‘ having received the Kingdom,” forgetting that the actual reign is connected 
with his return (comp, Props. 83-90), that the whole scene after the return (as many 
writers have noticed) is laid here on the earth, and that no mention is made (as Wag- 
goner’s notion demands) of a transfer of this Kingdom from earth to heaven, Itisa 
matter of surprise to find concessions where we would scarcely exyect them. Thus e.g. 
Henry (Com. loci) says : ‘‘ That which they thought should immediately appear Christ 
tells them will not appear till this same Jesus, which is taken into heaven, shall in like 
manner come again, see Acts 1:11.’’ Dean Trench says: ‘‘ He went to receive solemn 
investiture of that Kingdom which He had purchased with His blood, and which here- 
after He shall return and claim as His own, sitting on the throne of His father David.” 
The critical student will observe that the force of the postponement leaves no room for 
the substitution of another Kingdom in the place of this one, or the making of a germinal 
one to develop into the covenanted Messianic one. The subject matter, the general 
analogy, refers all along to but one Messianic Kingdom. To indicate the manner in which 
our opponents have to deal with this parable in order to make it fit into their theory of 
the Kingdom and to wrest it from us, we give, without comment, Williamson’s (Letters to a 
Millenarian, p. 61) view, viz., that ‘‘ the return”’ is ‘‘ a returning after His resurrection’’ (!) 
which he calls a coming ‘“‘ the second time” (!). We thus set aside the broad state- 
ment of Russell (Our Lord’s Return, p. 54), when he says: ‘‘ The Scriptures everywhere 
recognize the Church as the Kingdom of God,’’ but as proof only refers to the parables. 
The Church in no sense, in no manifestations, in no peculiarities, is the same as the 
covenanted and predicted Kingdom of God, and Russell constantly falls into the error of 
substituting the Divine Sovereignty or the preparatory for the Kingdom itself. 


30) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 108. 


Obs. 4. It would be an easy matter to criticise the inconsistencies and 
contradictions engrafted on these parables by the Church-Kingdom theory, 
but such a course is not needed by our argument, seeing that they are read- 
ily detected and exposed. Yet an illustration may be in place because of 
the influence exerted by the distinguished writer. If we take the last par- 
able we find that Dr. Neander, in order to make the Church the Kingdom, 
handles it in a very illogical manner. He makes this absence of Christ, 
His return, and the establishment of the Kingdom to refer to a very brief 
period—to His death, ascension, and immediate return (the servants having 
a few days to trade in, etc.). He vainly endeavors to conceal the difficul- 
ties environing his interpretation by general phrases (which do not exclude 
the Second Coming), and utterly fails to make his interpretation fit into his 
own theory. The proof is this: Previously (Life of Christ) he informs us 
that the Kingdom of God had already come, that it was even then in prog- 
ress of development, and declares that while Christ is absent during this 
brief interval ‘‘ His agents advanced His Kingdom,’’ that when Christ 
ascended to heaven He was ‘‘ appointed 'Theocratic King,’’ and immediately 
after such an appointment returns (spiritually 1s our conjecture) to exercise 
His royal power. Here he bas a Kingdom already founded, then this 
Kingdom is left for the purpose of being appointed ‘‘ Theocratic King,”’ 
and ¢hen'a return is made to exercise this kingly authority thus received, so 
that the reply that Christ gave to those who thought that the Kingdom 
would zmmediately appear was in substance the following: You are mis- 
taken ; the Kingdom is already here ; the interval of my absence makes no 
difference in its existence ; that interval embraces but a few years at most, 
etc. (see p. 239 Life of Christ). But even this interval is reduced to a 
few days, for in Sec. 243 he interprets the triumphal entry into Jerusalem 
as expressive ‘‘ that the Kingdom of God had come and that He was the 
promised Theocratic King,’’ so that the departure and the appointment 
were unnecessary for the appearing of the Kingdom. Sucha style of inter- 
pretation needs no comment beside the language of the parable itself ; and, 
we may add, it never would have been attempted by so able a man if he 
had not been fettered by a preconceived doctrine that the Church is the 
Kingdom of God. Alas! when so great and good men fall into such pal- 
pable contradictions. 


The reader can extend the self-evident contradictions involved. Thus e.g. after this 
supposed immediate return the bestowal of rewards is to be engrafted to accord with the 
parable. But this resolves itself into, as facts attest, an assignment to suffering, persecu- 
tion, and martyrdom. Can we credit such a forced interpretation? The student will 
also observe how it utterly demolishes Dr. McCosh’s (with many others) theory, that the 
Kingdom is ‘‘ God’s reign in the heart.” If this is true, how could the truthful Jesus 
present a parable 1n answer to such an introductory question, which places the Kingdom 
not as then present in the hearts of believers, but as future—dependent upon His going 
away and future return. ‘The absurdity and unscripturalness of the Church-Kingdom 
theory is seen on all sides as the converging testimony of Scripture appears. We now 
append as a fitting conclusion Dr, Craven’s (Lange’s Com. Rey. p. 100) remarks : ‘‘ Matt. 
13 : 31-52. It is contended that in the parables of the Mustard Seed and the Leayen 
especially Jesus taught concerning the Kingdom, that it begins silently and impercepti- 
bly in the heart and in the community, and gradually increases. The force of the argu- 
ment is derived from the assumption that in these parables the thing neat to the verb of 
comparison is that to which the Kingdom is compared——that in one case it is compared to 
the mustard seed and in the other to the little leaven which the woman hid. But if this 
rule hold good in one case it must in all others ; and under its operation we have the 
Kingdom likened (v. 24) to the sower, (v. 45) to the merchantman, (22:1) to the house- 
holder, (22 : 2) to the King, ete. Manifestly in all these instances we must pass over the 


Prop. 108.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ol 


next thing to the verb of comparison to seek for the object of comparison. Doubtless the 
true explanation of the phrase ‘ the Kingdom is likened,’ etc., is the one given by Alford 
on Matt. 13 : 24, ‘ is like the whole circumstances about to be detailed,’ i.e. the entire parable 
presents a truth concerning the Kingdom, With this explanation, unity as to the nature 
of the Kingdom (which on the current interpretation is lacking) is brought into this 
whole series of parables, and these and all the other parables are brought into beautiful 
consistency with all the other teachings of our Lord. The series in Matt. may be re- 
garded as setting forth that nothing impure, imperfect, or immature, can have place in 
the Kingdom—in such case the good grain, the mighty tree, the thoroughly leavened 
lump, the treasure separated trom the field, the pearl, the good fish, will represent it,” 


32 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 109. 


Proposition 109. An examination of the passages of Scripture 
supposed to teach the Church-Kingdom theory will confirm our 
doctrine of the Kingdom. 


The Propositions already given, and the concessions of candid 
writers like Neander concerning the apostolic views, indicate that 
all such passages are susceptible, by a fair comparison of the Word 
and interpretation, of a consistent explanation 72 accord with 
covenant, prophecy, and the position of the early Church. 


Obs. 1. The passage usually quoted against us is the one in John 18 : 36, 
‘“My Kingdom is not of this world ; 1f my Kingdom were of this world, 
then would my servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews, 
but now is my Kingdom not from hence.’’ There is not the remotest dec- 
laration here that the Church is the Kingdom, but it is inferred on the 
ground that a Kingdom was established and that this describes a purely 
spiritual one which must be the Church. Leaving the parties who use this 
Scripture against our doctrine of a visible, real world-dominion to reconcile 
it with their own alleged objections drawn from it, when advocating the 
same visible world-dominion in describing Millennial portrayals, etc., we 
content ourselves with merely giving the reasons why this passage is not 
only not hostile but tm actual harmony with our doctrine. ‘The view that 
we have all along maintained is this, viz., that this Kingdom, 'Theocratic- 
Davidic, is of divine origin and is specially claimed as God’s, He Himself 
being the Ruler in and through the reigning King; that this Kingdom, 
-being not of worldly but divine outgrowth, is promised to Jesus Christ as 
the promised David’s Son ; and that, owing to the foreknown rejection of 
the Messiah, etc., is postponed to the ending of this age or dispensation. 
The language of Christ accurately corresponds with our previous proposi- 
tions, for we have (1) ‘‘My Hingdom,’’ a Kingdom belonging to Jesus as 
covenanted ; (2) ‘‘7s not of this world’’—it is a Kingdom, as we have 
already shown, no¢ of a human-devised order of arrangement, not of earthly 
derivation, but heaven-derived and belonging to a renewed order of arrange- 
ment, in the future, to ‘* the world to come,’’ having been, as prophets and as 
Jesus Himself, previously predicted, postponed ; (3) ‘‘ ¢f My Kingdom were 
of this world, then would My servants fight, that I should not be delivered to 
the Jews,’ i.e. if it were not of ‘‘ the world to come,’’ if it were not post- 
poned to the end of the age and to a new order of things, then would | not 
be in the power of the Jews for then even my servants would fight, but the 
Kingdom being postponed from the First to the Second Advent, my ser- 
vants do not interfere with the authority of Cesar ; (4) ** but now 1s My 
Kingdom not from hence,” i.e. but now, during the present order of things, 
owing to this very postponement my Kingdom is not of this world. This 
itself would forbid the idea of the Church Kingdom, and as the emphasis 


PRop. 109. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 35 


is on the word “‘ now’’ there is implied that at somé future time, as our 
argument demands, His Kingdom would be established. Besides this, the 
peculiar and significant “* dwt now’’ implies even more, viz., that His King- 
dom will ultimately, although not at present, embrace a jurisdiction or 
dominion over the world, crushing and overcoming all resistance, which 
corresponds with what is predicted, Rev. 11 : 15, ‘‘ the Kingdoms of this 
world are become the Kingdom of our Lord and His Christ, and He shall 
reign forever and ever.’’ Our view causes no antagonism between the two 
passages, but receives and harmonizes both of them ; for, as the prophets 
describe the Kingdom, it is not world-derived but will at a certain period 
of time manifest itself in the appearing of the King and exhibit a world- 
dominion. 


The way this passage is pressed beyond its natural meaning reminds us of the inter- 
pretation given by some fanatics to another, ‘‘ all things are lawful for me.” We com- 
mend, on the other hand, the language of Van Oosterzee (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, p. 621): ‘‘ With 
regard to the nature of this Kingly dominion it is to be observed that it must be ascribed 
to the Lord, not ina metaphorical but in a natural sense. Wrongly would any derive the 
opposite from the frequently misinterpreted words of John 18 : 36. This saying of the 
Lord indicates only that—which no one doubts—this Kingdom is not of worldly origin, 
but as the Kingdom of truth establishes itself in the hearts of men ; but by no means that 
itis not at all a Kingdom, destined also visibly to come.’’ Thus, without denying its plain 
meaning, he endeavors to incorporate with it his Church-Kingdom view. Schlegel 
(Philos. His., s. 10) does the same, as follows: ‘‘ The expression ‘ My Kingdom is not of 
this world,’ does not imply that it was not to be in this world a real and effective power, 
with a form and organization clearly defined. Many have read so much or inferred so 
much from this declaration, that they could not adopt an easier or more polite method 
of shutting out this divine Empire of truth from the world.’’ So Schmidt (Bib. Theol., p. 
247) remarks: ‘‘ According to Matt. 12 : 28 and 11 :12; Luke 17 : 20, 21, the Kingdom 
exists on earth, and all nations on the earth shall receive it, Matt. 13 : 31, 33; 8:11, 
12; 24:14.” Compare Seiss’s view, p. 338, Last Times, and his quotations from 
Tholuck, Stier, Krummacher, Trench, Alford, Luther, and King. Turning from these 
utterances (opposed to the idea of invisibility), we give a few others in accord with our 
view. Demarest and Gordon (Christology, quoted p. 192, Nathanael, vol. 11), say : “Christ 
said ‘ My Kingdom is not of this world’ (Cosmos), John 18 : 36; but He also said to His 
Apostles, ‘Ye are not of the world’ (Cosmos), John 15:19. The two propositions are 
identical ; if the first one proves that Christ’s Kingdom shall never be literally on the 
earth, then the second proves that the disciples, to whom He addressed these words, 
were not then literally on the earth, because neither were of the‘ Cosmos.’ On the other 
hand, if it be true that while the disciples ‘ were not of this world’ (John 16 : 16), they 
might remain in it (John 17 : 25), it is also true that the Kingdom is not of this world, 
and yet shall be in it ; for what may be said of Christ and, His disciples can also be said 
of His Kingdom. The import of the passage is transparent. Christ’s Kingdom, in its 
origin, form, spirit, economy, nature, and object, is not in any of these respects like the 
kingdoms of earth, such as Cesar’s. The anticipation of the saints will be realized, Rev. 
5 : 10, ‘ we shall reign on the earth.’’’ Comp. Brookes’s El. Proph. Interp., p. 149, and his 
quotation from Koppe, which however misapprehends the real facts in the case at the 
future setting up of the Kingdom, when denying that a resort will be made to violence— 
which is contradicted by the predicted action of the stone, the war with Christ and His 
army, Rev. 19, the overthrow of Antichrist and all enemies (see e.g. Props. 115, 123, 147, 
161, 162, 163, etc.). Christ’s servants were not then to fight, and to say that they never 
will, is to contradict the most express predictions in God’s Word. Sirr (The First Resur- 
rection, p. 89), “ My Kingdom is not of this world, is not derived from it, if My Kingdom 
were out of this world, that is, were world-derived, then would my servants fight that I 
should not be delivered to the Jews, but My Kingdom is not now, henceforward, or here, 
that is, in the world. From this place we learn that the Messiah’s Kingdom was not to 
be world-derived. It is to be given directly by the Father, and to be based on the ruins 
of every earthly dynasty. It was not to be set up at that time. There is a time to come, 
viz., the Palingenesia, commencing in the restitution of all things, when it shall thence- 
forward be set up here. Such is the direct, plain, natural import of the place before us. 
Were this the only passage in the Bible bearing on the subject, I would here take my 


34 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 109. 


stand and assert that Christ must yet be King over all the earth.” Judge Jones (Notes, 
p. 348, etc.) has excellent remarks, insisting upon a Kingdom in the future, world- 
embracing, etc., but vitiates much by not properly discriminating between the Divine 
Sovereignty (Props. 80, 89), and the covenanted Kingdom of David’s Son. He correctly 
notices that as Christ assumed that He should have a Kingdom in the future and hence 
that He was a King, this was observed by Pilate, who instantly drew the inference, 
** Thou art a King, then.’’ The impression left on Pilate’s mind is evinced by the super- 
scription of the cross, ‘“‘ This is the King of the Jews.” The student can easily add to 
such quotations. Christ positively asserts that Ris Kingdom was not then in existence 
(Props. 56, 57, 58), and hence not the Church, but would be at some time in the future. 

The student will observe that the stress lies on the two statements, ‘‘ not of this world,” 
and ‘‘ but now.” King (Mors. of Criticism, vol. 1, p. 421), correctly says of the first 
clause : ‘‘It might be translated or at least paraphrased, My Kingdom is not derived 
from any powers or authority in this world.’’ ‘This is precisely the truth concerning a 
Theocracy, for to be such it must be heaven or God-derived. Now mark well: it is of 
this Theocracy that the declaration is made, and that it was not then to be established 
(being, as we have shown, postponed to the Second Advent). This language, therefore, 
in its appropriateness and force, alone harmonizes with our position. For if the spiritual 
Kingdom (invisible reign, etc.), were denoted, the latter clause would not be true, for our 
opponents say that was in existence. The emphasis that may be laid on “ this world”’ 
(and which confirms our view) has been well expressed by Krummacher (Suffering Saviour, 
p. 248): “ He only asserts that His Kingdom was not of this world, and clearly intimates 
by laying the emphasis on the word ‘ this,’ that another aov than the present would cer- 
tainly see His delegates seated on thrones, and His word and Gospel the magna charta of 
all nations’? (comp. Steir, Words of Jesus, loci). In opposition to our view, our op- 
ponents push the first clause to an extreme which (comp. Schlegel’s Philos. of His., see. 
10) will not allow a Kingdom in the world at all of ‘‘ areal and effective power with a 
form and organization clearly defined,” but which expressed opinion they themselves 
again flatly contradict when—overlooking this passage—commenting e.g. on Dan. chs, 2 
and 7, Rev. 11:15, etc. The history of the interpretation and application of this pas- 
sage would form in itself an interesting essay : the primitive view, the Papal opinion, 
how it was used in the struggle against the Popes (as e.g. in the contest of Louis XIV. 
in 1682, when—Mosheim’s Ch. Lis., vol. 3, p. 309, note 81-—it was employed as evidence 
that the civil and temporal should be separated from the spiritual power), how it was 
understood by the Reformers and their successors (as e.g. what inconsistencies were ob- 
servable in its use, being employed against the Popes when those using it claimed for the 
Church a kind of Theocracy which could enforce obedience, etc., through the civil 
power, etc.), the various interpretations succeeding (and the contradictions again in- 
volved, etc.). The perversion and abuse of this Scripture is something remarkable, and 
asad commentary on the weakness and prejudice of human nature. Employed as a 
Weapon against others it became a deadly shaft when turned against themselyes— 
charging others with forming a Kingdom of this world, they proceeded to do the same 
thing, only claiming a higher degree of spirituality. In view of the great stress con-. 
stantly laid on this passage, we may refer to the decided opinion expressed by Dr. Cra- 
ven in his ‘‘ Excursus on the Kingdom’’ in Lange’s Com. Rev., a most admirable paper. 
He remarks (p. 100) that the ‘‘ now” ‘‘ may be regarded as a particle of time : My King- 
dom is not now established,’’ and then pertinently asks whether Jesus would inform “ a 
heathen” of the truth (alleged by our opponents) and conceal it from His disciples after 
the experience of Luke 22 : 29,30, and continued to conceal it after the experience of 
Acts 1:3; Luke 24:45, Craven’s view makes a consistent whole, avoiding antagonisms 
between the preaching and teaching of disciple and Master. It is the only interpretation 
that will do it. 


Obs. 2. Rom. 14:17, ‘‘For the Kingdom of God ts not meat or drink ; 
but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.’’ From this is in- 
ferred that the Church or piety is the Kingdom, But this passage must be 
explained in accordance with the general tenor of the Word, and if this is 
done then the idea of the Apostle is that the Kingdom we hope to enter is 
not one of (leading to or tending to, e.g. Rom. 8 : 6, etc.) meat and drink 
(hence no need of the contention, etc., previously mentioned concerning 
meats), but one of righteousness, peace, and joy. Or, the Kingdom is not 


Prop. 109. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 319) 


obtained by meat and drink but by righteousness, etc. If we are to under- 
stand it differently and by way of inference, then some passage direct and 
explicit, teaching that the Church is the Kingdom, ought to be produced to 
prove its correctness (comp. Meyer, Com. loci). Matt. 6 : 32, “But seek ye 
first the Kingdom of God and Mis righteousness’’ only has reference to seek- 
ing an interest in the Kingdom ; for, as many commentators admit, the 
connection in which it stands in Luke 12 : 31 shows this, Jesus having 
immediately added: ‘“‘Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father’s good 
pleasure to give you the Kingdom,’’ etc. The passage in Luke 16 : 16, 
‘‘ the law and the prophets were until John ; since that time the Kingdom 
of God is preached and every man presseth into it’’ (also Matt. 11 : 11-12) 
has already been alluded to, and the satisfactory explanation given by Judge 
Jones (Notes on Matt. 11 : 12) proves that instead of every man pressing 
into it, every man, i.e. the generality of men pressed against or resisted it, 
which accords with the historical facts as given by John 1:11; 12:37; 
Rom, 11: 8, 11, 12; Matt. 23:13, etc. This interpretation sustained 
by the language prevents it becoming contradictory to others.* The pas- 
sages found in Matt. 16:28; Mark 9:1; Luke 9:27; Matt. 10 : 23, will 
be examined in connection with the transfiguration, Prop. 153. The lan- 
guage addressed to Nicodemus, John 3 : 3, 5, is of such a nature that we 
have a preparatory work described preliminary to a future seeing and enter- 
ing into the Kingdom, or, as will be shown under the Prop. relating to the 
resurrection it is so far-reaching that it also includes that birth of the Spirit 
which Jesus Himself experienced, viz., that of the resurrection from the 
dead, which is preliminary to the inheriting, etc., of the future Kingdom. 


Meyer, Com. on Rom. 14:17, makes a direct reference to ‘‘ the Messianic Kingdom 
which shall be set up at the Sec. Coming of Christ.” Other writers, as Craven, Lummis, 
“* Senex,” etc., give the same interpretation. Matt. 11:11 has been already sufficiently 
noticed ; but it may be observed additionally that if the current explanation of Matt. 
11:11, 12, and Luke 16 : 16 is the correct one then it proves too much for the Church- 
Kingdom advocates, for (1) it ignores the theory that the Christian Church or Kingdom 
was only established on the day of Pentecost ; (2) it makes a Church or Kingdom exist- 
ing from the days of John into which persons entered and John the Baptist the least one 
of all that entered ; (3) and it introduces an antagonism between two supposed King- 
doms. The palpable contradictions into which leading popular commentaries fall can 
readily be tested by any reader if he will take the trouble to compare their comments 
on these passages, and then see how quickly they forget them when explaining the day of 
Pentecost or even Acts 1:6, etc. A theory that introduces such confusion and antago- 
nism is, to say the least, open to grave suspicion of unsoundness. 


Obs. 3. It is supposed that the most direct Scripture in support of the 
Church-Kingdom theory is found in Col. 1 : 13, ‘‘ Who hath delivered us 
from the power of darkness and hath translated us into the Kingdom of 
His dear Son.’’ This undoubtedly is the strongest proof text that can be 
presented in favor of the prevailing view. But (1) if we receive our version 
as it stands the language is easily reconcilable with the principle that future 
blessings are spoken of as present, as exemplified in Heb. 12 : 22, 23, etc. 
(comp. Prop. 65, Obs. 9). This is a peculiarity of Paul’s, so that in Rom. 
8 : 30 he has those who are justified a/so glorified, when, as is taught in the 


* Let the student see the excellent and satisfactory explanation of Dr. Craven, p. 96, 
Lange’s (om. Rev., as well as the statement given, in detail, under a previous Proposi- 
tion, 


36 THE TILEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 109. 


same chapter, the period of glorification is still future. In the context 
itself the allusion to the inheritance of the saints and deliverance from 
darkness indicates the same, seeing that ‘‘ the inheritance’’ is only bestowed 
at the Sec. Advent and that @ complete deliverance from darkness (which 
includes death and the grave) is only obtained at the Coming of Christ. 
This Scripture must be explained according to the general analogy of Script- 
ure, and it is too indefinite to form the foundation of so important a doc- 
trine as that of the Church-Kingdom. (2) Some authors, however, give a 
different rendering from our version, making the reading “‘ changed us for 
the Kingdom of His dear Son,’’ contending that the preposition ‘‘ eis’’ 
should be translated ‘‘ for’’ as, e.g. in Luke 9 : 62, ete. Hither view will 
secure uniformity of promise, etc.’ A passage from which it is inferred 
that John was then in the Kingdom (i.e. Church) is found in Rey. 1 :9, 
“*T, John, who am your brother and companion in tribulation and in the 
Kingdom and patience of Christ.’’ 'The best comment on this is to be 
found in 2 Tim. 2:12, “Jf we suffer, we shall also reign with Him,’’ or in 
Rom. 8 : 17, ‘lf children, then heirs; heirs of God and joint heirs with 
Christ ; if so be that we suffer with Him, that we may be also glorified 
together.’’ Commentators (as e.g. Bloomfield, doc’) frankly admit this ex- 
planation and think that reference is made to ¢he hope of the Kingdom 
expressed in verse 6. Hence John declares in the most decided manner his 
strong faith and hope of sharing in the Kingdom.? 


1 Thus Reed, ete., renders : ‘‘ Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and 
changed us for’’ (or unto, in respect of, in order to, see Graves on Prep. eis) “ the King- 
dom of the Son of His love.’’ Lyon and others ‘‘ and hath transferred us over unto the 
Kingdom,’’ etc. Ward ‘* hath changed us into a better way toward the Kingdom,”’ etc. 
Wakefield : ‘‘ For delivering us from the power of darkness and removing us into the 
Kingdom of His beloved Son.’’ We are content to receive the version as it stands, satis- 
fied to explain it by the general analogy of the Word. Comp. the remarks of Craven 
(Lange’s Com. loci and Eveursus), who, if the common rendering is to be received, gives 
it adejure force. Comp. Variorum. 

> Other renderings are given, as e.g. Wakefield’s, ‘‘ I, John, a sharer with you in endur- 
ing the affliction of the Kingdom,” etc., but we are satisfied with our version. Rev. 
Hosford (Bib. Sacra, Ap., 1866, p. 310) explains it, ‘“sharer with you in the hope of the 
Kingdom,” and this explanation is presented by numerous writers. Ward (Proph. 
Times, vol. 12, p. 39) well observes that ‘‘the idea that John is with us in tribulation, 
and is at the same time in the Kingdom of heaven, is inconsistent with itself and with 
‘the glorious Gospel of the blessed God,’” and, therefore, he regards the passage as 
equivalent to saying, I, John, who also am your brother and companion in tribulation 
and “ in patient waiting for the Coming and Kingdom of Jesus Christ.’’ That is, being 
now in tribulation, he patiently hopes for deliverance in that Kingdom of Christ’s which 
he is about to delineate. The critical reader is reminded that such phraseology as our 
version gives was current among the Jews (Knapp’s Ch. Theol., s. 99, 1), so that “ when 
a proselyte was received, he was said to be admitted into the Kingdom of heaven, or, 
of God”’—that is, he then became one of ‘‘ the children of the Kingdom,’’ and as such 
was entitled to the Kingdom with the other sons or heirs, The certainty of future 
inheritance was thus expressively denominated. The critical student will observe one 
feature, in the next Prop. we meet the prevailing view that the Kingdom is not some- 
thing into which John or a man enters, but is something which enters into John or a 
person—so conflicting and directly opposite are the views we have to oppose. Tischen- 
dorf’s New Test., loci, has the mss., S. and A. to give, ‘‘in tribulation and the Kingdom 
and patience in Jesus (A. in Christ).” The passage evidently must be interpreted by 
the general analogy. Comp. Variorum, etc. ; especially Craven, Lange’s Com. Rev., p. 
103, who quotes Trench as saying: ‘ As yet, however, while the tribulation is present, 
the Kingdom is only in hope, therefore he adds to these, as that which is the link 
between them, ‘ and patience (endurance) of Jesus Christ ;’ cf. Acts 14 : 22, where exactly 
these same three, the tribulation, the patience, and the Kingdom occur,” ete. 


Prop. 109. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 37 


Obs. 4. Several other passages are occasionally urged against our view 
that may be worthy of attention. Thus 1 Cor. 4 : 20, ‘‘For the K ingdom 
of God is not in word but in power,” is thus employed, but it really sus- 
tains our position because we all along contend that it is not produced or 
established by *‘ word ’’ but by “* power,”’ not by speech but by authority. 
If the ancient (Bloomfield, /oci) and some modern commentators are correct 
in making the word “* power”’ an equivalent for *‘ miraculous power,”’ then 
it is still stronger on our side. At least the language is a rebuke to certain 
ones who thought that they were rulers, possessed authority, etc., and the 
appeal is that if they were such their power should be manifested, although 
Paul himself professes not yet to reign. But if the passage does refer to 
the power exhibited through the Apostle himself (as in ch. 2 : 4), then the 
idea is that the Kingdom of God is proclaimed, preached by him not in 
word, ‘‘ not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but in demonstration of 
the Spirit and of power.’? In any case the verb, being omitted, must be 
supplied by the force of the context, and therefore is not very decisive in a 
question of this kind, especially as the word ‘* power,’’ on which critics 
differ, has a material influence in deciding what is to be supplied. Again, 
such passages as Luke 22:16; Matt. 26:29; Mark 14 : 25, require no 
particular notice, since over against the few who make a fulfilment in the 
Church in the sacrament of the Lord’s Supper, the immense majority of 
those who hold to the Church-Kingdom view concede that it has no refer- 
ence to the Church here in this dispensation. They indeed refer it to the 
third heaven, etc., while we regard its fulfilment connected with Luke 
22:29, 30. Finaliy many inconclusive inferences are drawn from the 
phrase in the Lord’s Prayer ** Thy Kingdom come,”’ the main one being 
that it is praying for a Kingdom already present, and that its power, etc., 
may be extended, etc. But this is in direct opposition to the words of the 
petition which is—as the last saint will do—praying for something fo come ; 
the force of which is admitted by later Fathers, commentators, and others, 
so that they (as e.g. Cyprian, Augustine, etc.) tell us that the Kingdom 
meant is the Kingdom of glory or the third heaven. That it has an un- 
doubted reference to the future is evident from the annexed clause, ‘* Thy 
will be done in earth as it is in heaven,’’ which by numerous passages we 
find will not be done before but after the Second Advent. Besides this the 
prayer is given to the people with the then prevailing belief that the King- 
dom of promise was still future, and as we have seen from Jewish expecta- 
tions, etc., fully accords with the preaching of the Kingdom. A theory 
must be hard pressed for argument that can change ‘‘ Thy Kingdom come”’ 
into a present, existing one. The Church-Kingdom is grafted upon it 
irrespective of real fitness and against the protests even of many of our 
opposers. 


Having several, times referred to the Lord’s Prayer (see Prop. 105), but little need be 
added. Against the prevailing view which would engraft upon it ‘‘the spread of 
Christianity,’ ‘‘ the extension of the Christian Church,’’ “‘ the increase of God's reign 
in the hearts of the children of men,” ‘‘the development of the power of religion,” 
‘* the Church now and the Kingdom of glory in heaven,” the Church in its development, 
the completion at the Sec. Advent, and the events which shall lead to its glorious trans- 
formation,” etc., ete., we only now, in behalf of Meyer’s (Com. loci) scriptural inter- 
pretation of the Kingdom prayed for being “‘ the Messianic Kingdom’’ (understood in 
the Millenarian sense), propose to the reader two considerations. (1) How comes lt 
that those nearest to the Apostles, and who, it is reasonable to suppose, ought to be the 
best acquainted with the nature of the Kingdom petitioned for, adopted the Chiliastic view 


a 


38 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 109. 


and prayed for a Kingdom still future to be ushered in at the Sec. Advent? How, with 
their views of the Advent, etc., could they entertain the modern notions? Hence, the 
use of the prayer in the apostolic and immediate age enforces our position. (2) It has 
been proven by Lightfoot, Schoettgen, Gregory, etc., and which is indorsed by various 
commentators. that Jesus brought together in this prayer what was already in use by 
the Jews, since they give every sentiment in full taken from Jewish sources. If this is 
so, then it strongly corroborates our attitude. For, Jesus thus incorporating them 
without explanation, virtually and emphatically indorsed the Jewish view of the Mes- 
sianic Kingdom. 'This He does, too, framing them in the form of a prayer, which in 
itself is so sacred as to exclude the notion of prevarication, accommodation, etc. It was 
given to Jews, and mark it, to Jews who went forth and preached the Jewish conception 
of the Kingdom (Prop. 43, ete., comp. Acts 1:6), and hence when they prayed it they 
did so with Jewish conceptions. Now is it credible that Jesus would give a prayer so 
framed that He knew His disciples would thus employ and understand it, when He, as 
modern theologians assert, placed another sense on the words? No! never. We only 
add that all other passages are readily incorporated and consistently applied by our 
doctrine. Thus e.g. 1 Thess. 2:12, ‘‘who hath called you unto His Kingdom and 
glory” (Lange’s loci calleth you into His own, or Amer. Bible Union, ‘‘ is calling you 
into His,’’ and comp. Notes of Alford and Lange), only asserts, what we firmly hold, our 
high calling to both—united—Kingdom and glory. The nearness of Matt. 3 : 2, etc., 
has been fully explained ; the Kingship of Jesus, John 18 : 37, etc., for He was ‘* born 
King of the Jews,”’ only evidences that in His humiliation we must distinguish—as our 
whole argument proves—between a King de jure and a King de facto. (Craven in Lange’s 
Rev., p. 95, points this out and adds: ‘‘ The fact that He is now exalted to the throne 
of universa] dominion, Eph. 1 : 20-22, no more proves that the Kingdom is now estab- 
lished on earth, than did the universal government of God in the days of Daniel prove 
that the Kingdom of God was then established on earth. We must distinguish between a 
Kingdom on earth and a Kingdom over earth, which includes earth as a revolted 
province.’’ With this compare e.g. Props. 79 and 80.) All passages, either directly or 
indirectly bearing on the subject have been, or will hereafter be, introduced, so that the 
reader can in every case judge for himself in reference to the consistency of our 
application, 


Prop. 110.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 39 


Proposition 110. Zhe passage most relied on to prove the Church- 
Kingdom theory utterly disproves i. 


Desirous to call especial attention to this passage of Scripture, it 
is reserved for a separate Proposition. In a careful reading and 
study of the Church-Kingdom theory, it will be found the most 
Srequently quoted, and adduced as an authority, from Origen 
down to recent writers as Dr. McCosh, and including a host. In 
view of the learning, ability, and high standing of those who thus 
employ it, this Scripture (viz., Luke 17 : 21) deserves marked atten- 
tion. 


Obs. 1. Before discussing the passage itself we may briefly advert to the 
manner in which it is employed. It is amazing that, notwithstanding the 
just criticisms of able commentators, the most prominent men will continue 
to quote it in support of a spiritual Kingdom without the least attempt to 
show how it can be consistently and logically thus applied. They use it as 
if no difficulties of any kind were attached to it, and as if it did not prove 
too much for their own theory. ‘To give a recent example : Dr. McCosh in 
replying to Renan (Christ. and Posit., p. 245) adduces the passago to prove 
that ‘‘ the Kingdom was to be a reign of God in men’s hearts’? without see- 
ing that if such is its meaning ¢hen the wicked Pharisees had already this 
Kingdom ‘‘ within’’ them, for the words were directly addressed to them. 
When men of acknowledged ability will quote Scripture so loosely it is sad- 
dening to the heart, and causes but little hope that many will duly weigh 
and examine the passage. It is true some allowance must be made for the 
manner in which such an interpretation is intrenched in the Church itself, 
and thus becomes unless particular attention is directed to it, part of its 
theological equipments. ‘Thus, e.g. Dr. Woodhouse (7'ransl. of Apoc.) lays 
down as a canon of interpretation that the Kingdom predicted in Revela- 
tion is a spiritual Kingdom and to prove it quotes, italicizing it, ‘* the 
Kingdom of God, says our Lord, ts within you, Luke 17 : 21,’’ which 
canon is indorsed and adopted by Horne (Jntred., vol. 2, p. 383). Thus it 
is erected even as a foundation upon which to build an interpretation. 
Neander is more guarded, translating (Life of Christ, s. 213) ‘‘ Behold the 
Kingdom of God is among you,’’ and in a foot-note opposes the rendering 
‘‘ within you”’ as inconsistent because it ‘‘ would not swit the persons ad- 
dressed, for they were as yet strangers to the Kingdom of God,’’ etc. But 
bound by his theory to find the spiritual Kingdom he apprehends it in the 
preceding phrase, which he renders ‘‘ the Kingdom of God cometh not with 
outward show (cannot be outwardly seen by human eyes), and in a note 
adds : ‘* The antithesis is, that it reveals itself ¢zvistdly, so as to be seen only 
by the eye of faith.’? He afterward forgets and contradicts his own defini- 
tion of this Kingdom, making it in the course of development @ real, out- 


40 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 110. 


ward, visible world-dominion, Many such illustrations can be given, found 
in commentaries, etc., which find here a spiritual Kingdom in one or the 
other of these sentences, and then make this same inward, invisible King- 
dom—a Kingdom only seen by the eye of faith—transform itself somehow 
into a visible outward Kingdom. ‘This singular transformation notion, so 
hostile to what they call ‘‘a higher spiritual conception,’’ is evidence that 
there must be something faul/y in the theory itself. The reader need 
scarcely be reminded that this passage, with the interpretation that it de- 
notes ** God’s reign in the heart,’’ is a favorite one with Spiritualists, etc., 
to confirm spirit revelations, claims to inspiration, etc. Various sects have 
built largely on it as indicating special inward light, knowledge, authority, 
etc. 


The interpretation given by believers is well adapted to the use made of it by un- 
believers. ‘Thus e.g. Renan (Life of Christ, p. 106) employs it in the interest of human- 
itarianism as ‘‘ a true Kingdom of God which each one bears in his heart” ; it is *‘ the 
universal Fatherhood of God,’’ etc., but remarks that later in the life of Jesus it took 
more of a Jewish complexion which was connected with ‘‘a speedy renewal of the 
world.” Rob. Dale Owen (The Deb. Land) employs it as Dr. McCosh and others, to 
denote a Kingdom in the heart, or “the divine, indwelling spirit of truth,” or a kind of 
ethical, spiritual development. ‘This is the old mistake of confounding the Divine 
Sovereignty with the covenanted Theocracy, which e.g. Jerome (quoted by Neander, 
Christian Life, p. 241) expounds, in “ From Jerusalem and from Britain the Kingdom of 
heaven is equally open to you, for the Kingdom of God is within you.” Sermons in 
every variety not only reproduce Jerome’s statement but (as Dr. Lowrey and others) 
actually apply the Millennial predictions, en masse, to this Kingdom in the heart, as e.g. 
illustrated thus: “ When we read that the wilderness and the desert shall be made 
glad we must understand this to refer to the wilderness and desert places of our own 
hearts.’’ Writers, whose earnest piety must be admired, thus confound the Divine 
Sovereignty, God’s universal rule, with the Covenanted Kingdom (comp. Props. 79-90), 
and chiefly base their conclusions upon this passage misinterpreted, as illustrated e.g. 
in Flavel’s Fountain of Life. One distinguishing feature in this class of writers is, that 
without any regard to the context of passages, or their reference to dispensation or time, 
they are all equally quoted as applicable. Others (as e.g. a writer in Proph, Times, vol. 
11, p. 156) have (1) ‘‘ the reign of God over the heart,’’ (2) God’s reign in and over the 
Church, (8) and a Kingdom “to come—something future.’’ But this is only a reitera- 
ticn of the old misapprehension, a confounding of things that materially differ, a 
mistaking the means for the end intended, a substituting of sovereignty for the King- 
dom covenanted to the Son of man, and an ignoring of express Covenant promises and 
the strictly logical facts connected with the Kingdom. It is calculated to prevent a 
proper conception of the Kingdom covenanted to David’s Son. Farrar (Life of Christ, vol. 
2, p. 137) takes the common view, and says that ‘‘ even they (the disciples) did not fully 
realize that the Kingdom had already come,’’ and that they looked forward to some 
glorious future for its arrival. We only now say that the preachers of a Kingdom, 
specially appointed and sent forth by Jesus, were far betler qualified (comp. Props. 43, 
44, etc.) to judge in this matter, and form an estimate of the Kingdom than men are at 
this late day. Of course, Farrar’s view ignores the abounding passages relating to the 
postponement (Props. 58, 66, 67, 68, etc.). Even so excellent a writer as Christlieb 
(Mod, Doubt, p. 416) falls into the error of quoting this passage to sustain the notion of 
an existing Kingdom ‘‘ within man,’’ and adds, ‘‘and yet this opinion gains ground,”’ 
Alas ! this is but too true that it is gaining ground, rooting out the early Church belief, 
and preparing both the Church and the world for the predicted state of unbelief on this 
very subject. This hearl-Kingdom theory put in the place of the covenanted Kingdom 
cannot be sustained by the Covenants, by the predictions, by the bestowal of the King- 
dom to David’s Son, by the postponement, by the time when it is to be inaugurated, 
by the means employed at its establishment, ete. It is simply an unwarranted sub- 
stitution of something, which has always existed (Prop. 84) for a specifically covenanted 
Theocracy pertaining to David's Son. Beecher (Ch, Union, Jan. 15th, 1879) gives this increas- 
ing belief as follows: ‘‘ I (Jesus) came to establish a Kingdom that consists in man’s 
dispositions, and not in an outward and visible Kingdom.’’ This passage is a favorite 
with all the mystical and spiritualistic theories, making the Kingdom to be ‘‘ the pre- 


Prop. 110. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 4] 


dominance in the soul of man of right dispositions,’’ etc. Entire works, as e.g. The 
Inner Kingdom, are based on a wrong inference taken for granted, viz., ‘‘ The Kingdom 
of heaven, Christ said is within us ; it is not a physical state ; it is a condition of the 
soul.’”’ The Swedenborgian (Christ is Coming ; but how? p. 14) is more consistent when 
he spiritualizes not merely a part but the whole, and makes the Lord Jesus’s Coming 
into the heart to raise up this Kingdom, His Second Coming. Alas! 


Obs. 2. The passage, Luke 17 : 20, 21, must be taken in its entire con- 
nection. (1) ‘‘ And when He was demanded of the Pharisees when the 
Kingdom of God should come.’’ 'The question when the Kingdom should 
come determines the answer. And we may well ask the question whether 
Jesus will give that information to the Pharisees which He wniformly 
denied to His own disciples during His ministry (Mark 13 : 32) and even 
after His resurrection (Acts 1:7). Would He give that (i.e. exact time) 
to His enemies which He withheld from His friends? (2) ‘‘He answered 
them and said, the Kingdom of God cometh not with observation.’’ Perhaps 
no word has received such singular treatment as the word ‘ observation’’ 
here ; its primary, distinctive meaning is discarded and a meaning given to 
it which Judge Jones (Hssays on the Com. of the Kingdom of God, p. 51) 
justly remarks ‘* cannot be extracted from it,’’ and as a further proof of it 
the reader may be challenged to produce another place, either in sacred or 
secular literature, where any critic has attempted to force any one of these 
meanings (i.e. outward show, pomp, splendor, etc.) either upon the word 
‘ parateresis’ or ‘ observatio.’’’ Discarding then all those far-fetched sec- 
ondary engrafted meanings, and leaving even the highly ingenious (perhaps 
correct) and critical interpretation of Judge Jones, we are willing to accept 
of the plain meaning of the word as given by critics, viz., denoting 
(Olshausen) ‘‘ the act of perceiving or of observing,’’ (Kype) ‘‘ scrupulous 
attention or observation,’’ etc. ‘Thus then, the Kingdom of God cometh, 
not as something whose approach may be attentively perceived, observed, 
considered, i.e. like that of a visible object gradually or even swiftly ap- 
proaching. It will not come indicating its coming by sending forth any 
observable signs. ‘This is the simple meaning and it corresponds with the 
general tenor of the word. This Kingdom 1s linked, as we have shown, 
with the Sec. Advent; ‘‘ the appearing and the Kingdom’’ (as in the fol- 
lowing verses) are united, 2 Tim. 4:1. No one will be able to observe its 
coming, for it comes as the Advent itself, suddenly, wnexpectedly, like a 
thief, illustrated in the parable of the Ten Virgins and by its comparison 
with the lightning and the days of Noah. So concealed is its approach 
that it becomes ‘‘ a@ snare’’ to the world, and even to the Church ; for its 
coming is dependent on the fulfilment of ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles,’’ the 
completion of a certain number of the elect, the Advent of Christ Himself, 
which things are not observable to man, being known only to God. There 
is nothing in the Kingdom itself to indicate the time of its establishment. 
(3) ‘* Neither shall they say, Lo here! or Lo there !’? Not being observ- 
able for the reasons just assigned no one is able to direct attention to 1t in 
the manner indicated.’ 

(4) ‘‘For, behold, the Kingdom of God is within you.’? Surely He did 
not mean that the Pharisees who addressed Him and to whom He spoke, 
had the Kingdom within them individually, personally. The phrase 
‘within you’’ is susceptible of an easy and consistent solution. Let the 
reader consider the Propositions in which we showed conclusively that this 
Kingdom is covenanted fo the Jewish nation ; that it is an elect nation ; 


42 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 110. 


that this Kingdom belonged so exclusively to them that the public ministry 
of John, Jesus and the disciples was confined (Prop. 54) to that nation ; 
that the Kingdom was fendered to it ; that on its refusal (through its repre- 
sentative men) to repent, the Kingdom is postponed and the people who are 
to receive it as an inheritance with Christ are grafted into that elect nation, 
etc., and all these considerations show at once how this Kingdom was 
‘within’? them. It was truly ‘‘ within’’ the nation, it being the elect 
nation. The persons addressed were part of the nation and chief men of 
it, and Christ, in strict accordance with covenant relationship and fact, told 
those very unbelievers, that in view of the tender of this Kingdom to the 
people of the nation, and of its being pregehed within the nation, and of 
its being identified with the nation in the throne and Kingdom of David, 
this Kingdom is within them. It is connected with them, and within their 
reach on condition of repentance. It is also equivalent to the expression in 
Luke 11 : 20, ‘‘ the Kingdom of God is come upon you,’’ or Matt. 12 : 28, 
‘* come unto you,’’ i.e. has attained unto you or pertains to you. ‘The word 
‘‘within’’ receives its force from ¢he restriction thrown around the King- 
dom by the covenant relationship of the nation, and therefore it has or it is, 
come ‘‘ wpon’’ them, ‘‘ among’’ them, ‘‘ within’’ them, as it could not at 
that time come to any other nation or people. ‘This is evidenced from the 
fact that this very Kingdom thus come within the nation is taken from it 
and given to another engrafted people. If it did not in a high and peculiar 
sense belong to the nation, it could not be taken from it. Hence the 
‘‘within you’? addressed to these unbelieving Jews is most expressive of 
their covenanted relationship and the glorious privileges that they as a nation 
enjoyed. Restricted as it was to that nation, the opportunity was presented 
of a blessed change, but instead of repentance and faith and a consequent 
establishment of the Kingdom, a sad history of wickedness intervened.’ 

(5) If the context following is noticed it confirms our interpretation. He 
now addresses the disciples: ‘‘ the days will come when ye shall desire to see 
one of the days of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it’’ (v. 22). This, in 
reply to the question when the Kingdom shall come, indicates what we have 
already proven, the indefinite postponement of the Kingdom ; for the line of 
Christ’s remarks makes the decided impression that the Kingdom will noé 
soon be established, owing to His departure, and that the time of His return 
and its manifestation ts concealed. None of the disciples then living shall see 
and enjoy it during their lives ; and, comparing John 17 : 11, 12, 13 ; Matt. 
9:15, etc., these days of absence extend down to our own time, and will only 
end when the day of the Lord Jesus (Phil. 1:6; 1Cor.1:5,8; 2Cor.1:14; 
1 Thess. 5 : 2, etc.) shall be revealed. In verse 23 He cautions against 
deceivers who shall pretend to found this Kingdom, which again intimates 
that it will not come very soon. In reply to the question when, He, taking 
the fundamental fact that the Kingdom itself és dependent on His appear- 
ing, directs attention to the sudden and unmistakable (y. 24) Coming of 
the King, of the Son of man ‘‘ in His day.’’ And (vy. 25) directly shows 
that the Kingdom cannot soon appear, because of His suffering and rejec- 
tion by that generation. Then He points out the condition of the world at 
the period of His Advent, that it will be a season of forgetfulness, unbelief, 
etc., as in the days of Noah and Lot. And yet at such a period, when men 
wlmost generally shall discard the notion of the imminency of His coming 
and the setting up of His Kingdom, this question of the Pharisees shall be 
realized, for ‘‘ even thus will tt be in the day when the Son of man is 


Prop: 110.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 43 


9) 


revealed.’’ This is followed up by a parable representing a period of trial 
as intervening, that although such trials were before them men should pray 
and not faint, because although God “‘ dear long with them’’ (expressive of 
delay) He shall finally deliver them, concluding with the deeply impressive 
question (alas, so abundantly verified in this day), ‘‘ Nevertheless, when the 
Son of man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?’ Jews and Gentiles, 
with here and there an exception, discard all faith in this personal Coming 
of the Son of man, and the Kingdom covenanted to Him and identified 
with that Coming. The delay is to them ample evidence that it never will 
be witnessed. Now in the direct answer to the Pharisees, and the added re- 
marks to the disciples, together with the corroborating state of the Church 
and world, we have reiterated, what has already been proven, that the King- 
dom was nigh to the Jewish nation, that, owing to their sinfulness, it was 
not established but is postponed to an indefinite period in the future, viz., 
‘* to the day when the Son of man ts revealed’’ (comp. Props. 56-68).* 


1 Bloomfield, Com. loci, has well observed that many professed versions are rather 
interpretations sought out. Van Oosterzee (Lange’s Com. Luke, loci) explains : “‘ liter- 
ally, with or under observation, so that it can be recognized and observed by outward 
tokens, and that one could exclaim with assurance, Lo here, lo there!’’ To this Craven 
(Lange’s Rev., p. 96, foot-note) attributes the idea ‘‘ it cometh not with the signs of a 
gradual approach.’’ The idea of asudden, unexpected Coming—especiaily to the Jewish 
nation, to whom this is specially addressed—is particularly impressed ; and how this 
will be verified is stated in immediate connection with the Advent. Various proposi- 
tions, hereafter, will develop, in detail, this very feature. 

? Dean Alford, Com. loci—‘** The misunderstanding which rendered these words ‘ within 
you,’ meaning this in a spiritual sense ‘ in your hearts,’ should have been prevented by 
reflecting that they are addressed to the Pharisees, in whose hearts it certainly was not. 
We have the very expression, Xen, Anab., 1 : 3, entos auton. See also John 1 : 26, and 
12 : 35, both of which are analogous expressions’? (comp. Neander, Obs. 1). It is 
noticeable that even those who in some form admit of a present existing spiritual 
Kingdom are unwilling to concede that this expression: teaches it. Thus e.g. Steir 
(Words of Jesus, loci) expressly says : ‘‘ It does not, as superficial expositors dream (here 
and verse 37), refer the Kingdom of Christ to the invisible region of the heart.” Dr. 
Brown (Com. loci) cannot, with his views of the Church, make this a purely “ internal 
and spiritual character,’’ declaring, ‘‘ But it has its external side too.’’ They find 
especial difficulty to harmonize this saying with their engrafted spiritual views, with 
e.g. their (Fairbairn, etc.) expressed opinions of the Kingdom portrayed in the parable 
of the Tares. It is sufficient to say that if this Kingdom is ‘‘ God’s reign in the hearts,”’ 
or “ pious dispositions,’’ it is only requisite to apply it (as synonymous) to e.g. Matt. 
3:2, or 4:23, or 8:12, or 11:11, or 16 : 28, etc., and notice the absurdities intro- 
duced. An interpretation to be valid must be consistent and in agreement with the 
Kingdom wherever mentioned. The prevailing view is that of the Romanist, Dr. 
Rutter (Life of Jesus, p. 358), who says that ‘‘ the Kingdom of God within you” denotes 
“that interior one (Kingdom) which God possesses in the souls of the just, after 
destroying these the empire of the devil, by the doctrine of the Gospel and by the 
infusion of the Holy Ghost ; in other words, by faith and charity he reigns triumphantly 
in the hearts of all his elect.” Lyon, Thomas, and others render ‘‘ the majesty of the 
heavens is among you,” but while this introduces a more consistent application (thus 
avoiding the contradictions by a reference to the person of Jesus) this is not the usual 
meaning of the phrase (as is readily seen by attempting to make it synonymous with 
numerous other passages where the phrase occurs), and is not the Jewish conception 
and usage, thus violating the general analogy of Scripture on the subject. ; : 

8 We have purposely avoided taking any liberties with our version, accepting of its 
rendering, although if we were to take those made by Neander, MacKnight, Phavorinus, 
Jones, and others, it would, in several places, confirm still more our view. But such 
aid is not necessary and therefore no appeal is made to it. 


Obs. 3. Because of the free use made of this passage, a few more remarks 
on the meaning of ‘‘ observation’? are in place. Coming to this Scripture 


44 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 110. 


with a preconceived notion of a Kingdom spiritual and invisible in this 
dispensation, the multitude engraft on the original word such expressions 
as ‘‘ outward show,’’ ‘‘ splendor,’’ ‘‘ pomp,’’ ‘‘ outward display,’’ ‘‘ exter- 
nal display of majesty,’’ etc., which do not legitimately belong to the word 
translated “‘ observation,’’ but are given to it, ¢o swit a theory, on the 
ground that such things are observed! As Judge Jones (Philo-Basilicus, 
Essays) has at length shown, nowhere else is it even attempted to render 
such a meaning.* Commentators who employ this secondary sense (as e.g. 
Bloomfield, Olshausen, etc.) frankly admit that this secondary sense only 
becomes a conjectural one, because they cannot find another example to 
verify it. Surely this in itself should be already sufficient reason for the 
student to regard the secondary sense with suspicion, but we have two 
additional ones to add. (1) This secondary sense is not true even of the 
Church. The Church comes with observation, as e.g. on the day of Pente- 
cost. It was established with ‘‘ outward show”’ and is perpetuated with 
the same, having a preached Word, ministers, officers, external ordinances, 
etc., and the saints are to be a light, a witness of the truth to the world. 
The faithful body of believers is to manifest itself as a testimony to all, 
and, of course, this cannot be done unless they can be observed, ete. (2) 
This secondary sense is 20¢ correct concerning the Kingdom of Christ. 
Let the reader notice what the Covenant demands, what the prophets pre- 
dict, respecting this Kingdom. Isit not to come with such ‘‘ outward 
show,’’ such ‘‘ splendor’’ and “‘ external majesty,’’ that it shall arrest the 
attention of, and be witnessed by, all living? Is it not to occupy the place 
of other kingdoms and to be exalted to the sovereignty of the world ? 
Multitudes of passages teach this ; and the least consideration of the pre- 
dicted glory of the Kingdom, ts wniversality, the restoration of the Jews 
connected with it, the worship of nations, etc., will at once show that, 
when it arrives, it will be the great and absorbing object of ‘* observation.”’ 
Indeed so evident is this, that we find admissions on all sides conceding it, 
even although opposed to a previous interpretation of the first part of the 
passage ‘Thus, e.g. Schmidt (Bib. Theol. of the N. T., p. 246), after 
spiritualizing this Kingdom, admits that ‘‘ the Lord also depicts in v. 24 
this same Kingdom as appearing visibly.’’? Olshausen (Com. loci) advo- 
cating the spirituality of the Kingdom in the reply to the Pharisees also 
claims that in the same chapter it is alluded to as external, external in its 
perfection. Having already pointed out the inconsistency of this develop- 
ment theory of aclaimed higher (spiritual) position to a lower one, it is 
only necessary to add that all such admissions prove the correctness of our 
interpretation of the chapter, and the incoherency of their own theory. 

Van Oosterzee (Lange’s Com. Luke, p. 268) rejects the idea that this is to be pressed 
to exclude the visibility of the Kingdom. While we cannot receive his explanation 
entire (because contradictory), yet we indorse this utterance : ‘‘ Not seldom has the 
saying, that ‘the Kingdom of God comes not with observation,’ been misused and exag- 


gerated, in the sense that this Kingdom will never on earth display itself in a glorious 
form worthy of itself. No; the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, but when 


* See Philo-Basilicus’s Essays in Literalist, vol. 3, and Essay No. 4, where reference is 
made to Campbell, Ravanelli, Munthe, Scott, Cartwright, Illyricus, Michaelis, Bloom- 
field, Kype, ete. So also compare Dr. Clarke (Com. loci), who refers to Kype and others 
having shown from Greek writers that it means ‘‘ scrupulous observation,”’ i.e. it will 
be easily discerned. Olshausen (Com. loci) says: ‘‘ It denotes literally the act of per- 
ceiving, of observing, and then, secondarily, everything that excites observation.”’ 


Prop. 110. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. AD 


it has once come, we shall nevertheless be well able to say : Lo here!’ But he rejects 
(p. 266) the view of Chrysostom, Luther, etc., that “ within you’’ means ‘in your 
hearts,” and gives his reasons for preferring the translation ‘‘ in the midst of you.’’ The 
fact is, that the elect condition of the nation necessitating the offer of the Kingdom— 
bringing it nigh to it—is too much overlooked, and that the relationship of these 
‘‘children of the Kingdom” to the tender offers the most ample and satisfactory ex- 
planation. Spiritualize it, and then ask whether such spiritualisms can explain either 
the language of the prophets as to its world-dominion, or what Kingdom was really 
taken from the Jews. 


Obs. 4. The meaning that so many deduce from the expression ‘‘ within 
you,’ is not only opposed by ourselves but finds opponents among many 
who have no sympathy with our doctrine, and who are in doctrinal position 
with the Church-Kingdom party. Advocating a spiritual Kingdom, yet 
they cannot find it a consistent measure to take the phrase ‘‘ within you’”’ 
as indicative of God’s reign in the heart,’’ etc., for, as they tell us, this 
would prove too much of the unbelieving party addressed. Hence Neander 
takes the position (see Obs. 1, above) that it ought to be rendered ‘* among 
you.’’? Olshausen informs us that Paulus, Fleck, Borneman, De Wette 
explain it, ‘‘ among you.’’ ‘The marg. reading also gives ‘‘ among you.”’ 
Bloomfield (doct) gives ‘‘among you.’’ Barnes (Com. loci) gives both 
“‘ within’? and ‘‘among you.’’ On the other hand Dr. Campbell, Dr. 
Jones, and many others insist on retaining ‘‘ within you.’’ So far as the 
sense of the passuge is concerned, either one or the other would suffice, 
although our preference is for the latter. Again, in the efforts to avoid 
the prevailing application of the ‘‘ within you,’’ some, as Dr. Neander, 
assert that “‘ the Kingdom of God was manifested in his own appearance,’’ 
and, as Prof. Whiting explains it, ‘‘ the King is among you.’’ So also Dr. 
Thomas and the Christadelphians generally. Whatever truth (Prop. 56) 
there may be in King and Kingdom being convertible, yet the peculiarity 
of the expression embracing a word that legitimately means ‘ within,”’ 
and the use of the previous word ‘‘ observation” forbids the application 
of this to the person of Jesus Christ, for then He would be ‘‘ within’’ those 
unbelievers and He could not be observed. Besides this, such an explana- 
tion is forced, being derived from the third one given by Cornelius a 
Lapide,* and which was based on the Divine Sovereignty of God ; while 
the Kingship of Christ, in view of the foreseen rejection, 1s held 77 abey- 
ance, being founded on His covenanted humanity and His relationship to 
God, after the performance of an allotted mission (Props. 81-90). The 
explanation given under Obs. 2 is in correspondence with and unites the 
statements of the Old and New Testaments, and accurately accords with 
the then existing status of the Jewish nation. 


Obs. 5. This Kingdom ‘‘ within you’? could not be the Christian Church, 
for that was afterward instituted and it was not anything that the 
Pharisees were in personal actual enjoyment of, and to apply it either to 
the person of Christ or to a spiritual reign is to bring it into conflict with 
covenanted expectations and the preaching of John the Baptist, Jesus, and 
the disciples (Props. 19-23 and 38-49). 


Hence, even Bloomfield (loci) says, that to make this phrase significant of ‘‘ the 
internal and spiritual principle’ ‘‘ is forbidden by the context.” How he can reconcile 


* Vide Philo. Basilicus’s quotations from Cornelius 4 Lapide, p. 17 Essays, Lit., vol. 3. 


46 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 110. 


his own view with such an admission is something that we cannot understand. Enemies 
and friends concede to us all that we require. 


Obs. 6. While the approach of the Kingdom itself is not discoverable by 
any observation, being dependent on the secret knowledge of God Himself 
as to the time and to the completion of the number of the elect, yet this 
does not forbid a certain approximative knowledge concerning the period 
of its approach. While not in itself giving forth any visible signs of its 
Coming, yet the Divine Spirit has given us other signs, other events as a 
kind of guide by which we may know, more or less, the nearness of its 
Coming. Jesus Himself enumerates a lengthy series of events, and em- 
phatically adds, Luke 21:31; ‘‘ So likewise, ye when ye see these things 
come to pass, know ye that the Kingdom of God is nigh at hand.’ Having 
already. used this passage in sustaining the postponement of the Kingdom, 
it is only necessary to say that neither the Church, visible or invisible, nor 
‘* God’s reign in the heart,’’ could be denoted, since “‘ these things’’ speci- 
fied are running their course down to the present day. Still attention is 
directed to ‘‘ these things’’ to urge us to watchfulness and anticipation of 
the Coming of the Kingdom undiscoverable by any outward, visible signs. 
Even the believing, owing to this lack of external observation of the King- 
dom, are represented as in danger of having its approach coming upon 
them most unexpectedly, while the world, rejecting those merciful and 
gracious predictions, is buried in slumber and caught in ‘‘a snare,”’ or 
‘‘net.’’? But few, wholly dependent on faith and not on the Kingdom itself 
presenting preliminary external signs for observation, will accept of the 
prophecies pertaining to this matter and be looking for, watching for, and 
awaiting with hope the Kingdom. ‘These signs, not of the Kingdom itself 
but of things existing when it is to come, will be enumerated under 
another Proposition (comp. Props. 173 and 174). 


We may in conclusion quote several writers who reject the prevailing interpretation. 
Rey. H. Dana Ward, in an interesting article, ‘‘ The Inhabited Earth Shortly to Come” 
(Proph. Times, vol. 12, p. 37), resists the notion that the Church is the visible Kingdom 
of the Messiah, and among other texts examines Luke 17 : 21-26. He justly repudiates 
a Kingdom existing in the Pharisees, and also ‘‘ among you” (i.e. in the person of the 
iting then present), for the former would honor the Pharisees above His disciples, and 
the latter is opposed by the context following and the references to this Kingdom being 
still future. He makes the ‘‘ observation” to be ‘‘ outward watching,’’ and the ‘** within 
you” to be an inward looking for it and preparation for it. This, however, is to lose 
the force of ‘‘ within’”’ pertaining—not to believers but—to the Jewish nation, viz., the 
Kingdom actually tendered to them in view of the elect position occupied. We thus 
preserve its depth of meaning, so pregnant with tremendous results. Craven (Lange’s 
fev., p. 67) points out that the question and answer are both in the present tense, the 
Pharisees asking : ‘‘ When cometh the Kingdom of God?” and adds: ‘* The question 
and the answer are but illustrations of that law proper to all languages, but pre- 
eminently to the Greek, by which a certain future may be represented by a verb in the 
present ; illustrations may be found, Matt. 26 :2; 1 Cor. 15 : 42-44 (see Jelf, Winer, 
Kihner, and grammarians generally). To the conclusion that the language of our Lord 
must be understood as having reference to the future, it may also be remarked, we are 
shut up by the following considerations : The supposition that He indicated an existing 
Kingdom (qa) implies that it was set up in (or among) the Pharisees; (b) disconnects 
His words from the immediately following address to the disciples, while the contrary 
supposition brings them into manifest and beautiful connection therewith, and with 
His other utterances.’’ In a foot-note on ‘‘ observation’ and ‘‘ within,” he adds: ‘t The 
Pharisees ask ‘ when cometh the Kingdom of God?’ He answers, ‘ It cometh not with 
the signs of a gradual approach ; neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there, for the 
Kingdom of God is in the midst of you.’ Then turning to His disciples, He says : ‘ The 


Prop. 110.] THE THECCRATIC KINGDOM. 47 


days will come when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye 
shall not see it. And they shall say to you, Lo here, or lo there: go not after nor 
follow. For as the lightning that lighteneth (flashing) from one part under heaven 
shineth to the other part under heaven (comes not with the signs of a gradual approach), so 
aiso shall the Son of man be in His day,’ etc. Does not the very unity perceptible in 
the entire address—the vividness of the scene it presents— the manifest oneness of the 
doctrine with that elsewhere taught by our Lord, especially on the Mount of Olives—place 
the stamp of truth on the hypothesis? Does it not become manifest that this passage, 
so far from teaching the doctrine of a present establishment of the Kingdom, must be 
numbered wmong those that connect the establishment with the Sec. Advent.” 


48 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 111. 


Proposition 111. Zhe Kingdom being identified with the cect 
Jewish nation, it cannot be established without the restoration 
of that nation. 


This has been proven in preceding Propositions, but as the proof 
is abundant and cumulative, additional ones may be assigned. 
For, if the Kingdom is the Theocratic-Davidic, then embracing the 
throne, Kingdom, and land of David, it must also include the 
nation to whom it was alone specially covenanted ; that is, the 
Jewish people, one branch of Abraham’s natural seed, viz., in the 
line of the Patriarchs and their descendants. Hence, the restora- 
tion of this nation naturally falls in with the Divine Purpose—is 
fully identified with it. 


All those who deny the restoration of the Jewish nation confine themselves to isolated 
predictions which they endeavor either to spiritualize or make conditional, forgetting 
that the main foundation of our doctrine is left untouched by them, viz., the necessity 
imposed by oath-bound Vovenant for such a restoration. The purpose of Redemption, 
as exhibited in the Theocratic Plan, makes such a restoration imperative. Hence, the 
Milienarian scheme makes the restoration of the Jews an integral part of its system. 
But the reader will observe that, aside from this basis of ours, many who are opposed to 
our doctrine as a whole still accept, being forced to it by Scripture testimony, of this 
restoration as something future to be realized. Thus e.g. Faber in Diss. on the Proph., 
and Sac. Calendar of Proph., ably presents the subject. Brookes (Hl. Proph. Interp., p. 
63) mentions Cyprian, Jerome, Chrysostom, Theophilus, Alexandrinus, Augustine, 
Bede, Hugo, Lyra, Dean Prideaux, Hilary, Ambrose, Aquinas, Scotus, Cajetan, and others 
(for the list might be indefinitely swelled, including Origen, Locke, Clarke, Doddridge, 
Erasmus, Poole, Simeon, Primasius, Owen, Scott, McKnight, etc.), who hold to a 
national restoration of the Jews while being neutral or opposed to Millenarian tenets, 
and points out how Lorinus, the Jesuit, even rejected this restoration on the ground 
“because it leads to the heresy of Chiliasm, which Pope Damasus had condemned in 
Apollinaris.’’ The Jesuit, at least, had the perception to see that this tenet was an 
important feature in our system of faith. Many evidently entertained tnis belief of 
whom we have no direct account, as of ‘‘ the many’’ alluded to by Jerome, and so e.g. 
indirectly mentioned, as by Evelyn (Diary, vol. 1, p. 325), who states that the ‘‘ renowned 
mathematician, Mr. Oughtred, entertained the belief that the Jews would be converted 
by the personal appearance of the Saviour. ’‘ 


Obs. 1. The only objection of force that can be urged against our 
view is, that these promises of restoration are conditional, but this has 
been met under Props. 18 and 46-52. If we can make the Covenant—con- 
firmed by God’s oath, and its ultimate fulfilment again and again affirmed 
by holy men—conditional, then everything else is conditional ; then the 
foundations of Christian hope crumble away beneath us, and nothing 
stable remains. It isa fact of weight in this discussion to note, that a 
vast number of writers, opposed to our doctrine, and inclined to spiritual- 
ize the predictions as much as possible, are still forced by the singularly 
effective language of the prophets ¢o admit a restoration of the Jews to 
their own land. ‘The powerfully converging testimony is foo strong even 


Prop. 111. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. AQ 


for them to refuse credence to it; and they give us, urging with just and 
conclusive reasons, the scriptural ground for such a faith, although it 
badly fits into their system, owing to its being, more or less, in antagonism 
to their theory of exclusive spiritual blessings, of the abandonment of the 
wall of partition between nations, and of the remaining portions attached 
to the same predictions. Even sucha writer as Whitby acknowledges, 
owing to the force of Luke 21:24; Jer. 31 : 27-40, etc., such a restoration 
and the rebuilding of Jerusalem. Indeed, some even see that its wncon- 
ditionality is asserted in various places; that they are restored not on 
account of their own holiness but to preserve the faithfulness of God ; and 
that Israel being carefully distinguished from the Gentiles (as e.g. Isa. 49, 
Marg. reading, etc.) must, in order to preserve the Divine arrangement, 
also be gathered. ‘The application of passages relating to the earthly Jeru- 
salem by Waggoner (Ref. of Age to Come) to the New Jerusalem, because 
the Old is cast out and the Son of the Free Woman is the heir, misappre- 
hends the Barren Woman (see Prop. 118), does not distinguish between 
the heir and the subject, unites things which God has separated, violates 
the promises of God to His own ancient city and people, and, in brief, 
agnores the inheritance of Christ, as David’s Son. 


Obs. 2. This too is shown by the election of this Jewish nation (see Props. 
24, 54, 55, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, etc., on Election). No nation on earth, 
saving the Jewish, has God chosen, over whom He condescends to act in the 
capacity of an earthly Ruler. No nation save it alone has been thus 
favored with a Theocratic rule. Owing to the sinfulness of the nation this 
Kingdom was indeed overthrown, and the nation itself, as a nation, driven 
from its land and placed in a scattered and subject condition among the 
nations of the earth. It has abundantly been shown that they are still the 
elect nation, not perpetually cut off. Indeed, if this election were to 
entirely cease, or if it were diverted to any other nation or nations, then it 
would be «wnpossible to verify the Covenant promises made directly to it. 
This subject having been elucidated, it is only necessary to add : the elec- 
tion of the nation, evidenced even now by the necessity Gentiles are under 
to be grafted into it, continues on by virtue of its covenanted relationship 
to the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, and if such election is manifested in 
the establishment of the Kingdom, it involves, fully embraces, its restora- 
tion to Palestine. 


It is essential to notice what has been proven under various Propositions, viz., that 
the Theocratic ordering, pertaining as it does to the Jewish nation as a nation (for how 
else can the Theocratic-Davidie throne and Kingdom related as it is to the nation and 
of which Jesus, as David’s Son, is the heir —Props. 49, 116—be re-established), con- 
stitutes the Jewish nation an elect nation. The careful student will ponder the expres- 
sive language based on this Theocratic relationship connected with a restoration, such 
as ‘‘ the tribes of T'hine inheritance,’’ ‘the cities of Thy holiness,’’ ‘‘ Thy people,’’ ‘* Thy holy 
mountain,” etc. Men may make sport of this feature, and, with Froude (Short Studies, p. 
239) may speak of ‘‘ the narrow iittleness of ‘ the peculiar people,’ ”’ or with learning 
contend in order to exalt Gentileism, against its reception ; but against all such we simply 
oppose God’s covenants, and the simple facts of history, and the fulfilment of prophecy, 
down to the present day, with the abundant assurances that this cast-away condition of 
the nation is only temporary and not perpetual. Otherwise—mark it well—the government 
of God over the Jewish nation would prove a failure, and thus God instituted a form 
of government in the world, which He is unable to have realized (comp. Prop. 201). 
But God will not fail in His purpose, and hence the strong assertions given, as e.g. Jer. 
33 : 15, 26 (with which comp. Props. 47 and 52). 


50 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 111. 


Obs. 3. It is important to keep in view, in the consideration of this sub- 
ject, that the Jews, living at the time of the First Advent and afterward, 
believed that the prophets linked a complete restoration of the nation with 
the Kingdom of the Messiah. This is admitted by all ; but.if the admis- 
sion is made, then the question arises, unless the doctrine is true, how 
comes it that the New Test. employs (as e.g. Rom. 11) language to con- 
jirm the Jews in their opinions? Ernesti’s one-sided criticism making 
Rom. 11 to mean a mere possibility of being saved or restored without its 
being accomplished, is contradicted by the positive language of Paul, his 
eulogy of the nation, his confident expressions, and the accordance of the 
same with generally entertained expectations. ‘The application of New 
Test. passages solely to a conversion of the Jews, and not to a future 
restoration, is met not only by the same, but also by the directness of pas- 
sages which teach that the dispersion, desolation, and the treading down of 
Jerusalem shall continue for an appointed time (and then cease), as well as 
by the references to this election and covenanted relationship, and by the 
connection in which such a conversion stands to a restoration to the land. 

Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 249, etc.) and others are very unjust and one-sided in their 
estimate of the New Test. argument in favor of the restoration. They proceed on the 
principle that whatever is not distinctively repeated, and in detail given, in the New 
Test. must be rejected, which is derogatory and destructive to the Old Test. (comp. 
Prop. 16). We dare not overlook the intimate connection existing between the Old and 
the New ; and if we find that the New does not recall or cancel the Old as to promises, 
that in itself should be sufficient to excite faith in God fulfilling His Word. But we 
have more than this : we have, as will be shown, confirmatory and express evidence in 
the New sustaining our position. So clear and decisive is this fact that many of our 
opponents concede the same tous. Let the reader turn e.g. to Prop. 50, Obs. 24, note, 
and see the concessions of one of our chief opponents, Dr. Brown. When Williamson 
(Letters) refers to the silence of Jesus, or of the New Test., he simply ignores what is 
pointedly stated on the subject. The objections of Oswald (The Kingdom), Waggoner 
(Refut. of Age to Come), and others, will be fully met as we proceed in the argument, it 
being sufficient for the present to say that the Jewish view (e.g. Reuss, His. Chris. Theol. 
Apos. Age, p. 55) is most positively confirmed by the language of the New Test., so that 
the doctrine was indorsed and perpetuated, without dispute, in the Primitive Church. 
So clear is this, that even writers largely addicted to spiritualizing the prophecies 
frankly admit it. 


Obs. 4. The Jews, influenced by the plain language of Covenant and 
prophecy, wniversally held that the Messianic Kingdom was to be accom- 
panied by a complete restoration of the nation ; both ideas were insepara- 
bly united, the one being regarded an impossibility without the other. So 
wedded were they to this view, that they objected to Jesus being the 
Messiah because it was not realized at the First Advent (the early Chris- 
tians answered by locating the fulfilment at the Second Advent of this 
Jesus). Now observe, that with this prevailing Jewish doctrine, so dear to 
the Jewish heart, before them, Jesus and the Apostles use the very lan- 
guage pre-eminently calculated to cherish and confirm the Jews in their 
opinion of restoration, and the proof that it was thus adapted and intended 
is found in the simple historical fact, that both believing Jews and 
Gentiles in the early Church held to, and taught, the doctrine. A glance 
at various passages—keeping in mind the existing belief of the hearers—is 
amplv sufficient to show this distinctly. Thus e.g. ‘‘ the regeneration,” 
Matt. 19:28, the removal of the desolation from ‘‘ the house’’ Matt. 
23 :37-39, the Messianic reign over the house of Jacob on the throne of 
David, Luke 1:32, 33, the deliverance from enemies, Luke 1:74, the 


PROP, 111:' THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. d1 


removal of Jerusalem’s down-trodden condition when the times of the Gen- 
tiles are fulfilled, Luke 21: 24, the times of refreshing and restitution, Acts 
3:19-21, the rebuilding again of the fallen-down Davidic tabernacle, Acts 
15:16, the Jewish hope to be realized, Acts 26:6, 7%, etc.—all is adapted 
_to strengthen the hope of ultimate restoration, just as Covenant and proph- 
ecy promise. Hence we need not be surprised at the Apostolic and Prima- 
wre ee cleaving to such a future restoration at the Sec. Advent of the 
essiah. 


If no restoration was intended ; if all was to be understood typically, or spiritually, 
or conditionally, then surely the language was most eminently calculated to deceive the 
hearers, and simple justice demanded such an explanation as would have prevented the 
Ch. Church from following in the Jewish belief. But since there is no denial of the 
prevailing faith, but, on the contrary, a confirmation of it, we are forced to accept of it. 
The fact is, that it is so unmistakably taught that men addicted to spiritualizing freely 
admit it. Scott (Com.) even allows the restoration to be distinctly taught in Matt. 
23 : 38, 39 (Luke 13 : 34, 35), Acts 3 : 21, etc., and so many others, as Tomlinson (Ser. 
on the Mill. and Appendix), Doddridge (Com.), etc. Nast (Com. Matt. 24 : 15-28) expresses 
the view of a large number, when he says, “‘ We are taught in other passages of Holy 
Writ (that) the Millennial state of the Church of Christ shall not commence before the 
restoration of Israel.” The Mormons also hold to the restoration of the Jews, but in 
accordance with their eclecticism, giving a Mormon bias to every incorporated doctrine, 
the Jews are to be gathered to their ‘‘ Western Zion’’ (see Art. on ‘‘ Mormons, M’Clin- 
tock & Strong’s Cyclop.). 


Obs. 5. As in th» following Props. our proof, given in detail, shall be 
mainly drawn from the Old Test., it may be well to state why the New 
Test. does not enter into the subject of the restoration so extendedly as the 
Old. For, although pointedly mentioned and often implied, yet such 
magnificent portraitures of it as the Old Test. contains,are lacking. (1) It 
is taken for granted that the instruction of the New will be combined with 
the Old (both being one, etc., comp. Prop. 16), where a sufficiency is given 
to every one who will ‘‘ search the Scriptures.’’ (2) The union of the doc- 
trine of the restoration with the events of the Second Advent make it easy 
for any believer ¢ojoin the declarations of the Old with those of the New 
Test. (3) In the condition of the early Church and of the Jewish nation 
at, and after, the First Advent, a more detailed statement would wneces- 
sarily (in view of the lengthy postponement) have prejudiced the Roman 
Power (already embittered) against the nation and Church. 


That the reader may have a fair specimen of the quibbling of passages in the New 
Test. when arrayed against us, we direct attention to Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 361, 
etc.). Well knowing how essential to our system is the doctrine of the restoration of 
the Jews to their own land and of the Theocratic polity, he strives, under the specious 
plea of his typical application, to discard it. Thus e.g. after making ‘‘ Zion” (Rom. 
11 : 26) equivalent to ‘‘the Church of the New Testament,’’ and that Jesus therefore 
‘“must come out of it at the same time He comes for it,’’ saying: ‘‘ It (the promise) 
holds out none, indeed, in respect to the cherished hope of a literal re-establishment of 
their ancient polity. It rather tends to discourage any such expectations ; for the 
Zion, in connection with which it tells us the Messiah is to come, is the one in which 
He at present dwells—the Zion of the New. Test. Church ; to which He can no longer 
come, except at the same time coming out of it.” It is surprising that so able a writer 
should shield his faith under an absurdity of his own creating, and which, if true, would 
forbid the personal Second Coming of Jesus to His Church for her deliverance. Jesus 
ascended to heaven (not Zion) where He now remains at the Father’s right hand as. 
Mediator and Intercessor, and is only spiritually present in His Church through the 
imparted Comforter. Now, when He comes again, He is predicted to come to Zion, and 
out of that Zion He is to exert His power as Deliverer, and even to go personally out of 
¢ (see Prop. 113) to meet the tribes in the wilderness. Let the Word give its own 


52 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. PRBOP Jit 


testimony, and the plain grammatical sense will always be found to be the true one—iv 
unity with all Scripture. But to allow Fairbairn to show his reasons for his typical 
application, we give them as specially stated in Appendix, pp. 395-399, in reply to the 
question, ‘‘ Does the original relation of the seed of Abraham to the land of Canaan 
afford any ground for expecting their final return to it?” This he answers negatively : 
(1) The possession of the land of Canaan only a type, earnest, or pledge, of the posses- 
sion of the renovated earth by the glorified saints—hence the nation excluded. (Answer : 
how could it be a type, earnest, or pledge to Abraham who never—as he affirms cor- 
rectly in another place—possessed the land, and how could it be an earnest, etc., to the 
exiled ones?) (2) That things are spoken of in relation to this future inheritance which 
cannot be realized within the bounds of the earthly Canaan. (Answer: that depends 
entirely on the amount of faith we have in the plain grammatical promises of God, 
and in the One who is to inaugurate the changes.) (3) The inheritance is one that 
can only (p. 317) be enjoyed by the children of the resurrection, hence only de- 
signed for the redeemed and glorified saints ; this excludes nations in the flesh, and 
therefore such a restoration. (Answer: Let the whole Record speak, and not merely 
one passage, and then the Scriptures clearly distinguish between “ heirs” and sub- 
jects—between the glorified and the unglorified—between the Kings and those over 
whom they reign.) (4) That being a type, it cannot foreshadow another occupation, 
just as eating manna in the desert does not typify a future eating of the same. 
(Answer: He has not yet proven that the possession of the land was a type, for all 
prophecy forbids it, as we shall show in next Propositions, specifying a return to the 
identical land, ete. Besides: unbelief might turn this principle against his own 
theory, thus: he makes part of the earth to typify the whole earth renovated.) (5) 
That those who make it a type of a future occupation must include as also types the 
resuscitation of the Levitical priesthood, sacrifices, etc. (Answer: We do not make it 
a type but a real possession to which there is a return, and hence are not driven to the 
position indicated.) (6) That the Mosaic economy is abolished and a spiritual dispensa- 
tion takes its place, and, therefore, no restoration can be expected. (Answer: We leave 
God to tell us the nature of the dispensations, and find that this one is to be succeeded 
by one more glorious that includes this very restoration.) (7) The natural seed are types 
of the spiritual seed, the national Israel of the spiritual Israel, and hence no restoration. 
(Answer : (1) Were none of the natural seed also of the believing, spiritual seed? and if 
so, were they types of themselves? (2) If this is so, why the proceess of engrafting ? 
Why necessary ?). (8) Abraham’s seed are the heirs, i.e. the believing portion only 
inherit. (Answer: Granted; but they inherit a coming Kingdom and reign over 
others, including the restored Jewish nation.) (9) The type is lost in the antitype, as 
the Paschal Lamb in Christ. (Answer: Granted, where really a type exists.) We are 
sorry to say that, admirable as this and similar works are in some respects, their whole 
tendency and spirit is to lead the Church away from Covenant promises, and inducing 
tothat unbelief so sadly predicted. 

When the typical theory is deemed insufficient, recourse is had to other methods. An 
illustration may be in place. The Interior (quoted hy The Luth. Observer, Dec. 27th, 1877) 
rejects the restoration of the Jews on mathematical grounds, thus presented: ‘* The 
present population of Palestine is 300,000—all that it will support in the most starveling 
way. The area of Palestine is 12,000 square miles. The present number of Jews in the 
world is 6,000,000. If located in Palestine the population would be 500 to the square 
mile. But the population of China is only 303 to the square mile ; of France, 173 ; of 
Hindoostan, 130. If a third of the Jews were to go back to Palestine they would starve to 
death. Now, we call the attention of the exegetes to the fact that this showing appeals 
directly to their bowels of compassion. Are they willing to starve a matter of 5,000,000 
of Jews to death for the sake of vindicating their exegesis.’’ This efforl at witticism and 
sharpness, evincing no faith in the Word, exhibiting ignorance of its real teaching on 
the subject, and making natural impossibility the measurer of God’s promise, evidently 
takes the position that such a restoration is advocated only as one of the results of 
national movements. It overlooks (1) that this is a supernatural restoration under the 
Messiah, who will provide for the maintenance of the nation ; (2) that the dimensions 
of Palestine, to accord with the original grant, will be greatly extended, even from the 
Nile to the Euphrates ; (3) that it will have its population largely in cities ; (4) that 
special fruitfulness of the land, special commerce with nations, special prosperity, 
wealth, etc., are promised ; (5) that if divinely promised that should suffice, God being 
abundantly able to perform whatever promises He makes. Surely, if the writer had 
lived before the Exodus from Egypt, his mathematical acumen would have demonstrated 
the absurdity of entering the wilderness with such a host; or had he lived before the 


moor. it.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 53 


First Advent, he would have demonstrated from scientific data, the utter impossibility of 
a virgin giving birth to a Son. This favorite cry of ‘‘ impossible’ from professed 
believers comes with a bad grace, when so many divine truths are denied on that ground 
by unbelievers. We are not surprised that The Princeton Review (Ap. 1850, p. 329) 
complacently speaks of a ‘‘ modern and more spiritual view of the Millennium, which 
has gained general prevalence of late years in this country. It rejects the doctrine of 
the return of the Jews to their own land; of the personal appearance and reign of 
Christ for a thousand years, but retains the idea of a Millennium.” Surely, in the light 
of Covenant and prophecy, an emasculated Millennium without a personal Christ, reign 
and restoration. This the reader will more clearly see as he follows our argument step 
by step. 


Obs. 6. In view of the elect position of the nation (Prop. 24) and its con- 
sequent Theocratic position, the restoration is so essential, such a pre- 
requisite, that two remarkable forms of expression are employed to indicate 
it. (1) God restores the nation for His own sake, to vindicate His cove- 
nant-keeping mercy, and thus magnify His own name. For example, Ezek. 
36 :22 declares, in connection with a restoration which has never yet been 
realized, ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord God: I do not this for your sakes, O 
house of Israel, but for mine holy name’s sake, which ye have profaned 
among the heathen, whither ye went,” and v. 32, ‘“‘ Not for your sakes do 
I this, saith the Lord God, be it known unto you: be ashamed and con- 
founded for your own ways, O house of Israel.’? The condition in which 
both Judah and Israel are aé the time of the restoration, viz., that of 
unbelief, shows that God evidences mercy because the time has eventually 
arrived for the re-establishment of the Theocratic Kingdom, and hence to 
exalt His own truthfulness, ‘* because’”’ the nation has been overthrown and 
its uplifting is a necessity, ‘* because’’ the heathen ridicule the Covenant 
and its promises, God will perform this work, and, by an astonishing pro- 
cess, bring this rebellious nation to heart-felt obedience and most fervent 
allegiance. (2) He will doit for the Hather’s sake, in behalf of that por- 
tion who have been believing and God-fearing. Paul appeals to this, 
Rom. 11 : 28, ‘‘ deloved for the fathers’ sakes,’’ to whom the Covenant was 
given. Now turn to Lev. 26 : 42-45, which Paul evidently had in view, 
and it is asserted, that although the nation be dispersed, God ‘‘ will remem- 
ber’? His “ Covenant?’ and ‘‘ the land,’’ and it is affirmed that in their dis- 
persion He will not ‘‘ wtterly cast them away, or abhor, or destroy’’ and 
thus (by an utter destruction) ‘ dreak His covenant with them, for [ am the 
Lord, their God. But I will for their sakes remember the Covenant of their 
ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of 
the heathen, that I might be their God: Iam the Lord.’’ 'The restoration, 
therefore, is impregnably fixed, upon God’s honor as a covenant-keeping 
God, and upon His promises given to the Fathers, which will be realized. 

The reader will observe that two things in the future history of the Jews show con- 
clusively that after the saints, sufficient to form the predetermined number of kings and 
priests, have been gathered out, God then, for His own sake and for the Fathers’ sakes, 
manifests His amazing mercy in restoring the nation, when still in unbelief against 
Him. For, as to one portion of the nation (the two tribes) it is converted and saved by 
the open Parousia of Jesus and His saints, as we shall explain, and as to the other 
portion (the ten tribes) they afterward shall be converted and saved. The unbelief at 
the Sec. Advent is proven by the hearty repentance and mourning of Judah, and the 
trial and selection of Israel in the wilderness before qualified to enter the land. Thus 
it is true that God does not restore the nation because of moral worthiness at the period 
when He comes for that purpose, but He does it because the time has arrived for the 


fulfilment of His own Covenant promises made to the Fathers ; and it is likewise true, 
that morally unqualified as the nation then is for a restoration to Theocratic rule and 


54 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 111. 


privileges, He will so impress, teach, and guide the nation at His Coming, that it 
will acknowledge its guilt, and most earnestly and devotedly receive Jesus as the mighty 
Theocratic King promised to it. God’s Word will be amply vindicated, and every declara- 
tion will find its realization. With the magnificent destiny before it, it is saddening to 
find a portion of the nation casting away its hope as founded in the prophecies. Thus, 
Reformed Judaism (see Art. on, by Felix Adler, in North Amer. Review, Sept., Oct., 
1877), following its Rationalistic tendencies and rejecting the glorious prophecies 
“abandons the idea of a national restoration,’’ and, of course, with it a future Advent 
of Messiah, in the Davidic line ; the nation, according to its modernized conceptions, 
becoming its own Messiah. This, to say the least, is degrading Moses and their proph- 
ets into virtual impostors, making the past noble faith of the nation an idle dream, and 
casting mud upon the most exalted Records in existence. How can a Jew engage in 
such work ? 


Prop. 112. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 


or 
Sr 


Proposition 112. Zhe Kingdom, if established as predicted, de- 
mands the national restoration of the Jews in their own land. 


This we have all along proven, viz., that such a connection is 
positively required by Covenant and election, promise and proph- 
ecy. Now it remains to prove in a more specific form a national 
re-establishment of the nation, which, of course, confirms our doc- 
trinal position. Besides, the reign and Kingdom, as will be seen, 
is invariably associated with such a restoration (comp. preceding 
Prop.). 


We are the more encouraged to insist «upon a restoration to the land, because it is 
freely admitted by some of the most prominent opposers to Millenarianism. ‘Thus e.g. 
Brown (Christ’s Sec. Coming, p. 434) frankly concedes ‘‘a territorial restoration,’’ saying 
that ‘‘ the people and the land of Israel’’ are ‘‘ so connected in numerous prophecies of 
the Old Test. that whatever literality and perpetuity are ascribed to the one must, one 
would think, on all strict principles of interpretation, be attributed to the other also.’’ The 
‘* Millerites’”’ or ‘‘ Adventists” (Art. on, M’Clintock & Strong’s Cyclop.), and others (comp. 
next Prop.) make the restoration of the Jews to comprise only the resurrected and 
glorified Jews and adopted Gentile believers (Israelites), on the ground of ‘‘ an everlast- 
ing possession of the land,” because ‘‘ mortal Jews cannot possess it forever—glorified 
and immortal ones can.’’ But this is one-sided, ignoring the return of mortal men in 
the flesh, who repent and are converted, who perpetuate the nation in the flesh, etc. ; 
overlooking that the saints are engrafted into the nation and that the everlasting posses 
sion of the land is promised to the nation in virtue of this incorporation of glorified 
ones who bear the rule ; passing by a number of clearly related doctrines such as the 
nature of the Theocratic Kingdom, its relation to the Jewish nation, the reign of the 
saints over the nations, the perpetuity of the race after the Advent, the requirements of 
Redemption to give it completeness, etc. On the other hand, Swederborgianism (comp. 
e.g. Works of Swedenborg and a recent—1878— Address to the Clergy) spiritualizes every- 
thing future relating to the Jews, and takes the predictions of Jewish restoration, the 
blessings particularly, and applies them to the Swedenborgian new Church. This is 
true of many others ; but it is sufficient to say that it is done at the sacrifice of the 
plain grammatical sense, and the careful avoidance of appropriating the curses which 
logically and grammatically (if language has any meaning) belong to the same people that 
are restored. We say nothing of the unenviable position in which it places the Divine 
Word, making it to contain a sense which was pre-eminently calculated to deceive, and 
did—if this is true—deceive generation after generation of Jews, and the Primitive 
Church established under inspired guidance. The time is coming when the dreadful 
persecution of the Church—now arrogant—by claiming these Jewish blessings —shall 
sweep away all such false interpretations and applications of prophecy. We turn from 
such expositions with relief to those given by Bickersteth, the Bonars, Seiss, Brookes, 
Bonhomme, Wilson, Nicholson, Faber, Lord, Clarke, Herschell, McNeile, Wood, Tyso, 
Thomas, Pym, Arnold, Pirie, Noel, Molyneux, McCaul, Maton, Frey, Cunninghame, 
Cox, besides many others, who hold with Rev. Rizer (Art. on Restoration, Proph. Times, 
July, 1877) ‘‘ That the Jews will ultimately be restored to the land which was promised 
and given to Abraham and his posterity for an everlasting possession, cannot be success- 
fully controverted by those who believe the inspired prophecies.”” Even works of fiction 
incorporate the idea as seen in Lord Beaconsfield’s (D’Israeli) Lothair, and George 
Eliot’s Deronda. One caution is requisite : as the subject itself is a vast one and com- 
plicated, requiring the close study and comparison of numerous predictions (some 
exceedingly concise, others abrupt, and still others obscure), it is reasonable to expect 
a diversity of view respecting the exact order and manner of fulfilment. We can only 


56 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


anticipate a unity in the grand outlines pertaining to the subject, viz., in its being asso- 
ciated with the Second Advent, Pre-Millennial in its accomplishment, repentant and con- 
verted under direct Messianic influence, exalted during the Mill. age, etc. Too many 
writers regard the restoration separate and distinct from the Covenant and Theocratic 
relationship of the nation, and thus materially weaken the force of their representations ; 
casting away or overlooking the golden key which opens before us the nation’s grand 
destiny. 


Obs. 1. Before continuing our proof, several preliminaries must be con- 
sidered which materially add to the force of the prophecies. (a) The per- 
petuity of the Jewish nation, owing to their election, is asserted, and with 
it their separation from all other nations. ‘This is distinctly stated in 
Numb, 23:9, and from this arises the declarations of God not to make a 
full end of them as He may do with other nations, Lev. 26:44; Jer. 
s0.211% Jer. 46:28 etc.; Deut. 32:26, 27; Amos: 9 3:8 5: Hizey tae 
As explained in previous Props. this nation is chosen, out of all others, to 
be the peculiar instrumentality by which the Divine Purpose in Redemp- 
tion and Government is to be carried out, and hence of them it is said, 1 
Chron. 17:21, 22; Psl. 1386:4; Jer. 31 : 35-37, etc. This, of course, 18 
an indispensable feature in our argument which must by no means be 
overlooked.' (d) This perpetuity of the nation thus promised, together 
with the reasons which impose it, and with the added predictions derived 
from it, ixvolves the final restoration of the nation to its old state of special 
favor and nearness to God. Several writers, as McNeile, Noel, Bh. Newton, 
Kurtz, etc., employ this promised perpetuity as a powerful reason favoring 
the restoration. (c) This nation, owing to unfaithfulness, is driven from 
its land and scattered among the nations. History has made this so famil- 
iar, that a mere mention of it will suffice. (d) Butsuch removal, as Moses 
and the prophets taught, being designed for correction and punishment is 
not perpetual. It is for a limited, appointed time, the knowledge of 
which God has reserved to Himself. That this period of tribulation, long 
as it may be, is a limited one, all the prophets testify and Christ Himself 
pointedly specifies. To deny this, is simply to reject some of the plainest 
statements in the Word of God and the entire current of prediction, ‘The 
Scripture bearing on this point has already been partly given, and hence 
needs no repetition. (e) The Jews, therefore, owing to their nationally 
promised perpetuity and future position as a nation in the yet unfulfilled 
Purposes of God, are preserved down to the present day as a people, sepa- 
rate and distinct from all others, who, if such were the Divine Will, can 
at any moment be reorganized into a distinctive nationality among the 
nations. ‘The preservation of the people is distinctly predicted, not in the 
possession of king, government, etc., characteristic of a nation properly 
organized but, in a dispersed and utterly disorganized condition, retaining 
national peculiarities, such as rites, practices, customs, doctrines, etc. 
The astonishing verification of these predictions in the history of the Jews 
has been noticed by numerous able writers, and has been aptly styled ‘‘a 
standing miracle’’; and from it also has been derived an argument 
favoring the literal restoration.? Many writers of history, science, etc., 
have noticed, that while some individuals have been absorbed by other 
nations yet the vast body of them, in the midst of the nations, have pre- 
served their Jewish individuality and national peculiarities, remaining a 
separate, and for ages an isolated, people.* The confident prediction of 
Celsus that the Jews as a race would become extinct is not verified. Dis- 


- 


PROP. 112, | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 57 


persed among powerful nations, they continue to exist, while these nations 
disappear.’ Denied the privilege of living under their own magistrates, 
etc., debarred for centuries from all civil rights ; suffering frequently the 
most terrible persecutions that ever afflicted a people ; driven from country 
to country and made a “ hissing,’’ ‘‘ by-word,’’ etc., among nations not 
wise, but cruel ; in brief, enduring, as history shows, what no other nation 
on earth has ever passed through, yet they still remain a peculiar, distine- 
tive people, ready at almost any time, if the way were prepared, for a 
national reorganization. ‘Their powerful enemies have perished or de- 
cayed, and they remain numerous and @ significant power in the earth. 
But all this is necessary, preparatory to another phase in their remarkable 
history. If God intends to fulfil His promises concerning their national 
restoration, it certainly is essential to preserve them, while the preservation 
itself thus becomes—being predicted and fulfilled—evidence that the 
Divine Purpose in reference to them is in regular course of fulfilment, and 
leads on fo the ultimate end intended. God has been, even when scattered, 
‘fa little sanctuary’ (Kzek. 11:16) to them, thus saving them from ex- 
tinction that His own Word may stand. (f/f) The plaintive representation 
of Isa. 63:18, ** The people of thy holiness have possessed it but a little 
while,’’? contrasted with the promises and with the protracted tribulation, 
has pertinence. ‘The comparative drief possession of the Holy Land when 
compared with the prophetic intimations, clearly evinces that something 
great and lasting in this direction must be held in abeyance for this same 
nation. (g) Certain promises of restoration are made ¢o the Jewish nation, 
not to Gentile nations or even to Gentiles adopted into the nation (although 
the latter are included in the way hereafter shown, viz., as inheritors, 
etc.), but to the one distinctive Jewish nation. ‘The Church is xo¢ com- 
posed of ‘‘ the outcasts of Jsrael,’’ of those cut off under the anger of God, 
possessing the sad traits and experiencing the forsaken condition attributed 
to this nation. ‘The Church has no¢ the throne and Kingdom of David in 
ruins, the city of God desolate and in the hands of enemies, etc., and 
hence the Church cannot be denoted. The same nation which experienced 
this heavy tribulation is also to realize the blessings of restoration. ‘There 
is nothing so sad and absurd in the interpretation of the Bible as that, 
alas! so prevalent with many, to give all the threatenings, curses, and 
afflictions ¢o the Jews, and appropriate the promises and blessings ¢o the 
Gentiles or ¢o the Church.* It is not only wrong but dishonoring to the 
Word, and opens a wide field of arditrary exposition. The threatenings 
and reverses have been /i¢erally fulfilled, even to the minutest particular, 
so also must the predicted blessings, standing as they do in the same con- 
nection with this scattered, etc., people. History indorses a literal inter- 
pretation of these prophecies, and its testimony thus far forbids the seek- 
ing and applying a hidden, mystical, or spiritual meaning to the remainder. 
God Himself appeals to the justness of such a conclusion, Jer. 32 : 42, 44, 
‘* For thus saith the Lord: Like as I have brought this great evil upon this 
people, so I will bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.” 
“Hor, I will cause their captivity to return, saith the Lord.’’ Let the 
reader compare as unanswerable, Jer. 31:27, 28. () The dispersion and 
the restoration, the tribulation and the blessings cannot be contempora- 
neous. In the predictions, the latter invariably follows the former. To 
reverse this Divine Order is Zo violate all propriety of language ; and yet 
this is done by multitudes of even learned and able divines, under the mis- 


58 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


taken notion that the Jewish nation having forfeited the blessings, they are 
now bestowed upon the Gentiles. And what confirms them in the opinion 
is, that some Scriptures are quoted by the Apostles merely to prove that 
Gentiles are also called, shall also participate in the blessings, etc. (just as 
the Jews also at that day believed), and the conclusion is formed that this 
denotes that the Gentiles take the place assigned at one time to the Jews. 
But before such deductions, so destructive to the unity and symmetry of 
prophecy, are drawn, would it not be best to ask and decide, whether the 
nation, as such, has forever forfeited these blessings ; and whether there is 
not a specific period appointed during which the nation is to experience the 
just anger of God; and whether the mention of the present era as ‘‘ the 
times of the Gentiles’? is not sufficiently suggestive of their ending, etc. ; 
Important considerations, which we have passed over, are brought in view 
which forbid this wholesale appropriation of promises given only to the 
Jewish nation. The fact that the threatenings prophesied run down to 
the present day and continue on in the future (for they are not quite all 
fulfilled, as e.g. Zech. 14:1), is positive evidence, if we will only receive 
it, that the blessings are still future. ‘Those blessings cannot be applied to 
the Church ; for it is highly improper and a dissevering of prophecy, to 
say that the evils predicted of the nation and the blessings prophesied of 
the same nation can coexist. (¢) The promise that this nation shall be 
restored to ‘their own land cannot be understood of the Church. It is 
fashionable to make the land of Canaan a type of the Church or of heaven. 
Aside from the reasons already urged against such a perversion of the 
prophecies, it would appear sufficient to consider, that it is the same land 
put of which the nation has been driven; a land lying desolate for many 
yenerations until the restoration ; a land that shall be tilled and sown, z¢s 
ruined cities rebuilt and inhabited, man and beast multiplied upon it; a 
land specially covenanted to the Fathers who lived in it at one time, and 
which shall be settled again after *‘ the old estates’’ and as at ‘‘ the first ;”’ a 
land for a long time in the possession of their enemies ; a land formerly ~ 
occupied by the Kingdom of David ; a land whose geographical boundaries 
are fixed ; in brief, a land which, by a great variety of allusions and speci- _ 
fications, can only be Palestine. ‘lo convert this land into something else 
is not only most arbitrary ; impossible to reconcile with language, unity of 
prediction, etc., but itis a virtual impeachment of the veracity of the 
Word, and an expressed doubt of God’s intention to fulfil His Word as 
written. Ifno reliability is found here in the plainest of all predictions ; 
if to obtain the true meaning an astonishing and most awkward transposi- 
tion of a spiritual nature must take place ; then truly the Bible may denote 
almost anything that fancy can attribute to it. (7) In the investigation of 
this subject, other things are worthy of notice, which can only be briefly 
alluded to, such as (1) that certain prophecies have never, in any sense, 
been fulfilled, as Ezek. chs. 36, 39, etc.; Isa. 11:11, 12, ete.; (2) that the 
promises of Deut. and Lev. cannot be explained in any other way than 
referring to the Jewish nation ; (3) that the prophecies referring to resto- 
ration distinguish between Judah and Israel; (4) that the division into 
‘*two kingdoms,’’ formerly existing, is stated and the union into ‘“‘ one 
nation’’ in the same land predicted ; (5) Jerusalem and the Jewish nation 
are in the restoration distinguished from the Gentiles ; (6) the action, posi- 
tion, ete., assigned to the Jewish nation at and after the restoration ; (7) 
the prosperity and the results of the restoration point to the future ; (8) 


PROP. 112.) ° THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM: — 59 


the astounding reception and acknowledgment of the crucified Saviour by 
the nation, which can only be predicted of the personal interview described 
by the prophets ; (9) the refining process, terrible but glorious. 


1Tf we are to receive Dr, Draper's rule (His. Intel. Devel. of Europe) that nations, like 
individuals, die and are succeeded by others, we find an exception in this Jewish nation. 
This exception, as the Bible assures us, flows from an overruling, superintending 
Providence (e.g. Deut. 32 : 26, 27). The vitality of the nation is specially notable in 
the list of eminent names that it possesses as statesmen, senators, legislators, bankers, 
mayors, officials in places of great trust, artists, scholars, etc. 

* Basnage (/Tis. Jews) has well said: ‘‘ The preservation of the Jews in the midst of 
the miseries which they have undergone during 1700 years is the greatest prodigy that 
can be imagined.” An Art. in the Helectic Mag. (taken from the Saturday Review), Ap., 
1877, entitled The Jews in Europe, asserts : ‘ The Jews really stand by themselves as the 
case of a whole nation dispersed in all parts of the world, yet remaining a nation, 
cherishing a national feeling, but having no local country of its own anywhere.”’ 
Speaking of the purity of Jewish descent, the writer adds: “ The gens remains a gens 
by birth, and not by legal fiction. The phenomenon is one of the strangest in all history ; 
the more it is thought of the more its thorough strangeness comes out.’’ 

§Milman’s His. of the Jews, Jost’s His., Gibbon, Edeisborn, Laurence on Physiology, 
p. 468, Smith, S. M. Smucker, C. and A. Rothschild’s His., Bicheno, Rule, Neal, ete. 
Milman frequently refers to the fact that neither in the Eastern nor Western part of the 
world were they absorbed by other nations. Thus e.g. (p. 140) ‘‘ However opposite the 
Institutions, the usages, the manners of the people among whom they dwell, whether 
the government be mild or intolerant ; the Jews, equally inflexible and unsocial, main- 
tain their seclusion from the rest of mankind. The same principles operate on the 
banks of the Yellow River, and on those of the Tiber, or the Seine ; the Jew, severed 
for ages from all intercourse with his brethren, amid the inaccessible regions of the 
Celestial Empire, in most respects remains as he would have been, if he had continued 
to inhabit the valley of Palestine.’’ Clarke (Ten Religions, p. 421) says : “ Dispersed as 
they are, they are still a distinct people, a nation within other nations. Like drops of 
oil floating on the water, but never mingling with it, so the Jews are found everywhere 
floating drops of national life in the midst of other nationalities.” Such testimony 
from Anti-Millenarians, etc., could be multiplied. The Jewish nation is an exception 
to the general law of decay laid down by Draper (His. Intel. Dev. of Europe), and this 
arises that behind and underneath the natural law there is a controlling power, a higher 
law, which preserves the nation for a glorious purpose. 

4 Whether men will receive it or not, there is propriety in the reproach ascribed to 
David Levi (quoted by Bickersteth, Guide, p. 84), “Can anything be more absurd than 
to explain the prophecies which foretell the calamity which is to befall the Jews in a 
literal sense, and those which speak of their future felicity in a spiritual and mystical 
sense.’’ Weadd: Equally absurd is the typical theory so prevalent, because the nation 
and land made typical still exists—-the alleged type having suffered, and still suffers, 
its threatened downfall and punishment—and of them prediction has still much to say 
relating io thefuture. It is preposterous that a type should be the subject of such evils, 
so continuous, etc. 


Obs. 2. It is requisite here to meet another objection urged against our 
view, on the ground that the predictions of restoration: were met by the 
return from Babylon. Having noticed this before, some repetition is 
necessary to bring it before the reader in this connection. Leaving the 
reasons first announced in this and preceding Propositions which bear 
against such a theory it is sufficient to add, that the promises of restoration 
were never realized in the return from Babylon ; not in the Aing that was 
to reign over them, not in ¢he magnitude of the return, not in the dwelling 
safely, removal of sorrow, imparting of prosperity, etc., not in the wnion 
of the two Kingdoms, or in the protection from enemies and perpetuity of 
the Kingdom, or in a manifestation of the Branch, or in repentance of the 
nation occurring as described, or in an engrafting of Gentiles, or in @ 
gathering of nations against Jerusalem and a sudden deliverance, or in @ 


60 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 112. 


fearful overthrow of nations and corresponding exaltation of the nation, or 
in a removal from nations so far off that they then did not know them 
(Zech. 7:14), ete. Such reasons can be multiplied by looking over the 
prophecies ; and this notion is even more groundless and objectionable 
than that which makes the predictions conditional, seeing that they belittle 
the Word, making the Spirit give an exaggerated (after Oriental style) bom- 
bastic description of a restoration which, as history attests, falls far short of 
the description. No! The Divine Spirit deals in sober, actual, blessed 
truth and, as fulfilment down to the present day abundantly testifies, 
never deals in Oriental eulogies with their engrafted exaggerations. It is 
amazing that believers in Holy Writ can overlook the fact that not only 
prophets before, but prophets at and after, the return from Babylon pre- 
dict the same glorious restoration. Let any one e.g. compare Zechariah, 
Haggai, Malachi, with previous prophets and a restoration very different 
from the one experienced is seen to be foretold. The one from Babylon 
was designed and carried out to provide the necessary preliminary condi- 
tions for the First Advent ; the one in the future is identified with the 
Second Advent. ‘lo bring up the rule of the Maccabees as a fulfilment 
against our view, is fo overlook the requirements of prophecy, which 
demand that not Asmoneans or Levites but those of the lineage of David are 
to bear rule ; that not tributary princes should govern, but One independ- 
ent of, and superior to, all others should have dominion, It is sad to 
reflect on the lack of faith existing in God’s promises, and how, to accom- 
modate such want of faith, human reason seeks after an apologetic fulfil- 
ment which diminishes the lustre of the Divine Record, bringing its 
prophetic portion down to the level of the uninspired productions of man. 
Well may it be asked, if the return from Babylon with its small colony, 
under Persian rule, struggling painfully on, etc, is all that is meant by 
those glowing portrayals of restoration, dominion, and exaltation, where, 
in the light of historical fact, is the boasted foreknowledge of the Spirit 
which these prophets professed to be guided by, and what becomes then of © 
the credibility of their utterances in other respects? Such manipulation 
of Scripture is not only wnwarranted but dangerous, leading as it does (as 
infidels have shown in seizing this Maccahean theory) to a direct impeach- 
ment of the truthfulness of the Divine Word. 


Obs. 3. Unless the student keeps before him ¢he actual condition of the 
Jewish nation at the time of this great deliverance and restoration, it is 
impossible for him to preserve the unity of the Divine statements on the 
subject, or to locate the period of the restoration at the time assigned to 
it by the Spirit. That condition has been briefly noticed, and shows us 
that when the restoration, and the Theocratic Kingdom united with it, is 
to be witnessed, it will find the Jews and Jerusalem in a fearful extremity. 
It was, as commentaries, etc., inform us, an opinion current among the 
Jews, derived from prophecy, that only in a time of sore trial would the 
Messiah come to deliver and establish His Kingdom.’ This opinion 7s 
correct, and is fully indorsed by Christ Himself, who in Matt. 24, ete., 
identifies His Coming, the deliverance, etc., with the direful situation of 
an oppressed nation and down-trodden city. The tribulation described by 
Jesus is by no means confined to that inflicted by the Romans, it continues 
down, as expressly stated, through Gentile nations, until these ‘* times of 
- the Gentiles’ are fulfilled. That they are not yet fulfilled, the condition 


Prop. 112. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 61 


of the city and nation painfully indicate. What the future has in store 
for the same, is also described by the sacred writers. Planting ourselves 
on the past lteral fulfilment, waswerving faith accepts of what is recorded 
still relating to the future of city and nation, as that which shall become 
historical -verity. Occupying this stand-point, there is no difficulty in 
ascertaining the exact position in which these will be placed when God will 
arise to be again merciful to His ancient people, and restore the Theocratic- 
Davidic rule. If the reader will turn to Zech. 12 : 1-14, he has (1) the 
multitude gathered against Jerusalem besieging it ; (2) the Lord interfering 
in behalf of the people ; (3) Jerusalem becomes ‘“‘ a cup of trembling,”’ ‘‘ a 
burdensome stone’? to the nations; (4) the complete overthrow of all 
enemies ; (5) the subsequent exaltation of “‘ the house of David,’’ etc. In 
Zech. 14 we have, taking the preceding context, (1) the smiting of the 
Shepherd, (2) the scattering of the sheep, (3) a period of tribulation, (4) 
the gathering of nations against Jerusalem, (4) the Lord interfering, 
‘* his feet standing upon the mount of Olives,’ (5) the saints coming with 
Him, (6) the destruction of the enemies, (7) the reign of Christ, (8) Jeruwsa- 
lem safely inhabited, exalted, etc. Dan. 12 has, (1) atime of trouble, 
resulting from a gathering of nations against Jerusalem, (2) special Divine 
interposition in behalf of the nation, (3) a gracious deliverance vouchsafed. 
Joel 3 has (1) the same gathering of nations, (2) deliverance by the Lord 
and His ‘‘ mighty ones,’’ (3) the complete removal of all enemies, (4) the 
Lord dwelling in the holy mountain, (5) the safety, happiness, etc., of 
Jerusalem. Without discussing the order of events, or how they are to be 
brought about, the simple fact of the Jews being in a state of extremity at 
this stage, just ammediately before their national deliverance, is proven by 
these passages. It is impossible to apply them to the extremity under the 
Romans, for the events represented to follow, did not then take place ; 
there was 20 deliverance and triumph of the nation, xo Divine interposi- 
tion and destruction of enemies, 70 Millennial glory, etc. The same all- 
wise Spirit, as if ¢o direct attention to the matter, repeats this testimony 
again and again. ‘The leading predictions are those found in Ezek. chs. 
38, 39, where (1) a@ confederation of nations is formed against Jerusalem, 
(2) the Lord will directly interfere for the land of Israel and His people, 
(3) a terrible overthrow of those nations, (4) the cessation of captivity and 
gathering of the Jews ‘‘ out of their enemies’ lands” *‘ unto their own 
land,’’ etc. References to this period are scattered here and there through 
the Word, which only become distinctive when viewed by the medium of 
the more enlarged, detailed prophecies. Thus, e.g. Jer. 30:4-11, where 
the same order comes in, (1) a time of dire trowdle, (2) deliverance, (3) the 
nation ‘‘ shall return from the land of their captivity,’’ (4) and in that 
time ‘‘ they shall serve the Lord their God and David their king.’’ Comp. 
Zeph. 3:8-20, Psl. 124 (which would be even more expressive if it be 
allowable to take the rendering of some in the last verse : ‘‘ Our help is in 
the name of the Word of the Lord’’ (Dr. Clarke Com. loci), taking that 
Word to be the one described by John), Isa. 51:17-23; Isa. 11:4; Isa. 
1:27, 28, etc. The introduction of a number of Millennial descriptions 
accords with what we have stated, viz., the straitened condition of the 
people, the triumph of God’s enemies cut short by His righteous judg- 
ments, etc. Hence, the conclusion must be formed that the nation has 
not yet experienced its full tribulation, and that wntil all is fulfilled 
respecting them the restoration bestowed directly by God (not by a 


62 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


nation, as may, and in all probability will, partially be done), cannot posst- 
bly be effected. It will also be noticed, how this still futwre extremity of 
the Jews helps us to estimate the theories of fulfilment at return from 
Babylon, in the Church, ete.? 


1 In addition to previous quotations : Milman (His. Jews, vol. 3, p. 98) remarks: “ It 
was an opinion, deeply rooted in the hearts of all faithful Israelites, that in the darkest 
hour of the race of Abraham, when his children were at the extreme point of degradation 
and wretchedness, that even then the arm of the Lord would be revealed and the 
expected Messiah would make his sudden and glorious appearance.’’ This view is 
evidently based on plain prophecies (as e.g. Zech. 14, etc.), and will hereafter be shown 
to be correctly founded. Their restoration immediately follows a fearful period of dis- 
tress, so that deliverance from enemies that sorely distressed, and triumphant exultation 
over their downfall, is mingled with national rejoicings. Many of the Jewish Rabbins 
link the restoration of the Jews with the destruction of Rome (under the name of 
‘* Edom,”’ see e.g. Mede’s Works, B. 3 and 5). A singular and fanciful notion is men- 
tioned by Mr. Calman (Mis. of Inquiry lo Jews, p. 403): Some Jews of Birlat told him 
that the Messiah ‘‘ is to come when their nation is either very corrupt or very pure, 
even as the leper, Lev. 13 : 6, 18, was counted clean either when his whole body was 
white, or when there was so sign of leprosy at all.’’ 

2 The critical student will observe that the feast of the Passover has reference, as 
Jesus teaches, to this final restoration of the Jews. Consider, what we have already 
abundantly proven, that Jesus foreseeing His rejection and death, the refusal of the 
nation to accept of the Kingdom on the condition of repentance, and the consequent 
postponement of the Kingdom, could not therefore proclaim the deliverance of the 
nation from the Roman yoke, but, in place of it, predicted a long-continued tribulation 
and captivity. Hence when Jesus eats the Passover, commemorating deliverance, not 
then experienced according to the intent and spirit of the feast (a feast designed for 
freemen and not for those in bondage to others), he says, Luke 22 : 16. ‘‘ For I say unto 
you I will not any more eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God.” Now, the 
Passover belongs to the Jews, and it was enjoined as a national observance. The Lord's 
Supper instituted in its place belongs to the Christian Church in this dispensation. 
Christ is the Paschal Lamb in both these feasts. ‘The Lord’s Supper points us on to 
the Coming Saviour (for we ‘‘ show forth His death until He come’’) for perfected deliver- 
ance ; so also the Passover directs the Jewish nation to a contemplated, covenanted, and 
predicted deliverance, and Jesus calls attention to this fulfilment which occurs when the 
Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, or the Kingdom of God, is re-established. A scene similar 
in nature and fearfulness to that witnessed in Egypt at the Exodus will be (Isa. 26 : 20, 
21, etc., comp. Props. 115, 147, 161, 162, 163, etc.) repeated on a grander scale. Dr. Eth- 
ridge (Introd. Targums) says that the Jews ‘‘ contemplate the Passover as a prophetic 
signal of their future release and restoration to Canaan.’’ He adduces abundant proof 
of this, and quotes from the Targums and Paschal ritual. In the ritual the Passover 
is ** for a sign of protection and deliverance, escape and salvation.”’ 


Obs. 4. Finally we come to additional prophecies which, taken in their 
entire scope, leave no doubt of the national restoration of the Jews and of 
the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom. Isa. 11 : 10-16 is conceded by many 
commentators, as even by Scott, Niigelsbach, ete., to teach a literal restora- 
tion. The ‘‘ second time,’’ v. 11, cannot refer either to:deliverance from 
Egypt or from Babylon because in neither case were the Jews recovered 
from the lands here enumerated ; and it cannot refer merely to a conversion 
(as some hold) of the people because it is linked with ‘‘ a cutting off of the 
adversarics of Judah” (Obs. 9), with ‘* a gathering of the outcasts of Israel 
and the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth,” with a 
removal of the enmity between the two kingdoms, etc. It must relate to 
the future, and the miraculous events ‘‘ like it was to Israel in the day that 
he came out of the land of Egypt,’’ the special Divine interposition, the 
‘spoil’ that shall then accrue to them (comp. Zech. 14, etc.), the power 
that shall be given, its connection with Millennial era (context preceding 


Prop. 112.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 63 


and following) fully identify it with the period of time and manner of in- 
troduction held by us.*_ But even this prediction must be regarded in the 
light of plainer ones. Thus in Hzek. 36 : 8-38 there is a profusion of cir- 
cumstances irreconcilable with any other view than the one adopted. In 
the enumeration of them there are (1) the gathering out of all countries and 
the bringing again into their own land ; (2) they shall dwell in the land 
given to their fathers ; (3) they shall be also converted ; (4) the desolate 
land is to be tilled and sown ; (5) man and deast are to be multiplied on it ; 
(6) the cities shall again be inherited and the wastes builded ; (7) they shall 
be settled after their ‘‘ old estutes’’; (8) God ‘* will do better unto you than 
at your beginnings’; (9) the land shall be for an inheritance; (10) the 
land shall no more be bereaved ; (11) it shall not be burdened with the 
shame of the heathen ; (12) the identical land defiled by Israel’s sins is the 
one thus again obtained ; (13) the removal from the land caused by sin ; 
(14) the return to it caused by God’s mercy and faithfulness ; (15) the fruit 
of the tree and the increase of the field so sure as to prevent famine ; (17) the 
land once desolate to become like the Garden of Eden; (18) the heathen 
that are left shall acknowledge the Lord’s power when this is done ; (19) the 
house of Israel shall be increased with flocks of men and the waste cities 
with the same. So circumstantial and minute are details given that no 
unprejudiced mind can resist their force.* But in the very next chapter 
(37th) the prophet reiterates and adds to them. After describing the 
resurrection which (as shown Prop. 126) is also related to this period, he 
tells us (1) that the children of Israel shall be gathered from among the 
heathen and be brought into their own land ; (2) that they shall be *‘ one 
nation’’ and not ‘* two kingdoms’’ as of old ; (3) that they shall have ‘‘ one 
king,’’ even *‘ David my servant’’; (4) that they shall no more be “‘ defiled ”’ 
being ‘‘ cleansed’’; (5) that ‘‘ they shall dwell in the land that I have given 
unto Jacob my servant, wherein your fathers have dwelt’’; (6) that they 
and their descendants ‘‘ shall dwell in it forever’’ (for the ages, so some) ; 
(7) that during these ages, or forever, David shall be their Prince ; (8) that 
they shall have peace and be multiplied ; (9) that God’s sanctuary shall be 
‘in the midst of them forever ; (10) that their situation shall be as 7m Rey. 
21:3; (11) that the Gentiles shall acknowledge the great power of God 
when this is accomplished. Comp. Jer. 32 : 37-44 (notice contrast with 
which comp. Jer. 31:28) ; Jer. 33 (noticing “ the building as at first,’’ the 
cities and even ‘‘ streets of Jerusalem’? filled with rejoicing, the reigning 
of the Branch a descendant of David’s, the Covenant shall not be broken, 
ete.) ; Jer. 3 : 14-18 (observing that then Jerusalem shall be called ** the 
throne of the Lord,’’ that nations shall be gathered unto it, and that they 
come ‘‘ ¢o the land that I have given for an inheritance unto your fathers’); 
Ezek. 11 : 16-20 (“‘ cast far off’ shall still be brought into * the land of 
Israel,”’ ete.) ; Jer. 23 :5-8 (so complete is this restoration under the super- 
vision of David’s seed that it is compared with that from Egypt, ete.) 5 
Ezek. 34 : 11-31 (sheep delivered ‘‘in adark and cloudy day,’’ and the 


_ 


* When Fairbairn (Ezekiel), Schréder (Ezekiel in Lange’s Com.), and others, by a 
wholesale spiritualizing of the plain grammatical meaning (with great learning, etc.) 
make out that all this is fulfilled in the Christian Church or world, the Jewish nation 
and land (and all particulars) being only typical of something else, this is the result of 
deep-rooted prejudice, that overrides everything, bends everything, substitutes every- 
thing to make it correspond with its preconceived spiritual theory. We envy not the 
labors and results of such writers. 


64 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 112. 


‘* servant David ’’ shall be ‘‘ the Prince,’’ delivering them from ‘‘ the yoke’’ 
so that they shall no longer be ‘‘ a prey’’) ; Zeph. 3 : 8-20; Zech. 8; Jer. 
31; Micah, chs. 4, 5, and 8; Hos. 2:14, etc; Isa. 43 and 52, ete. Bp. 
Newton well remarked, ‘‘ innumerable are the prophecies concerning the 
conversion and restoration of this people’’ ; for we find them on all sides, 
imbedded in nearly all prophetic utterances ; and, as the reader must ob- 
serve, if the Covenant and its fulfilment, if the promises of God respecting 
Kingdom and perfected salvation are so directly and fundamentally identi- 
fied with this people, then it is reasonable to anticipate that much should be 
said of it. If the reason be asked why, although not ignored but expressly 
mentioned and implied, comparatively so little is stated on the subject in 
the New Test. the answer is given by Jesus and the Apostles themselves, © 
viz., that the prophets are to be fulfilled, and that it is taken for granted that 
we possess, read, study and delieve in them. The Old Test. 1s not super- 
seded by the New (Prop. 16), and we are urged to observe the intimate and 
enduring connection existing between them, Both form the Word of God, 
and therefore it is our duty on a subject like this to consult both, and as- 
certain what God has been pleased to reveal. If we take the particulars 
thus given ; notice of whom they are predicted ; how they are related to 
each other ; that they never have been fulfilled ; that they cannot without 
violence be applied to any other people ; how the most sacred of all pledges 
support them, etc., the only consistent conclusion that we can arrive at is 
that contained in the Proposition. If some will be like those spoken of in 
Ezek. 11 : 15, saying that the land shall not be given to this people in pos- 
session but pertains to others, the reply coming from God Himself immedi- 
ately follows, for He will sanctify Himself (Ezek. 20 : 41-44) before the 
Gentiles, and manifest (Zech. 8 : 6) that the work is not difficult of accom- 
plishment. Hence the Spirit of the New Test. as we show in various 
places, accords in upholding ‘‘ the hope of Israel.’’ ® 

1 We refer to another point which Nigelsbach (Lange’s Com. Isa., ch. 11 : 10-16) brings 
out prominently, viz., ‘‘ The return of Israei takes place only when the Messiah has 
appeared, and the heathen have gathered to Him.’’ The order laid down is plain: (1) a 
previous gathering out of Gentiles ; (2) then a glorious restoration to follow ; (3) this is 
a universal, and not a partial, return ; (4) this, like the deliverance from Egypt, will be 
accompanied by an extraordinary manifestation of the supernatural. 

* The student desirous to investigate this highly interesting subject will find abundant 
material in the prophets. Thus e.g. let him compare the concluding part of Isa, 42, 
where the judgments brought upon the nation are delineated, and contrast this with the 
promised restoration. which God appeals to as His special work that He may be glorified, 
as contained in the following chapter. The miraculous power exerted in that day is 
presented in Isa. 30 : 26, which even our opponents, as Barnes, Com. loci, apply ‘‘ to the 
times of the Messiah” as something that cannot be doubted, and on the healing the 
wound, ete., remark : ‘‘ Jehovah would heal it by restoring them to their own land and 
to their former privileges.’’ The context indisputably shows that it is allied with the 
same period of time (Rev. 19, etc.) that precedes and follows the Sec. Advent of the 
Messiah. Isa. 61 is connected with the restoration of the Jewish nation, seeing that it 
is allied with a ‘‘ day of vengeance,’’ with a ‘‘ building the old wastes,’’ a ‘‘ raising up 
the former desolations,’’ a ‘‘ repairing the waste cities, the desolations of many genera- 
tions,” etc. If we were at liberty to receive the remarkable rendering (mss. Pachom and 
1 D., 11 of the Sep.) of the phrase ‘‘ in their land they shall possess double,” viz., “ they 
shall possess their land a second time,’’ it would increase the force of it ; but this is not 
necessary. Various distinctive predictions will follow under the Propositions relating 
to Jewish conversion and supremacy, the period of violence, the inheritance of Jesus, ete. 


Obs. 5. There is only one objection that at first thought appears plausi- 
ble urged against this restoration, which we feel unable to answer as it 


Prop. 112.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 65 


probably deserves. It is this: ‘‘ the whole house of Israel,’’ both ‘Judah 
and Israel’’ are to be restored, but if so, where are the ten tribes? Thus 
tar the question asked is legitimate, but when it is added: ‘‘if their pres- 
ent situation cannot be certainly and satisfactorily established it is impos- 
sible to accept of a restoration,”’ then the objector goes beyond his com- 
mission. (1) Whereare the ten tribes? Entire volumes have been written 
on this interesting point, one writer finding traces of them in the American 
Indians ; another in various nations in Central Asia ; one in Abyssinia and 
on the coast of Africa ; another in South America, etc. Eminent linguists 
(as Jones, etc.), travellers (Wolf, etc.), and others, have found in some tribes 
and nations peculiarities of language, custom, rites, etc., resembling those 
of the Jews. But amid the diversity of view who can positively give us the 
proper information? No one, with any degree of assurance, although in 
some instances we may grant a high degree of probability. This may, 
however, be taken as an indication that their existence, owing to such 
existing peculiarities cannot on the other hand be positively denied. ‘This 
would be both illogical and unscholarly. (2) Is it, however, necessary to 
know, or, according to the Word, can we ever know their location, ete. ? 
This is doubtful, for it is proper to consider in such an investigation several 
particulars more or less, overlooked. 1. This restoration is not appointed 
for man to perform, or for the nation itself to undertake ; it is constantly 
and invariably designated as God’s designed work, specially delegated to His 
Son Jesus Christ. Hence, if God knows where they are, that is all-suffi- 
cient. If, on the other hand, the work were ours, then we ought to know. 
2. In view of this being God’s work He has specifically declared that His 
watchful eye is constantly fixed upon them, and that, however commingled 
among the nations and as individuals concealed in the mass of humanity, 
He takes cognizance of every one of them. Thuse.g. Amos 9:93; Ezek. 
12:15; Jer. 46: 28; Deut. 28 : 62, etc., in connection with the ascrip- 
tions of perfect knowledge, a knowledge and power that extendeth to all 
things, it is wnworthy of faith and of reason to stumble over our lack of 
knowledge in the face of so many plain predictions. ‘The resurrection, and 
other doctrines might on the same plea be discarded. It is sufficient to 
stay ourselves upon God, Isa. 64:4. 38. But when we come to scan the 
prophecies more narrowly it will be found that this very undecided infor- 
mation 7s predicted and forms an additional proof both of the inspiration 
of the prophets and of the necessity of faith in this return. For the ten 
tribes being more idolatrous than Judah and having first dishonored the 
Theocratic ordering, meet with special abhorrence, and, as the Word teaches, 
suffer proportionately. They are ‘‘ the outcasts of Israel,’’ distinguished 
from ‘* the dispersed of Judah,”’ Isa. 11 : 12, cut off long before Judah, and 
not restored at the return from Babylon ;* and as Brookes (£1. Proph. 
Inter., p. 198) has shown, their return is a matter of surprise, the question 
being asked: ‘‘ then where had they been?’ Isa. 49:21. Being more 
idolatrous than Judah they are more given up to it according to the threat 
of Deut. 4 : 27, 28; Deut. 28 : 36, 64; Jer. 16 : 13, and implied as realized 
in Hzek. 86 : 25, etc. ; consequently a portion of the nation thus adopting 


* Brookes ably shows this in El. Proph. Interp.; Shimeall and others do the same. 
Admitting that some few may have returned does not embrace a general or tribal one, 
or meet the conditions of prediction on the subject. 


66 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


the worship and usages of idolatrous nations, although kept more or less 
separate in the very forms used by them, would be difficult to distinguish.* 
And some even think that a hidden, concealed condition is implied - in Isa.’ 
16:3, 4, ete. Fully admitting the difficulties attached to this point, yet 
over and against them is the Word of God ; and the believer is at no loss in 
making his decision when God says: Jer. 31 : 35-387. What our eyes now 
behold in the perhaps now unconscious witnesses of God (Isa. 43 : 10-13 : 
Isa. 44 : 8, etc.) causes us firmly to hold to the testimony of the future 
that is yet to be added in the eyes of all nations. In the light of a thou- 
sand predictions dike Ezek. 39 : 28; Deut. 30:3, 4; Isa. 43 : 5, 6, ete., 
who, that receives the Word as given by the Almighty, can reject such a 
restoration. 


Satisfied from the particular fulfilment of prophecy in the past, and from the posi- 
tive declarations of the Almighty on the subject, that He will perform this work, and, 
when the time comes, reveal the long lost ones, we do not, for the reasons assigned, 
consider the identification of the lost tribes essential. Yet in view of the interest 
pertaining to them, it may be well, if only to show the variety of conjectures, to point 
out, to some extent, the opinions entertained. Aside from Calmet's Dic. and the articles 
to be found in our religious cyclops., the writings of missionaries, Wolf, Carey, Marsh- 
man, and others, the reader will find the following works on the subject. Grant’s 
Nestorians, or the Lost Tribes; Fletcher's Israel Redux (making them the Tartars) ; 
Moore’s The Lost Tribes (making them the Saxons); Sailman’s Researches in the East 
(endeavors to trace the tribes to the 17th century) ; Whiston’s Memoirs, vol. 1 (advocates 
the Tartar theory) ; Thorowgood’s Jews in America (old work—others more recent— 
comp. e.g. Wm. Penn in Jewish Expositor, under the title of The Sun in the West) ; 
Brookes, under the signature of ‘‘ Abdiel,” in Jewish Expositor, indicates the Welsh and 
some of the Irish ; Samuel’s Israel’s Hiding Discovered (makes them of Daghistan on the 
Caspian Sea) ; Hamilton, Bryant, Buchanan, Wolf, and others trace them to the Jews of 
Cochin on the coast of Malabar; Wolf, in his Miss. Journal, speaks of finding some 
of the lost tribes in and around Bombay, and among the Afghans: Sumnius, De Extremo 
Dei, Judicio (holds the North Amer. Indians to be the lost tribe); so also Boudinet’s 
Star of the West, Crawford’s Proph. of the Gospel, Elliott’s Jews in America, Jones’s His. 
of America, Simon’s Hope of Israel, Worsley’s Amer. Indians, Ingraham’s Ten Tribes (in 
opposition, L. Estrange’s Americans no Jews); Edrehi’s His. Acct. of the Ten Tribes 
(finds them beyond the Sambotyan in the East) ; indeed, every continent is placed under 
contribution to swell the list, Mexico, South America, the coast and the wilds of Africa, 
China, and other countries have swelled the number of conjectures. More recently a 
vigorous effort is made by Wilson (Our Israelilish Origin) and many others to identify 
the British nation with the lost ten tribes. A society called ‘‘ Israel’s Identification 
Society’’ is reported by the newspapers to be established to prove this Jewish origin. 
Other works also refer to the subject, such as Burns’s ‘‘ Travels in Bokhara, Basnage’s 
His. of the Jews (so other histories), Jerome on Dan. 11, Josephus, B. 11, ch. 5, and 
various of the Pre-Mill. writers, especially those who devote considerable space to the 
restoration of the Jews. As we have no theory of our own to support, it is unnecessary 
to discriminate between these widely conflicting opinions. 

We have no objection to finding the lost tribes in any country on the globe, and 
especially none to discovering them in England, Ireland, and Scotland, but we do most 
earnestly protest to the deductions, perversions, and absurdities that may be engrafted 
upon such views. It is proper to notice the manner in which the theory of “* Anglo- 
Israelism’’ (i.e. of making the English nation identical with the lost ten tribes) is 
handled under the leadership of Edward Hine, of London, England. This view assumes 
that Judah and Benjamin alone compose the Jewish nation, and that the Ten Tribes’ 
alone constitute Israel. By this unscriptural distinction it denies that the Twelve Tribes 


* Rev. McNeile, Prospects of the Jews, an able work, justly and at length shows that the 
prophecies relating to the separate condition of the Jews mainly apply to Judah. But 
this by no means excludes Israel, whom God will preserve in a sufficiently distinctive 
form to verify His promises. The greatness and majesty of God, as well as His faith- 
fulness, are shown in this wonderful, covert preservation. 


Prop. 112. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 67 


constitute the nation. Such a theory is utterly repudiated by the Scriptures. The 
reader will find the reasons given by Robert Roberts in the Debate with Hine on the 
question, ‘‘ Are Englishmen Israelites?” It is sufficient here to say, that the origin of 
both is the same ; both have the name of their common father Jacob, changed to Israel ; 
that when the separation took place (as a punishment) it did not affect the Israelitish 
status of Judah and Benjamin ; that, in view of the separation and to distinguish 
between the two sections of the same nation, the smaller portion was called after Judah 
(the royal tribe), the larger retained the designation of Israel ; that when the Ten 
Tribes were scattered and disappeared, Judah being still the visible representation of 
the nation, the name applied to the nation was derived from those recognized as exist- 
ing ; that all the tribes were also called Jews, as seen in Josephus, and in the New 
esr mmom, 3 39, 29>) 70 712); 9 223-24; and 2:9, 10: that: ‘* Israel’’ was used as 
synonymous with “‘ Jew,’ and applied both to the ten and to the two tribes, as e.g. 
Matt. 8:10; Luke 1:16, 54, 68; Acts13:17; 21:28, and Acts 22:3, comp. with 
Rom. 11:1; that Jesus is both ‘‘ the King of the Jews’’ and ‘‘ the King of Israel,’’ both 
phrases being identical ; that the twelve tribes are distinctively mentioned as constitut- 
ing the one nation, Acts 26:7; James1:1; Acts 28 : 20; that the nation is an elect, 
covenanted nation to whom the promises belong, and although punished for disobedi- 
ence, the election remains including the whole nation originally chosen ; that the 
prophecies speaking of the nation as a whole, do not discriminate (as e.g. those in 
Deut.) between the tribes ; that the prophecies particularizing the manner of restoration 
refer both to Judah and to Israel; that in the future Kingdom of the Messiah the 
twelve tribes are distinctly mentioned, as in Rev., chs. 7 and 21; that as a nation koth 
the two and the ten tribes are suffering the withdrawal of God, and are under judgment 
as such, thus fulfilling the threats presented against ‘‘ the children of Israel”; and that 
if such a preference is shown to the ten tribes, it would be manifestly unjust to the two 
tribes who continued more faithful and received more special promises, etc. The plea 
that the Ten Tribes were separated, etc., for blessing, is, as Roberts conclusively shows, 
completely met by the predictions of the prophets, which declare the exact reverse. The 
effort to make the exalted predictions relating to Israel in the future to be verified at 
the present time by an identification with England’s greatness, without the Advent of 
the Messiah, is simply a degradation of the sublime prophecies, and leading to unbelief. 
It is more: it slides into ‘‘ blasphemous nonsense,’’ as illustrated by a writer in the 
Proph. News, Aug., 1879, who quotes one Oxley, a follower of Hines, writing in Hine’s 
own periodical, on The Deliverer out of Zion, as follows: ‘‘The work of identity (of 
the British nation with the lost ten tribes of Israel), and that of the Deliverer out of 
Zion, according to our impression, is all one. It is the same work. It is effected at the 
same time. . . . If these things are so, then where is the Deliverer? He must 
already have come out of Zion ; He must be doing His great work ; He must be among 
us. It is our impression that by the glory of the work of the identity we have come to 
the time of Israel’s national salvation by the Deliverer out of Zion ; and that Edward 
Hine and that deliverer are identical.’’ Alas! how sad, that things which belong exclusive- 
ly to Jesus the Messiah should thus be prostituted under fanatical ‘‘ impressions.”’ But 
this is on a par with numerous other vagaries (such as making the English throne 
David's throne, etc.), which a mixture of spiritualizing, literalism, rashness, and dogmatism 
produces. There is no danger that one who has compared the Scriptures relating to 
the restoration of the Jews will, for a moment, entertain such views (whatever identifica- 
tion may exist as to Jewish origin) ; it is only those who are ignorant of the subject, or 
have a slight knowledge of it, that can be influenced by it. The fundamental error 
(upon which a mass of others is erected) is in not discerning “ both the houses of Israel’ 
(Isa. 8 : 14) are identical with ‘‘ the house of Jacob.” So Wild’s work (Zhe Lost Ten 
Tribes) takes a@ somewhat similar position, and lays great stress on the United States, 
making the Saxon race to be Israel. Having nothing to say respecting the alleged 
Jewish origin (saving that it is largely founded on conjecture and speculation) we do 
object, however, to the perversion of prophecy, covenants, promise, etc., as illustrated 
in making Queen Victoria’s throne to be “ David’s throne,”’ the stone to be England, ete. 
We give our reasons for dissent under various Propositions, while acknowledging the 
sincerity, etc., of the writer. 


Obs. 6. Our argument on this point would be incomplete if a brief 
synopsis of Paul’s reasoning in Romans, alluded to, were not appended, thus 
more completely binding the Old and New Tests. together in the same doc- 


68 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


trinal position. Leaving the filling up of minor details to the reader, the 
leading ideas of the Apostle are presented by us in the following order: In 
ch. 9 we have: (1) His sorrow for the Jews ; (2) the covenant relationship 
of the Jews; (3) their election ; (4) ‘‘ the children of promise are counted 
for the seed’’ ; (5) that Gentiles by faith can also become such a seed ; 
(6) that the nation being in unbelief, still a part, together with engrafted 
Gentiles shall be saved ; (7) to prove this calling of the Gentiles he quotes 
Hos. 2 : 23, but to observe the force and propriety of the quotation we turn 
to Hosea and find it connected with a restoration of the Jews which has 
never yet been realized ; hence it is presented (a) because it clearly indicates 
that the Gentiles can and will thus be called, and (0) that they being thus 
also grafted in shall, as taught in many places, participate in the glory, 
etc., of the restoration. He then produces Hos. 1 : 10, which applies in 
the same way, and next Isa. 10 : 22, 23 (Sep. Ver. Horne 1, p. 302) ; Isa. 
28:22; Isa. 1 : 9, the immediate contexts of which confirm our statement ; 
for in them we have (a) the Jewish nation cast away on account of their 
sinfulness ; (2) this consumption decreed ; (c) but during this period a 
remnant shall be saved, a seed is to be raised up lest God’s purposes and 
promises fail ; (¢) this consumption shall be removed, for the nation after 
suffering for its sins shall be restored. Therefore, the Apostle only selects 
the points which show, (1) the foretold rejection of the nation, and (2) the 
raising up of a seed, even out of Gentiles, during this time, leaving the 
reader from his own knowledge of the prophets ¢o fill up the remainder which 
was not needed just then in his train of thought. (8) Lastly, the great 
offence, which led to their complete overthrow, as predicted by the prophets, 
and to the engrafting of Gentiles, is shown to be their stumbling over ‘‘ the 
stumbling stone’? Jesus Christ. In ch. 10 is stated : (1) the desire of the 
Apostle that the Jews might be saved by faith in Christ ; (2) that both Jews 
and Gentiles that thus believe shall be saved ; (3) that comparatively few of 
the Jews would receive the truth preached in Christ ; (4) that as Moses and 
Isaiah predicted, others, even Gentiles would be called and be adopted. But 
as Paul assumes the undoubted fulfilment of these prophecies on the one 
point, it is just that we believe that the remainder is equally worthy of 
credit. Let us see then what stands in the context of the passages referred 
to by Paul. Isa. 51:1 describes (a) the sufferings and death of Christ ; 
(2) that many shall be justified through Him ; (¢) that Jesus shall obtain a 
great portion ; (@) then follows ‘‘ the Barren Woman’’ (see Prop. 118), and 
a glorious Millennial description, including the restoration of the very nation 
that rejected this stricken Saviour. Paul appropriately, as his argument 
here only required, uses it to show, (1) that the Jews nationally would not 

believe, (2) that others would. Deut. 32 : 21 has, (a) the Jews on account — 
of sin are rejected by God ; (0) during this time of God’s withdrawal, He 
will provoke them by gathering out another people ; (c) while this gathering 
is In process the Jewish nation shall be scattered and suffering ; (d) but lest 
others should exalt themselves, etc., God will relent toward His covenanted 
people, punish their enemies, and be merciful to them and to their land. 
Isa. 65 : 1 gives us (a) in preceding ch. God’s anger toward, and punish- 
ment of, the nation ; ().a people notwithstanding gathered, even, as Paul 
intimates by quoting, Gentiles ; (c) God will not utterly destroy the nation ; 
(d) this followed by a prediction of their final restoration. ‘The unity of 
order, etc., preserved by the Spirit is something remarkable ; and Paul’s 
quotations instead of reversing, or transposing, or spiritualizing the 


Prop. 112.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 69 


prophets, establishes ¢hetr literal understanding. In ch. 11, the first 
question is suggested by the previous reasoning; for if the Jews are 
nationally rejected and others gathered in, the inquiry would naturally 
follow: ‘* Hath God cast away His people,’’—mark, ‘‘ His people,’’ i.e. a 
people sustaining peculiar covenant relationship to Him—and Paul pro- 
ceeds to answer it negatively by two powerful reasons : (1) that a remnant, 
some Jews like himself, would believe and hence were accounted still ‘‘ His 
people’’; and (2) that the same nation that stumbled and fell would finally 
be restored and be acknowledged as ‘‘ His people.’? Let us follow the 
Apostle and we find, (1) the question as stated ; (2) the first reply, that God 
has reserved some, including himself, who were not cast away ; (3) and even 
this is guarded and distinguished from the national election (see Prop. 24, 
etc.) by saying that this ‘‘ 7s a remnant according to the election of grace,” 
i.e. this favor is bestowed not on account of their relationship (which for 
the time God does not regard, having rejected during a determined time 
the nation as such,) but on ¢he same basis by which Gentiles are received ; 
(4) this election, made such, by faith, will obtain the promises ; (5) the rest 
of the Jews are blinded, and, owing to unbelief, are cut off from the 
exalted position once occupied, viz., that of being the only people who 
nationally sustained a present special covenant relationship with God. 
Here is the order still existing down to the present day, viz., (a) the Jews, 
as a nation, suffering a rejection ; (0) a remnant still saved, like the Gen- 
tiles, by faith, to continue the elect people, or the seed of Abraham ; (c) the 
rest remaining in unbelief. 6. He reiterates that this was predicted, and 
quotes Isa. 29:10 as proof, and when reference is made to the passage, 
precisely (a) such blindness is prophesied of the nation ; (0) that the anger 
of God shall fail upon them ; (c) that at some future time this blindness 
shall be removed ; (d) and that ‘‘ the house of Jacob’’ shall no longer be 
ashamed. Ps. 69 : 22, 23, is also given, and in the context is found (1) the 
sufferings and death of Jesus ; (2) the blindness of the Jews in this mat- 
ter ; (8) indignation poured upon them ; (4) they, however, that seek the 
Lord shall live ; (5) and then follows (v. 35, 36) the restoration of this peo- 
ple, the rebuilding of the cities of Judah, etc. 7%. Now he asks of the 
nation, ‘‘Have they stumbled that they should fall,’’ which is answered, 
‘“‘God forbid.’’ 'The reasons for believing that the nation, as such, will 
ultimately be reinstated in its condition forfeited by unbelief follow. 
8. They have fallen for the present that salvation—the promises to Abra- 
ham—may also be tendered to Gentiles, thus provoking them to jealousy. 
This direct allusion again to Deut. clearly indicates that this fall is merely 
temporary, and that the Apostle so regarded it in appealing to the very 
Scripture which necessarily, owing to the context in which it stands, implies 
and teaches it. 9. (a) ‘‘Now if the fall of them (b) be the riches of the 
world, and (a) the diminishing of them, (b) the riches of the Gentiles: 
(c) how much more their fulness.’’ Observe of whom the Apostle predicates 
this ‘‘ fall’ and ‘‘ diminishing,’’ and it is of the same party (not another 
as the believing portion) that this ‘‘ fudness’’ is stated. The only question 
is, what does Paul mean by the word ‘“‘ fulness.’’ That the charge of 
forcing a meaning may not be preferred against us, we cordially accept of 
the definition of an opponent. Thus Barnes (Com. loci) *‘ the word ‘ ful- 
ness’ means that which fills wp or completes anything. Thus it is applied 
to that which fills a vessel or cup ; also to the piece of cloth which is put in 
to fill up the rent ina garment, Matt. 9:16. To the fragments which 


70 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 112. 


were left when Christ had fed the five thousand, Mark 8 : 20; Rom. 13 : 10. 
‘ Love is the fulfilling of the law,’ i.e. it is the filling wp of the law, or that 
which renders the obedience complete. See Gal. 5:14. Here it stands 
opposed to their fall and their diminution, and evidently means their com- 
plete restoration to the favor of God ; their recovery from unbelief and 
apostacy.’’? It does not refer to individuals as such, for those who thus 
shamefully treated Christ and were punished shall never have this said of 
them, but, as in many other places, of the nation as such. But if restored 
thus to the favor of God, what does this imply? Precisely what the Apos- 
tle continues to present, the restoration of the nation into its once obtained. 
but delayed ‘Theocratic-Davidic position. In the word ** fulness’’ the 
Apostle embraces that “‘ filling wp’’ in the Divine Plan, that sublime “* fiJ- 
ling up’’ or complement in the future history of the nation as given by the 
prophets just quoted by him. 10. This is more plainly stated : “For (1) if 
the casting away of them (2) be the reconciling of the world’’ (Gospel now 
tendered to all), (3) ‘‘ what shall the receiving of them be (4) but life from 
the dead.’’ The same nation ‘* cast away’’ is the one “‘ received,”’ and, as 
above, when thus again restored to Divine favor as a nation it shall prove 
(so the prophets declare of this national restoration, and which we shall 
describe from them farther on) a greater blessing (“‘ much more’’) to the 
Gentiles.t. 11. Then follows an illustration of which Barnes (Com. loci) 
says: ‘* By this illustration (of first-fruits) Paul doubtless means to say 
that the Jewish nation, as a people, were set apart to the service of God, and 
were so regarded by Him.’’ Taking this admission and legitimately follow- 
ing it out, it indicates that when thus restored it occupies again ¢he same 
position ; Which is corroborated by the tenor of the prophets, 12. The 
natural branches are broken off (i.e. on account of unbelief, rejected as un- 
worthy of the covenanted blessings), and Gentiles are grafted in and borne 
by the root, viz., by being adopted and incorporated as the seed of Abra- 
ham (to whom the Covenant was given), they with Abraham receive the 
promises. 13, This nation thus cut off, God is able to graft in again, 1.e. 
restore them as formerly, especially if they yield up their unbelief as pre- 
dicted. Will God graft them in again? 14. That He will do it 7s post- 
tively asserted in the next verse, and made the stronger by declaring that if 
Gentiles could be adopted, etc., ‘‘ how much more shall these, which be the 
natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree.’’ But why ‘* how 
much more’? ? Simply because, as Covenant and prophecy unitedly affirm, 
- the Divine Purpose pertaining to perfected salvation is inseparably con- 
nected with the Jewish nation as such, and absolutely requires its restora- 
tion. Hence the provision that is specially made when the time arrives 
for the removal of this national unbelief, etc. 15. The Apostle taking this 
restoration as an established fact in the Divine Plan, now asserts when it 
will be accomplished. (a) He speaks of it as ‘‘a mystery’’ because the 
Jews could not understand how the blessings exclusively promised to a 
covenanted people, the natural seed of Abraham, could be extended to 
others and themselves be rejected, which, however, is explained by the 
adoption by faith into the covenanted people of Abraham, and by the addi- 
tional fact that this rejection of the nation is not perpetual but only for a 
limited period. (0) In describing how long this blindness or hardness or 
casting away is to continue, he emphatically limits it to ‘‘ watil the fulness 
of the Gentiles has come in.’’ This may denote either until the filling up 
of the predetermined elect (Props. 118, 153, 154, etc.) out of the Gentiles 


ROP; 112. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. Pili 


is accomplished, or until, as in Christ’s declaration, tue filling up, the com- 
plement of ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles’’ is finished. In either case the 
rejection of the nation is not final but bounded by a definite period known 
to God. 16. Then, i.e. after this order has been fulfilled, viz., the con- 
tinued blindness of the nation until this fulness of the Gentiles has come 
in, then comes, ‘‘ And so all Israel shall be saved.’’ Then Abraham, Isaac 
and Jacob and all the pious, believing dead shall arise to inherit the prom- 
ises ; then the Gentiles grafted in by faith, the dead of centuries shall also 
arise and inherit with them ; and ¢hen too the nation once blind, rejected 
and sorely punished shall return to their former station of special consecra- 
tion to God, and ‘‘ all Jsrael,’’ not part (comp. Ezek. 39 : 28) but all, thus 
saved shall prove an inestimable blessing to the world. 17. But, as Paul 
well knew, this requires supernatural agency, direct Divine interposition, 
and therefore—mark well—he locates in the future, as our whole argument 
evinces that it must, after this continued blindness and after this gathering 
of Gentiles or the completion of their times, the Coming of the Lord Jesus, 
as ‘‘ the Deliverer,’’ which, in the very nature of the case, seeing that we yet 
live during the time of this blindness and gathering, or Gentile era, must 
refer to the Coming of this Deliverer ‘‘ the second time unto salvation.’’? 
18. That ‘‘ the Deliverer’’ comes at this time (and not at the First Advent). 
is evident by studying the connection in which the passage quoted is found 
am Isaiah. ‘There it stands related to (1) a time when the sins of Israel 
have separated them from God; (2) when their calamities shall be great 
and they need deliverance ; (3) when God will come with vengeance (not 
upen them but) upon their enemies; (4) the nation, as a nation, will 
repent ; (5) when this vengeance shall cause a general fear to prevail ; 
(6) when the Jews shall become a holy nation and ever retain the truth ; 
(7) and when Millennial glory and blessedness shall prevail. 19. The Cove- 
nant promises demand this, as we see from the covenanted Theocratic arrange- 
ment which God has proposed to fulfil, which, as its basis, requires for its 
successful operation, *‘a holy people,’’ and as a consequence a national 
repentance and acceptation of David’s Son, Jesus “the Christ.’’? 20. All 
this comes to pass, because, although now ‘‘ enemies’’ of the Gospel, they 
are ‘‘ as touching the election, beloved for the Father’s sake,’’ i.e. they are a 
covenanted people to whom nationally certain promises given to the lathers 
belong, and, therefore, to verify these promises their restoration is a neces- 
sity. 21. For, God does not change or repent ; His promises to this nation, 
notwithstanding its rebellion, etc., are sure. Otherwise with His fore- 
knowledge, powers, etc., He would not have made and called them. 
22. He concludes, in view of all this, to express his admiration of the 
mercy, wisdom, and knowledge of God, of the profound, deeply laid Divine 
arrangements for salvation, of the marvellous advancement of them as then 
witnessed, of His performing and perfecting them according to His own 
will, and of being the source and end for which all things exist. How can 
we resist such reasoning which falls directly within the anticipated expecta- 
tions of pious Jews and Christian believers ; which expressly warns Gentiles 
against falling into the blunder, alas! now so general, of denying to this 
nation its covenanted position in the Kingdom of God, and which preserves 
a united testimony of inspired men upon a doctrine momentous as to results 
in the future history of the world. Indeed so amazing is the developing 
order of events in the call of the Jewish nation, in its fall, in the gathering 
going on, in the continued blindness, in the assurance of the removal of the 


72 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 112. 


veil and the re-establishment, etc., that we may well say with James, when 
expressing his belief in the same (Acts 15 : 16-18), “‘ known unto God are 
all His works from the beginning of the world.’’ Surely the early Church 
more fully appreciated the Divine Purposes of God in Redemption by keep- 
ing close to the Record, than modern theology (with here and there an ex- 
ception) with all its boasted enlightenment and deeper spirituality. Spirit- 
uality indeed belongs to it, as they also evinced, but it does not transpose 
or alter the Divine arrangements.* 


1 The author is not entirely satisfied with the explanation generally attached to the 
phrase ‘‘ life from the dead.” It certainly includes the idea of greater blessings as verse 
12 does, but may it not actually describe one of the blessings, viz., the resurrection of 
the pious dead, which we have shown (Props. 125-129) is associated with this identical 
restoration and through which unspeakable blessings will be extended to others. Alford 
(Com. loci) thinks that it, at least, implies ‘‘ the glories of the first resurrection, and 
deliverance from the bondage of corruption,’’ without excluding the other idea of 
‘*some further blessed state.’’ One of “the oldest ecclesiastical explanations’’ (so 
Lange, Com. loci) applied it to “‘ the resurrection of the dead’’ (so e.g. Origen, Chrysos- 
torn, Riickert, Meyer, Tholuck, De Wette, etc.). 

2** Come out of Zion,’’ Baines says may denote that Christ ‘ should arise among 
that people, be descended from themselves, or should not be a foreigner.” The Heb. 
is ’’ shall come to Zion’’; the Sep. ‘‘ For the sake of Zion, the Deliverer will come,’’ or 
as some render it ‘‘ the Redeemer shall come on account of Zion,’’ so also Cheldee and 
Latin Vulgate. Hengstenberg, with his Church-Kingdom theory, cannot see how this can 
apply to a literal Zion--to ‘‘ come out of Zion’’.—but must be referred to the Church, for 
it is, in his estimation, only applicable to ‘‘ the Saviour who is present in and with His 
Church.’’ This is a mere quibble, unworthy of the distinguished writer, for even if his 
reasoning had force it would be inapplicable, seeing that it would represent Jesus as 
coming “ outof’’ the Church. If He can do this, He certainly, when He comes “ to Zion,’’ 
as Isaiah says, can manifest Himself ‘‘ out of Zion,” for the latter phrase simply denotes 
the place of manifestation (comp. e.g. Props. 168 and 169). Hengstenberg on this point 
(and others, as Luke 21 : 24; Acts 1:6-8, and3: 19, 20, etc.) has been ably refuted by 
an anon. writer (Proph. Times, vol. 7, p. 65,etc.), who unmistakably shows its connection 
with Zech. 8 : 2-8, “ Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I was jealous for Zion with great 
jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury. Thus saith the Lord, J am returned 
unto Zion and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem,” etc. (see the context and compare with 


other Scriptures, as Deut. 32 : 21-23 ; Zeph. 1 : 12-18, etc.). The simple fact recognized. 


by Paul is that Jesus exerts His Theocratic power in connection with, and as identified with, 
Zion, where the Theocratic-Davidic power was exerted. Vitringa (Bloomfield on Rom. 
11 : 26) supposes also that Paul had Ps. 14 : 7 in view, and blended it with the other. 
This may be correct, and if so corroborates (as it does independently) our position, 
since the restoration is linked with ‘‘ out of Zion,”’ thus : ‘‘ Oh, that the salvation of 
Israel were come ‘‘ out of Zion! ‘Then the Lord bringeth back the captivity of His people, 
Jacob shall rejoice and Israel shall be glad.’’ (The last expression reminds us of 
Augustine’s rendering of Hos. 3 : 5—City of God, B. 18, S. 28—‘‘ And afterward shall the 
children of Israel return and seek the Lord their God and David their King, and shall 
be amazed at the Lord and at His goodness in the latter days.’’) 

3 While some of the rationalistic Jews take but little interest in a national restoration, 
while some are incredulous and reject it, others, and especially the orthodox portion of 
the nation, tenaciously hold to the ancient faith based on the prophecies. They still 
believe what Reuss (His. Ch. Theol., p. 55) ascribes to the Pharisees : ‘‘ Everywhere and 
always they hold that the first condition of realizing the brilliant hopes based upon their 
religious faith was the securing and assuring of the national independence.” ‘This faith 
is a matter of history, attested to by their liturgical prayers, their constant and abiding 
interest in the Holy Land, their pilgrimages to Jerusalem, their earnest desire to be 
buried in its sacred soil, their expressed hopes of areturn (a writer in the Jewish Chronicle 
recently calculated the restoration to take place about a.p. 1880), and their looking, 
longing, and praying for the coming Messiah. A Jew who honestly believes the Old Test. 
cannot but entertain such a faith. The ancient faith is shown in extracts from Jewish 
sources, Rabbinical, Apocryphal, etc., by Brookes, Mede, etc., and, in view of the quota- 
tions given in this work, need not be repeated. While the Radicals (Art. ‘‘ the Jews,” 
Galaxy, Jan., 1872) reject the belief in the coming of the Messiah (which is introductory 


oC” — i 


Prop. 112. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. is 


to restoration), yet the orthodox firmly hold to the twelfth Art. of belief drawn up by 
the celebrated Maimonides : ‘‘ I believe firmly and honestly the Advent of an anointed 
Redeemer, and notwithstianding His remaining away so long, I nevertheless yearn daily 
for His Coming.’ What Milman (His. Jews, vol. 3, p. 183) says of the Jewish belief at 
the time of the Crusades is the continued faith to-day : ‘‘ Though they had been so long 
exiled from that holy soil, though the few Jews who dwelt in Palestine were but as 
strangers in the land, Jewish tradition had still clung, as has been said, with undying 
fondness to their rightful ownership, to the hopes of returning to that blessed country. 
Their restoration to Judea, to Jerusalem, was to be the great work, the final triumph of the 
Messiah, whensoever or wheresoever He would appear.’’ The numerous false Messiahs 
indicate this ardent belief, and how impostors availed themselves of it to the detriment 
of the nation. The Inquisition in Spain (Milman’s His. Jews, vol. 3, p. 311) had certain 
tests by which to discover latent Judaism, and one was “‘ the expectation of the Mes- 
siah’’ which Milman calls (p. 366) the ‘‘ great and consolatory article of their creed,” which 
inspired hope under persecution and distress. Even the Chinese Jews, separated from 
their brethren (p. 496, vol. 2) ‘* entertain distinct though remote hopes of the Coming of 
the Messiah.”” The Jews, too, believe that this restoration will be effected by one in the 
Davidic line as all the prophets testify, hence e.g. the Jews in the time of Mohammed 
rejected his advances and ‘‘ disclaimed a Messiah sprung from the loins of Hagar, the 
bondswoman’’ (Milman). The Prince of the Captivity (Milman, vol. 3, p. 16—so Gibbon, 
etc.) who professed to derive his ancestral line from David, at his inauguration prayed, 
in a low voice, for the restoration of the Kingdom of Israel. Who can number the 
prayers, the pathetic. appeals, the longing supplications that have poured forth from 
Jewish hearts and lips, sustained by prophetical utterances and covenanted relation- 
ship? The Jews are, indeed, mistaken in their rejection of the Messiah, but not in the 
Messianic Kingdom and their connection with it. Rev. Randall (The Handwriting of 
God in Egypt, Sinai, and the Holy Land), referring to the Jews’ place of wailing at Jeru- 
salem and an interesting scene of mourning witnessed by himself, says : ‘‘ But, however 
sincerely they may mourn over the ruins of their demolished temple, no rivers of griet 
can cleanse the sanctuary, no sacrifices of prayer rebuild its walls, for, in the purposes 
of God, it has been utterly and forever overthrown.’ He forgets that Jerusalem is only 
overthrown for a definite period—expressly so stated by Jesus—and that the prophets, 
with united voice, proclaim its restoration. High-minded Gentilism will not delay or 
alter God’s purposes. From such a writer we turn to another, who, more in sympathy 
with the Jew and the Scriptures, says (Rev. Fuller in his Address to the Jews, appended 
to The Gospel its own Witness): ‘‘ You live in expectation of being restored to your own 
land. We expect the same thing, and rejoice in the belief of it. The Old and the New 
Test. agree in predicting it.’’ Yes! those tearful prayers, those mournful supplications, 
that undying yearning, that persistent cleaving to—even amid a sinful unbelief respect- 
ing God’s mode of procedure—God’s promises and God’s faithfulness, will at last be 
answered in triumph and glory. Isa. 30:18, 19, etc., will yet be verified in behalf 
of this afflicted people. 


Obs. 7. The reader will consider how unnatural—even cruel—it would 
be, if the doctrine of a restoration is not to be received, to give so many 
predictions which in their plain grammatical sense teach a future glorious 
national restoration of the Jews to their once possessed land. Why thus 
excite the expectations and hopes of a multitude for many centuries of 
oppression and exile, if they are never to be realized? Would such a 
course of procedure be honorable even in man, knowing as he must the 
deception that would accrue from it? To trifle with the dearest, most 
heart-felt hopes of a nation by language pre-eminently calculated to excite 
the same, is not Divine, and we earnestly repudiate every theory which 
either directly or indirectly charges Holy Writ with such a mode of pro- 
cedure. No! God’s Word is the truth, and the grammatical sense—the 
sense which all men agree is the most legitimate in language—contains the 
plain truth, which God will fulfil at the appointed time. 


It is a matter of amazement how our opponents, in order to rid themselves of these 
predictions which they cannot fairly spiritualize and appropriate to the Ch. Church, 


74 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 112. 


interpret the prophecies, applying part to the past, part to the present, and part to the 
future. It is a favorite theory with some that the promises relating to restoration to the 
land, supremacy, etc., were realized in the reigns of David and Solomon, But they fail 
to answer such questions : why then does David predict them as still future? And why 
do Jeremiah and other prophets, who lived long after Solomon, still locate the fulfilment 
in the future? And why do all associate their realization with a David’s Son so exalted 
and sublime, that David and Solomon sink into comparative insignificance in com- 
parison with Him? And why do the New Test. writers expressly refer these promises 
tu Jesus, the Christ, and locate their fulfilment at the Sec. Advent? If this method 
does not answer every prediction, then refuge is taken in conditionality, just as if the 
oath-bound Covenant of God, the elect and Theocratic position of the nation, did not 
necessitate God—in order to evince His own faithfulness and vindicate His intended 
Theocratic Kingdom—to be faithful in a restoration. Where e.g. is the conditionality 
of Zech. 14, of Luke 1 : 32, 33, of Isa. 65 : 17-25, and a host of other predictions? The 
fact is, that the advocates of conditionality do not honestly and consistently believe in 
their own theory, and the conclusive evidence is found in their appropriating (by the 
process of spiritualizing) these very predictions, and applying them as fulfilled in the 
Ch. Church. Ten thousand instances of such misapplication could readily be pro- 
duced, which leaves the promises of God to the nation and attested to by solemn oath, 
unfulfilled, and presents us a very imperfect Redemption, simply because, following a 
wrong premise, it does not perceive God’s glorious Theocratic Plan, but deliberately— 
without observing the absurdity involved—makes God’s Theocratic Purpose a failure. 


Obs. 8. The reader will specially notice (what completely meets a class 
of objections contained e.g. in Letters to a Millenarian, etc.) that Moses 
after the delivery of the ceremonial law and after the establishment of 
the Theocratic ordering, predicts, Deut. 32, the restoration of the nation 
(e.g. vs. 36-43) after the call and gathering (v. 21 comp. with Rom. 
10:19) of the Gentiles. This exactly corresponds with James’s declaration 
(Acts 15:16) that after the Gentiles are gathered out then the Davidic 
house or Kingdom will be restored. Here we have conclusive evidence 
(fully sustained by the general analogy of prophecy) that all efforts to 
apply these predictions to the Ch. Church, in part or in whole, are 
seriously defective, and opposed to the most decisive (chronological) state- 
ments. Indeed, as our argument unmistakably shows, supported by abun- 
dant testimony of Scripture, the fulfilment is associated with the Second 
Advent of Jesus, David’s Son (comp. next Prop.). 


PRop. 113.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 73 


> 


Proposition 1138. Zhe connection of this Kingdom with Jewish 
restoration necessitates the realization of their predicted repent- 
ance and conversion. 


The restored Theocratic Kingdom is a holy Kingdom. God 
Himself, in the Person of His Son, again condescends to act as 
earthly Ruler, but as He reveals Himself and His associated Rulers 
in a higher and more intimate personal relationship, and as the 
design is to make this a powerful and all-pervading Kingdom, those 
who stand nationally in a covenanted and elect relationship must 
become morally qualified for its establishment. Hence the pre- 
dicted repentance and conversion of the nation. 


Obs. 1. We have passed over Rom. 11, which combines the conversion 
and restoration. So self-evident is this, that our leading opponents con- 
cede this to us. Thus e.g. Dr. Brown (Com., Rom. 8, etc.) interprets 
the chapter as plainly teaching a national conversion and restoration of 
the Jews; he rejects its application to ‘‘ individual Jews,’’ and insists 
upon a ‘‘ national recovery of Israel.’’ We append a few statements of its 
spirit. ‘‘ Until the fulness of the Gentiles be (have) come in, i.e. not the 
general conversion of the world to Christ, as many take it ; for this would 
seem to contradict the latter part of this chapter, and throw the national 
recovery of Israel too far into the future ; besides in v. 15, the Apostle 
seems to speak of the receiving of Israel, not as following, but as contribut- 
ing largely to bring about the general conversion of the world—but, until 
the Gentiles have had their full time of the visible Church all to them- 
selves, while the Jews are out, which the Jews had till the Gentiles were 
brought in.”’ 


We quote simply to indicate his convictions respecting a national conversion and 
restoration and not to indorse his explanation of “the fulness’? (which we rather 
attribute, as the analogy of Scripture teaches, to the completion of the elect, chosen 
body who are to be associated with the Christ as Rulers, etc.). Many others of our 
opposers could thus be quoted. Even Whitby (Com. Rom. 11) asserts that the conver- 
sion and restoration of the Jews was ‘‘ the constant doctrine of the Church of Christ, 
owned by all the Greek and Latin Fathers, and by all commentators he has met with 
on the place.” The pitiful evasions, of Barnes in his commentaries (e.g. Isa. 11 and 
Rom. 11) to avoid a restoration (based on Covenant relationship) are noticeable, while 
conceding (also e.g. 2 Cor. 3 : 16) ‘‘a conversion of the people at large ; a conversion that 
shall be nearly simultaneous ; a conversion en masse.’’ Barnes’s favorite “as if’’ looms 
up conspicuously in this subject—all is figurative or spiritual, and bringing the Jews 
‘out of all nations’’ (e.g. Isa. 66 : 20) is simply converting them in these countries, and the 
great success attending such conversion is “ as if’? caravans of them proceeded to Jeru- 
salem, etc. Such perversions are saddening, coming from good men. Fausset (Com. on 
Isa. 66 : 20), referring to Houbigant, advocating a restoration to the Holy Land, says, 
‘‘ Tt cannot mean the mere entrance of the Jews into the Christian Church ; for such an 
entrance would be by faith, not upon ‘ horses, litters, and mules,’’’ But Dr. Fausset 
forgets how readily our opponents, if need be, can transform those ‘‘ horses’’ into strong 


76 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ‘[TPRop. 118. 


faith, the “‘ litters or coaches’’ into a weak or easy faith, and the ‘‘ mules’’ into a stub- 
born or persistent faith! Greater transformations than these constantly meet us, for as 
the land itself is mentioned in connection with this conversion in various predictions, 
the land is transmuted into the Ch. Church (and even into heaven), It is a little 
difficult to apply solely to conversion the predicted rebuilding of the cities, tilling and 
sowing the land, multiplying man and beast (e.g. Ezek. 36:11, 12, ete.) in ‘‘ the in- 
heritance’’ of ‘‘ my people Israel,’’ but then these are such figurative trifles, in the 
estimation of our opponents, that they may safely be passed by. 


Obs. 2. The conversion and the restoration both result from a personal 
Coming of Jesus. Paul informs us (Rom. 11 : 25, 26) that when the ful- 
ness of the Gentiles is come in, then the blindness befallen Israel shail 
also be removed, because (as the Jews believed), *‘ there shall come out of 
Zion the Deliverer,’’ etc., owing, as our argument has shown, to the Cove- 
nant, ‘‘ for this is my Covenant wnto them,’’ etc. The Apostle could not 
well use stronger language than this to indicate this Pre- Millennial Advent, 
and the resulting conversion and restoration ; because he well knew that 
the Jews understood Zech. 14, etc., to present the same Advent and with the 
same results ; that they held a portion, at least, of Zech. 12 to be connected 
with that period with which he identifies in a crucified Saviour held up as 
the Messiah Coming a second time unto salvation, the prediction : ‘‘ they 
shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for Him,”’ 
ete., linked with the time when their sins shall be removed and the nation 
shall be exalted. This work is specifically assigned to Jesus, as e.g. in Isa. 
49:5,6; Isa. 63:17, 18, etc.; Deut. 18:18, 19 (for the prophet “* xe 
unto me’? includes a deliverer of the people, but greater than Moses),' 
Deut. 32 : 36, etc.; Ezek. 34:11, 12, etc. Compared with passages which 
plainly designate this Shepherd of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, 
Isa. 56:8, ete.? Hence the Messiah, in view of this restoration, received 
from the Jews the significant title of ‘‘ the Consolation of Israel’ (Dr. 
Clarke’s Com., Luke 2:25). This restoration is even foretold in the 80th 
Psalm, where after asking how long God would be angry with His people, 
making them a sport to their enemies, etc., this people is represented by a 
vine brought out of Egypt which God planted in the land, after removing 
the heathen from it, but which is plucked, wasted, devoured, burned, and 
cut down. God is urged to return, and visit, and restore the same vine, 
not another, and the confidence is expressed in verse 17 that this will be 
done by ‘‘ themanof Thy right hand,’’ ‘‘ the Son of man whom Thou madest 
strong for thyself.’’ 'The most explicit prophecies are given. ‘Thus Amos 
9:11, ete., and Acts 15:16, etce., after describing the dispersion of the 
Jewish nation, we have (1) The tabernacle of David fallen and in ruins ; 
(2) the return of God in its behalf; (3) the rebuilding of the same taber- 
nacle fallen and in ruins ; and (4) to avoid mistake it is added: ‘* J will 
build it as in the days of old,’’ i.e. the same Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom 
will be restored under, as covenanted, David’s Son ; (5) it is ‘* the Lord 
that doeth this’’; (6) this is done when ‘‘ I will bring again the captivity of 
my people of Israel, and they shall build the waste cities and inhabit them,”’ 
ete.; (7) and when this takes place, and they are planted on their land, 
‘“ they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given them, 
saith the Lord thy God.’’> In Micah 5:1, 2, 3 (which in this connection 
will bear repeating), there is (1) the birthplace of the Messiah ; (2) His 
Rulership ; (3) that He should be smitten ; (4) owing to this smiting He 
** gives them up,’’ i.e. to captivity, etc., for an appointed time ; (5) then 


it 


ee 


Prop. 113. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 77 


the nation will be restored, Christ manifesting His rule in breaking down 
the confederation of wickedness. Compare Ps. 102:16 and context, Ps. 
148 :2; Isa. 60:1; Isa. 16:5, etc. In Hos. 3:4, 5 the same succession 
is presented : (1) the complete overthrow of the Kingdom, so that ‘‘ the 
children of Israel shall remain many days without a king and without a 
prince ’’; (2) so entire is the dispersion that they are even without a sacri- 
fice, etc.; (3) but ‘afterward (in the latter days) shall the children of 
Israel return,’’ i.e. the same nation that endured this overthrow ; (4) and 
shall acknowledge ‘‘ David their King.’’* Indeed, the restoration of the 
people is indispensable, seeing that they form the Kingdom as seen in its 
inauguration (Ex. 19:6), and as evinced in the Covenant with David, so 
that the presence of David’s Son, of the nation in the land where the 
Kingdom existed 7s requisite. The decided impression made by many 
predictions, as e.g. Ps. 89: 182, etc., is that David’s Son, shall at some 
future time sit on David’s throne, reigning gloriously here on the earth ; 
the magnificence, extent, duration, etc., of which reign, as predicted, has 
not yet been witnessed. ‘The explicit declarations of His obtaining the 
throne of His Father David (not that of another), Luke 1:32; Isa. 9:7; 
Acts 2:30, etc., is in accord with the Covenant promise. But all such 
predictions, in the nature of the case, imply, and in many places are 
actually connected with, the restoration of the nation. For, as David 
expresses it, Ps. 135, ‘‘ the Lord hath chosen Jacob unto Himself, and Israel 
for his peculiar treasure’’ ; and having power to perform all things, and being 
gracious He will relent, verify His memorial, establish them “ im the land 
given fora heritage unto Israel His people,’’ He, at the same time, ‘‘ dawell- 
ing at Jerusalem.’’ Unless we accept of the Divine Order laid down, it is 
impossible to explain the numerous prophecies which describe the Jewish 
nation, as a nation, to experience a blessedness unexampled here on earth. 
If we say, this has been fulfilled, then we Jelittle the Word of God, and 
challenge His foreknowledge ; if we divert these prophecies to a fulfil- 
ment in the Church, then we violate the plainest rules of language and 
make Scripture to utter and give hopes which were never intended to be 
realized.° No! let us receive the Word as it promises, and believe in the 
fulfilment in the future where God locates it, and light and unity at once 
abound. Then the language of Jesus, e.g. Matt. 23:37; Luke 13 : 35, 
etc., receives a force unknown to any other explanation. ‘Thus, in the 
passages just alluded to, we then have (1) the rejection of Jesus by the 
Jews ; (2) the Davidic house Jef¢ desolate (for the city and temple were 
not desolate when He spoke); (3) Christ’s removal from’ them ; (4) His 
return to them some time in the future ; (5) the removal of the desolation 
implied at His return ; (6) which implication is fully sustained by what 
the Jews shall then say, ‘‘ Blessed is He that cometh.’’ etc., as 1s seen by 
the universal Jewish application of this by Jews to the restoration of that 
. house, and by reference to Ps. 118 : 26, which stands related with a special 
deliverance of ‘‘Israel.’’ It is simply to he faithless if we deny this, 
because Christ is ‘‘ the man ordained’ to perform it ; and the assurance is 
given that, strange and astonishing as it may seem to the world, He will 
do it, Isa. 49:6; Isa. 62:1, 2; Ezek. 34,: 11-13, ete.° Hence Jesus, 
never in word or act, discountenanced in His followers His connection with 
David’s throne and Kingdom, and the necessary restoration of the nation. 
He defended the acclamations of the people when He entered the city, fore- 
shadowing His royal claim, although linked, as the prophets and Covenant, 


78 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 113. 


with the Davidic Kingdom. He left His own disciples down fo the very 
last moment (Acts 1:6), in the belief that His Kingdom was truly one 
connected with the restored nation under the Theocratic-Davidic rule. ‘The 
only error that He attempted to correct was that in relation to the time 
when it was to be performed, leaving it either indefinitely in the future or 
limiting it with a future (unknown as to time) personal Coming. ‘The 
fact is, that the restoration is so blended with the personal reign of Christ, 
as David’s Son, that they cannot, without gross violence, be separated, and 
therefore, on this very ground alone, some reject such a restoration, declar- 
ing that if the one is admitted, the other must follow, for the David, the 
Lord, then reigning over them is also with them in the land, etc." 


1Some of the Fathers have a remark worthy of notice: “ Neither Moses, the repre- 
sentative of the law, nor Miriam, the representative of the prophets, nor Aaron, the 
representative of the priesthood and its sacrificial rites, could bring the Israelites into 
the possession of the promised land. This was reserved for Joshua, who was in name 
and conduct a lively type of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.’’ How applicable this 
is, will be conclusively seen when the Mill. age is ushered in under the auspices of 
Jesus. 

2 Alexander and others endeavor to make ‘‘ the outcasts of Israel’? mean “the elect 
Gentiles.” This is far-fetched. We admit that the elect Gentiles being engrafted belong 
to Israel, but those alluded to are not the Israel, but the outcasts of Israel, and hence to 
make it fit the Gentiles it must be shown that they were first of Israel, then cast out, and 
then regathered. 

3 Amos 9 : 11, with the connection is so decisive in the ‘‘ building it as in the days of 
old,” etc., that Calmet, Clarke, and others frankly confess that nothing has yet occurred 
to meet the demands of the prophecy. Clarke (Com. loci) admits that this refers to a 
literal restoration to their own land under the Messiah. Bh. Newcome, following some 
mss. of the Syriac, the Arabic, renders (as Acts 15 : 17) the phrase ‘‘ that they may pos- 
sess the remnant of Edom,’’ by ‘‘ that the residue of men may seek Jehovah, and all the 
heathen who are called by my name,” substituting Adam, men, or mankind in place of 
Edom. ‘This is not necessary, seeing that many critics, allowing the usage of the Jews 
(who e.g. applied Edom to Rome, etc.), which seems to be imitated in Acts 15:17, 
make Edom equivalent to Gentiles. The critical student will observe that the language 
forbids the notion of conditionality, for the promise is not only positive, but the result 
as actually experienced is given. The same is true of many other predictions. 

4 Brookes’s Hl. Proph. Interp. givesa good explanation of the image Ephah and teraphim 
—so various commentators. In reference to the phrase ‘’ David their King,’’ Fausset 
(Com. Jer. 30 : 9, which he also applies to a future restoration of the Jews to Palestine) 
says of it: ‘‘No king of David’s seed has held the sceptre since the captivity ; for 
Zerubbabel, though of David’s line, never claimed the title ‘ King.’ The Son of David, 
Messiah, must therefore be meant: so the Targum (cf. Isa. 55:3, 4; Ezek. 34 : 23, 
24 ; Hos. 3, 5; Rom. 11 : 25-32). He was appointed tg the throne of David (Isa. 9:7; 
Luke 1 : 32).’’ To this we add, it has been customary to give successors the name of a 
progenitor, as the Cesars, etc. 

5 It makes one sad to read how the plainest statements are discarded for a typical, 
spiritual, or mystical interpretation. This, too, is found in works exerting a powerful 
influence in shaping scriptural application. The strangest part is, that some works are 
flatly contradictory on this subject. Thus e.g. Lange’s Com., having editors of diverse 
views, contradicts its teaching. Take Drs. Craven, Lillie, Van Oosterzee, Auberlen, etc., 
and compare their utterances, so favorable to the covenanted and predicted conversion 
and restoration, with those of Drs. Schmoller, Briggs, Fairbairn, Shedd, etc., that 
advocate the opposite, and a wide contrast is presented, which forms a blemish to the 
work. One party or the other certainly is in error, and teaches that which is misleading. 

6 Jesus is formed for this very purpose (Isa. 49 : 5) ‘‘ to bring Jacob again to God,’’ there- 
fore we may rest assured that it will be performed. The reader will oberve the marg. 
reading of our version which agrees with many commentators, as Clarke, Barnes, Lowth, 
etc., in view of the mss. Aquila, Chaldee, Arabic, etc., which read, ‘* And that Israel unto 
Him might be gathered.” -Consistency with the tenor of the chapter requires this, or a 
similar, reading. God will perform this work (Isa. 44 : 7, 8). 

7 V'o make these predictions, thus connected with the personal Advent of the Messiah, 


Prop. 113.] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 79 


conditional (as some Sec. Adventists, Seventh Day Baptists) would be to declare the Sec. 
Advent itself conditional. 'To make the conversion and restoration something to precede 
the Sec. Advent (as Hodge, Barnes, Luthardt, etc.) is to reverse the order given by the 
prophets. To leave out the Sec. Coming as the important and essential factor in the 
national restoration is simply to ignore an abundance of Scripture testimony bearing on 
the subject. This will be seen as we proceed in the argument. In reference to this 
subject the student will, in order to observe the completeness of our argument, refer to 
the additional testimony given under Props. 121, 122, 133, ete. There is much Scripture 
bearing on this point, some of which being more obscure must be interpreted in the 
light of the plain and decisive passages. Thus e.g. the interesting and deep represent- 
ative (“‘ figurative men,”’ so Dr. Clarke, etc.—i.e. representative men, men who prefigure 
or represent), chapters 3 and 4 (comp. with ch. 6, etc.) of Zech. exhibit the personal 
_ agency of Jesus in this restoration, as ‘‘ the Branch.” Whatever diversity may exist in 
explaining the details, it is evident that the work of ‘‘ My servant the Messiah’’ (so 
Chaldee) is delineated to be in the latter days. In Micah 2 : 13, in immediate connec- 
tion with the restoration and the presence of the King, some even make “ the Breaker” 
the one who gives deliverance (and among my notes is the following rendering) : “ He 
that forceth a passage is come up before them ; they have forced a passage and have 
passed through the gate, and are gone forth by it. And their King passeth before them, 
even Jehovah at the head of them” (comp. Zech. 2 : 10-13 ; 14 : 3-5, etc.). 


Obs. 3. This repentance, over against Ernesti and others, is positively 
covenanted to them, Isa. 44 : 22, 23; Rom. 11 : 26, 27; Isa. 59:19, 20, 21; 
Jer. 31:2, 3, etc. The «inchoate fulfilment of Joel 2:28, etc, as 
described in Acts 2:17, etc., isno impediment but a@ confirmation of our 
view, ‘because the application of Joel to certain events, miraculous and 
astounding in their nature, not only indicates them as typical or an earnest 
of a future realization (Prop. 170), but affords a positive assurance that the 
entire prophecy as it stands shall surely be fulfilled. Jn Joel it is con- 
nected (1) with the terrible day of the Lord, time of vengeance ; (2) with 
the bringing back again ‘‘ the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem ’’; (8) with 
the recovery of my ‘‘ heritage Israel’’ ** scattered among the nations ’’; (4) 
with the Coming of the Lord, the harvest, the complete overthrow of God’s 
enemies, the dwelling of God (as He once did as a ruler) in Zion, the 
blessedness of the nation, the then holiness of Jerusalem, the continued and 
everlasting prosperity of the people and of Jerusalem. We dare not sepa- 
rate what God has thus joined ; and as God has evidenced His faithfulness 
and power ina partial, incioate fulfilment, we reverently trust in the 
same faithfulness and power for an ample verification of all the particu- 
lars enumerated by the prophet. The judgments on the Jewish nation, as 
we have repeatedly shown, exist down to the Sec. Advent (as e.g. Matt. 
23:27; Matt. 24; Zech. 14, etc.), but these same judgments, Isa. 32 : 15, 
continue down “‘ wntil the Spirit be poured upon us from on high’’; and 
this Spirit we are assured is ‘‘ then’’ bestowed, Ezek. 36 : 24-26, when “I 
will take you from among the heathen;’’ etc., and restore ‘‘ to their own 
land that I gave to your fathers’’—fruitfulness, etc., being predicated of the 
land. See when the Lord will ‘‘ turn to the people a pure language,’’ etc., 
Zeph. 3:8, 9, and is it not when He will “‘ rise wp to the prey,’’ “‘ gather 
the nations and kingdoms,’”’ ‘‘ to pour upon them His fierce anger,’ etc., 
thus describing the period at the Sec. Advent? Look at the promises, so 
numerous, that when this nation is converted, obtains this happy deliver- 
ance, it shall never more be afflicted, etc., and should there be any difficulty 
in locating their fulfilment, if we truly believe in their realization, when it 
is positively taught that down to the personal Advent of Jesus, tribulation 
shall, more or less, accompany the nation? ‘This repentance, conversion, 


80 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 113. 


restoration, as prophet after prophet declares, if once experienced is effect- 
ual, needs no repetition, etc., Ezek. 16:63; Zeph. 3:9; Isa. 62:12; 
Jer. 31 : 31-84; Isa. 45:17, etc. Indeed, to produce proof on this point, 
nearly every prophet can be extensively quoted. And, a remarkable feat- 
ure pervading a// the predictions is this: that God, althongh men ma 

disallow it, will so order all things that when the period of fulfilment 
arrives, when the time that the realization of the Covenant comes, this 
very nation so long stubborn and unrepentant, so long the rejecters of the 
Messiah, shall be repentant and believing ; that after protracted correction, 
it will again experience mercy, and always 77 the land from which it was 
driven. The miraculows events connected with this period cause many to 
stumble in their acceptance of it, but this is not strange, if we consider the 
design of all this, viz., that it is part of the Divine Plan, and an important 
factor, in promoting the salvation of the race. The events themselves are 
of a nature dmpossible for man or mortal or physical forces to accomplish, 
demanding, if performed at all, direct Divine aid. ‘The taunt so long used 
by scientists and others, that if such a God as the Bible describes does 
exist, He should then manifest Himself by direct Divine interference, will 
then be effectually removed.' Jor, then God, so long withdrawn, will 
again, as He has promised, reveal Himself to man and exert His marvel- 
lous power in his behalf, but, mark it, only in the one direction always 
observed by Him, viz., in that of the only nation under heaven favored with 
a covenanted Theocratic relationship. ‘This relationship, for a time held 
practically in abeyance, He cannot restore until the time comes of His 
return, ‘The Divine Sovereignty now exercised in a way only susceptible 
to faith and to reason under the influence of grace, will again give place to 
that direct manifestation of power, etc., under the restored Theocratic 
rule. Hence it is important in regarding this repentance to notice (what, 
alas ! so many overlook) that it 1s controlled by the principles of the in- 
coming dispensation. ‘* The times of the Gentiles’’ having ended, Jewish 
times are again in the ascendency, so that in reference to the manner of 
this repentance, the order laid down, the miraculous influences connected 
with it, the time in which the work is to be effected, etc., we are to be 
governed solely by what is predicted ; and no attempt should be made to 
prescribe how it must be done, or to force it within the limits assigned to 
present times. It is sufficient for us to know, that God’s mode of proced- 
ure has always been at variance with that which man in his wisdom vainly 
proposes ; and that when a new era has arrived, it has been inaugurated 
strictly in accord with His own Word but never in accord with popular 
expectations. ‘I'he views so universally prevalent on this subject, so oppo- 
site to the simple language of the Bible and the child-like faith of the early 
Church, are, on this ground alone, open to suspicion. It is enough for us 
to receive predictions, and, actuated by the past literal fulfilment, by faith 
in God, to believe in them as recorded without the addition of another and 
differing sense, and of apologies for ancient weakness and credulity.? 


‘In the very nature of the case these scientists demand an exhibition of powers, etc., 
which the Bible shows, owing to sinfulness, has been withdrawn until a certain period 
of time has expired and a certain number of believers are obtained, when it shall again 
be restored. Presuming the Bible to be true, the demand is presumptuous ; if it be false, 
how then are we to explain some facts, (1) that such power, just as the prophets have 
predicted, has been withdrawn ; (2) that God does not now, just as predicted, con- 
descend to act as an earthly Ruler as He once did ; (3) that this nation, just as predicted, 
is preserved notwithstanding its dispersion, thus indicating the restoration of this rule, 


= —— 


PROP. 113.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 81 


\ 


as also predicted ; (4) the gathering of believers going on, as predicted, during this period 
of withdrawal, etc. Now, if there are so many particulars verified, why may not the 
rest be? This line of argument is only briefly given—as suggestive of the true method 
of dealing with the prophets, etc., as fairness and honesty require. The Theocratic 
Rulership being withdrawn, it is not reasonable to expect God's direct intervention, until 
the time comes when it shall be restored ; then it comes again with great power. 

* The conversion of the Jews is a miraculous one, i.e. is one dependent upon seeing 
the One whom they have pierced (Zech. 12 : 10, which the Sep. ‘“ they shall look upon 
Me because they insulted Me’’), upon being pleaded with face to face (Ezek. 20 : 35), is 
in brief, a conversion similar to that Paul experienced. A writer, initials I. I. (Proph. 
Times, Jan., 1870), presents an interesting comment (which, if not mistaken, Gilfillan 
also somewhere produces) on 1 Cor. 8 : 15, a passage of difficulty to some expositors, 
** And last of all He was seen of me also, as of one born out of due time.” Taking the 
ground that this being ‘‘ torn out of due time” denotes ‘‘ prematurely,’’ i.e. before the 
time—the time fixed for the Appearing of Jesus—he refers it to the manner of Paul’s 
conversion (miraculously) as representative of a similar, astounding, miraculous conversion 
of the Jews at the Sec. Advent when the latter shall also see Jesus and be overwhelmed 
with shame, sorrow, and contrition. This certainly gives a cogency to the phrase, which 
no other explanation excels. No one who compares the Scriptures on this point can fail 
to be arrested by the astounding display of special manifestation, and its resultant effect, 
then exhibited. This leads us briefly to say that the theories advanced by some that the 
nation shall be converted through the instrumentality of present means and agencies 
(however some may thus be converted) is certainly erroneous ; or that this will be done 
and then some Christian nation, »s England, shall convey them back (however this may 
be done with an unconverted portion before the Advent, or, after the Advent to others) 
to Palestine and thus preserve itself from the desolating judgments of God (comp., 
however, Thorp’s The Destinies of the British Empire, where this notion is opposed) is 
defective in that it ignores the means designated by the Word. Faber, in his writings, 
has some valuable remarks on this last point, but loses much of the force of Scripture 
by not noticing the foundation of all this in the contemplated Theocratic ordering and in 
not pressing the annexed personal Advent and Theocratic reign on David's restored 
throne and Kingdom. 


Obs. 4. The mention of this repentance and restoration is designed to 
meet the objection of some (e.g. Dr. Oswald, The Kingdom, and The Saints’ 
Inheritance by Hull) that only the spiritual Israel, dead and living, are 
brought to the land and inherit it, and that the nation now dispersed, etc., 
‘is never to be restored. ‘The strong language employed in declaring that 
no such restoration as we present is taught by the prophets, is refuted by 
numerous converging statements. We may well ask, What then becomes 
of the election of that nation ; is it cast off forever? What becomes of the 
direct Covenant made only with that nation ; is it altered or spiritualized to 
exclude the nation assuch? What becomes of the Davidic throne and 
Kingdom ; can it exist unless the nation with which it is identified (not a 
spiritualized nation) is restored? If all that are restored are only the 
spiritual seed, why this repentance necessary in their case? If the restored 
are only such, what are we to do with the multiplication of the race, the 
rebuilding, etc.—is this all conditional, or is it all to be spiritualized? If 
the nation as a nation is excluded, what becomes of Moses’s declarations 
respecting that nation in Deut. ete.; what of Solomon’s prayer in 2 Chron. 
6; what of David’s expressed hopes pertaining to it, etc.? The reader, if 
he has carefully followed the Propositions, step by step, can multiply just 
such questions. The mistake mentioned arises from not observing the 
nature of this Kingdom and to whom covenanted ; the continued election of 
this people ; the wall of partition only broken down between believers and 
not between the Jewish nation and other nations ; the difference the Word 
makes between those who inherit the Kingdom and the subjects of it ; that 
Post and prophets speak of the Israel cut off for a time and, with no dis- 


82 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 1138. 


crimination as is supposed, have the same nation brought back again ; the 
design intended to be accomplished by this Kingdom, etc. ‘The blunders 
that men may commit in endeavoring to present the order of events, is no 
reason why we should discard a doctrine so clearly annunciated, and so 
dearly held by the early Church. Indeed, if this doctrine were not found 
in the Bible, then an essential link in the Divine plan were lacking. That 
it is taught, is evidenced by the universally admitted fact that in the 
grammatical usage of the language it 1s wawdowbtedly contained therein ; our 
opponents rejecting it only on two grounds: either, that it is conditional, 
or, that another sense, unknown to the ancient worthies and first produced 
by Origen, is to be engrafted upon the prophecies. ‘The very simplicity of 
the plan causes men to discard it for something, in ¢heir estimation, 
higher and better. The truth of the matter is this: if men were not in- 
fluenced by a previously entertained theory, they would see at once that the 
experience alleged in the case of Israel’s restoration is so distinctively that 
of a nation unconverted and in the flesh—a nation long under punishment 
for sin and coming under converting influences only when God comes to 
punish the nations of the earth ; a nation of whom, when thus newly con- 
verted and restored, an abundant increase of children, beasts, etc., is pred- 
icated, that in no consistent shape or sense can be applied to the saints of 
this and former dispensations without a resort to Origen’s system of 
interpretation, and a consequent violation of the plainest rules of language. 
No! No!! let brethren (whom we love) pardon our zeal if it seems too 
strong in this matter, for we feel this doctrine to be exceedingly precious 
and intimately connected with the Divine Honor and Purpose. Let men-say 
what they will, it is self-evident that God never would convey an utterly 
erroneous doctrine in the face of language itself, and deceive an entire 
nation with the assurance of a special and continued Covenant and election 
that does not exist, The apology, that God meant to finally spiritualize 
this, avails not, since God nowhere asserts such a change ; since it is sheer 
inference drawn from previously formed ones ; since the Covenant itself 
and the promises derived from it stand to-day wnchanged, uncancelled. It 
is best to add here, leaving the matter for future explanation and extension, 
that while it is true that the saints will be fully identified with the Jewish 
restoration—their resurrection and translation preceding it—being also of 
“the seed of Abraham,’’ yet as intimated, and as will be shown (Prop. 
118, 154, 156, etc.,) they are separate and distinct in honor, position, ete., 
from the Jewish and spared nations, forming with Christ an associated 
body of rulers having peculiar. privileges, etc., not bestowed upon any 
others. A fruitful source of error on the restoration arises from not dis- 
criminating between the saints and others, between the exalted brethren 
and coheir’s of Christ and the subjects over whom they reign with 
Christ, between the inheritors of the Kingdom and the Kingdom itself. 
Planting ourselves with unswerving faith om the Covenant, credulous as it 
may seem, it embraces God’s promises as recorded, as e.g. Lev. 26 : 40-45, 
ete., that He will fulfil the same. 


We give several specimens of opposite views. Dr. Oswald (The Kingdom, p. 235, 


etc.) objects to the national restoration of the Jews to their own land on the ground that 


as the restoration of Sodom, etc., is also promised in connection and as the Scriptures 
say it shall be ‘‘ an utter and eternal desolation,’”’ ‘‘ Sodom, manifestly, is to have no 
restoration, and as Jerusalem’s restoration is to be, if we may so speak, contempora- 
neous with Sodom’s it will be never.’? Hence he searches for another meaning, forget- 
ing that in the very same connection he advocates a new recreated earth, which restitution 
evidently embraces Sodom and Gomorrah, thus limiting, as the Scriptures often do, the 


EE —e—— a 


Prop. 1138. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 83 


word “ eternal,” upon which his entire argument is based. The land he makes a type 
of the future renewed earth, and makes the believers —and not the nation—to inherit it. 
But that it is no type is self-evident from the express promises that its ruined cities, waste 
places, etc., should be restored in far greater prosperity, fruitfulness, etc. The renewal 
of the land does not destroy its identity or geographical position, just as the renewal 
(glorification) of man does not change his identity. As to making the resurrected and 
translated saints inherit it (for this they do in virtue of coheirship with Christ) only 
(comp. Fairbairn, Typology of Scripture, p. 267, etc.), this is utterly opposed by the special 
promise of the increase of children (for the saints, coheirs with Christ, neither marry 
nor are given in marriage), the multiplication of cattle, the supremacy of the nation over 
others, the remarriage of the nation, the covenanted relationship the nation sustains to 
the Davidie dynasty, the perpetuation of the race, the distinction between the New 
derusalem state and that of the earthly Jerusalem, the reign of the saints, etc. Oswald 
builds largely on the inadvertency of Dr. Cumming, who has the fire mentioned by Peter 
co-extensive with the earth and the saints in mid-air, and pertinently enough asks, how 
then can the Jews be restored? But the promises of God are not annulled by any 
blunders of interpretation that good men may fall into ; and that fire (comp. Prop. 150 
with those that immediately precede and follow it) does not affect the restoration. 
Oswald, to prove that ‘‘ a spiritual Israel’ alone is restored, quotes Ezek. 37 : 21 and 
Ezek. 37 : 12-14. For the latter, see Prop. 126 ; as to the former the reader can readily 
see by the context that it is only applicable to the Jewish nation as a nation, for the 
nation was divided into two Kingdoms, was defiled by transgression and idolatry, can 
only ‘‘ multiply” and “ dwell in the land that I have given unto Jacob my servant, 
wherein your fathers have dwelt ; and they shall dwell therein, even they and their children 
and their children’s children forever,’’ etc. This last sentence alone effectually demolishes 
his and Fairbairn’s typical theory. We are sorry that Oswald so far overlooks the cove- 
nanted relationship of the Jewish nation to the land, and God’s promises that at some 
future time He will for His own name's sake and glory ‘remember His Covenant,’’ that he 
could pen the following sentence: “ What more right has the Jew to that land than the 
Gentile? The remotest South Sea Islander has a title as valid, to that portion of Syria 
of which Jerusalem was the metropolis, as the lineal descendant of’Jacob.’’ Alas! 
when will believers admit that this anger of God’s resting on the nation has its limit , 
that Jerusalem is only trodden down until ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles’’ are ended ; that, 
as the Scriptures abundantly affirm, they are still ‘‘ beloved for the Father’s sake,’’ and 
will find their election reconfirmed in power and glory. It is a matter of amazement, 
therefore, that he can, in the light of the abounding testimony assert : ‘‘ the return as 
a future fact, of the Jews to Palestine, is never spoken of in the sacred Scriptures at all.” 
Wilful blindness is the most difficult to remove. 

Waggoner (Ref. Age to Come) reproduces the same ; and he makes the return of Israel 
to their land a return of the saints, quoting passages that are readily spiritualized, and 
those that will not so readily bend he has conditional. He makes the unwarranted 
assertion that ‘‘no prophecy contemplates anything more than full permission, and vol- 
untary acceptance’ (comp. Prop. 18), and under this unbelieving assumption easily rids 
-himself of oath-bound promises. Whatever will not yield to such handling is covered by 
the return from the Babylonian Captivity, thus dwarfing some of the sublimest predic- 
tions in the Bible. The only point of real strength that he presents in his entire 
argument is that referring to the conditionality of Ezek., chs. 40-48, with which we fully 
agree (see Prop. 172). His theory of a thousand years’ desolation of the earth after the 
Advent (the revival of a notion that a Jewish Rabbi long ago asserted) necessitates him to 
get rid of a national Jewish restoration, seeing that the latter would be fatal to the same. 
We sometimes feel sad to see how a preconceived theory will cause excellent men to 
overlook, or to rid themselves of some of, the plainest promises of God, founded, not in 
isolated predictions, not on this or that passage, but in the covenanted T heocratic ordering 
itself. Even the predictions themselves cannot be set aside, for if they describe one 
period of time here on the earth under the personal reign of Christ and the saints, then 
it is very easy to see that these descriptions include the Jewish nation and the spared 
Gentile nations—which is abundantly confirmed by a comparison of them. Any theory 
that cannot receive all of God’s Word in its plain grammatical sense, but must resort to 
spiritualizing, accommodation, etc., to make them tit in, is certainly liable to grave 
suspicion. 


Obs. 5. The restoration of the nation cannot, and will not, take place 
without a repentance ; and therefore it becomes essential to notice some 


84 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 113. 


more particulars relating to it. It is no ordinary repentance, and not 
merely that of individuals, but extraordinary and national in its extent, 
Micah 7 : 15-20, etc. It is caused by the judgments of God, Mal. 3 : 2-4; 
Hos. 5 : 153; Isa. 30 : 18-19, and the personal presence of the King, Micah 
2: 12-13; Ezek. 20 :33-44; Zeph. 3:15. It is done that God’s faithful- 
ness may appear, Hzek. 36 : 22; Isa. 43 : 25; Isa. 44 : 22-26. It is*be- 
stowed in the land given to their fathers into which they are brought, 
Ezek. 36 : 24-35 ; Jer. 33: 7-16; Jer. 32 :37-44 ; Jer. 31, etc. The reign 
of the Messiah is intimately connected with it, as e.g. in Jer. 23 : 3-8; 
Ezek. 34 : 23-31, etc. The absence of such national repentance for the last 
eighteen hundred years is no proof that it never will be accomplished. On 
the other hand, it is decisive that it will yet come to pass, if we but consider 
that this very absence of repentance—excepting in individual cases—this 
‘* veil’’ of unbelief covering them, is also predicted. Seeing the prophecy 
in the one case verified before our eyes, it is faithless to deny the other. 
Paul tells us (Rom. 11; 2 Cor. 3:16) that this ‘‘ vail’ shall finally be 
removed, corroborating the testimony of the prophets. There is a divine 
unity in all the writers on this point, worthy of a revelation from God ; 
and it becomes distinctive just in proportion as a comparison of their 
utterances is instituted. So striking is this, that men of all classes, even 
the most hostile to our belief, fully admit it, however some may be inclined 
to spiritualize certain portions of it, as the Coming and reign of the 
Messiah. The repentance and restoration is somuch the burden of proph- 
ecy, runs through and enters into the Divine Plan so thoroughly, that its 
almost universal admission is presented by a witness so impartial (owing to 
his opposition to our doctrine) that all will acknowledge its force.) Dr. 
Whitby on Rom. 11, speaking of this repentance and restoration of the 
Jews emphatically says: ‘‘ it hath been the constant doctrine of the Church 
of Christ, owned by the Greek and Latin Fathers, and by all commentators 
Ihave met on this place.’’ But right here isan inconsistency in many mod- 
ern writers, to which allusion has been made, and which deserves repeated 
notice. They acknowledge that the prophecies describe a Jiteral repentance 
and restoration but refuse credence ¢o the time, and manner, and accom- 
paniments of the same as also portrayed by the prophets. Why this 
change of time after, to one before the Advent; of this supernatural inter- 
position into one of ordinary means ;* of this personal presence of David’s 
Son, and introducing a spiritual Coming in its place ; of this transposition 


of a visible 'Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom into an invisible reign, etc. YY 


What satisfactory reason can be assigned for introducing an entire new 
element of interpretation which emasculates some of the most precious of 
God’s promises to man? Where is the authority for this most arbitrary 
dealing with the Word? Are the rules for such a proceeding given author- 
itatively by God or man ; and if so, where found? Simple consistency, if 
nothing else, demands that if ove portion of these prophecies is conceded to 
be literal (i.e. to mean what the laws of language present) then the other 
portion must be understood in like manner. For, having applied the literal 
interpretation, compatibility requires its continnance, wnless God Himself, 


* Some very recent writers, however, on that side, as e.g. Fairbairn, seeing that their 
theory is not commensurate with the prediction, begin to confess that extraordinary 
means ‘* Pentecostal,” etc., will be added. Such predictions as Ezek. 36 : 8-38 and 37: 
1-28 ; Zech. 12 : 1-14, etc., influence such concessions. 


OE 


Prop. 118. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 85 


the only Being having authority to indicate a change, in express terms 
revokes it, or informs us that it is to be understood differently. Besides, 
itis this literal interpretation that becomes history, doctrine, evidence of 
inspiration, etc. Is it not time, in this matter, to discriminate between the 
Word and human opinions attached to it? ‘Therefore, cleaving to the 
Word, as i¢ reads, our argument holds that, having no authority to make 
any change, we must receive this repentance, restoration, and the reign and 
Kingdom identified with it, precisely on the same ground of interpretation. 
And, it will not answer for the believer in God’s Word, in the face of the 
Incarnation, etc., to reject any portion of these promises because he cannot 
tell how, if accepted as the Word plainly indicates, they can be fulfilled ; 
for God, the All-sufficient, 1s abundantly able to take care of their fulfil- 
ment. 


Obs. 6. The attention of the reader is called, briefly, to the order of 
repentance as foretold by the Divine Spirit. The fulfilment being future, 
we must be entirely guided, in our own estimate of it, by the predictions of 
the Word. Now, first of all, the fact must be kept in view that a part of 
the Jewish nation (those of Judah and Benjamin) is restored to the land 
and occupy Jerusalem previous to the open Parousia of Jesus with His 
saints. ‘This is distinctly foreshown in Zech. 14:2, where the forces of 
Antichrist are represented as victorious over a portion of the nation which 
has reoccupied Jerusalem, when the Lord Himself shall directly interfere in 
their behalf, and Judah is subsequently (v. 14) mentioned as especially 
related to the city. This is repeated, Zech. 12:2, where the hosts of 
Antichrist are declared to ‘‘ be in the siege both against Judah and against 
Jerusalem.’’ <A part of the nation under political influences, and probably 
under the auspices of some government favorably disposed (various writers 
refer to England), is thus restored to Palestine 77 a state of unbelief, and 
thus drinks the last dregs of Jewish tribulation. This partial restoration 
must be carefully distinguished from the one under the Messiah, for ¢his‘is 
- a restoration which means suffering and terrible persecution by Anti- 
christ, while the other is full of blessing.’ This restoration will be, in all 
probability, detween the two stuges of the Sec. Advent, and, owing to the 
unbelief of the nation in Jesus as the Messiah, will result in the re-establish- 
ment of a temple, a splendid temple service, a return to the Mosaic ritual 
and former distinctive national usages. This persistent rejection of Jesus 
as the true Messiah will cause the fearful tribulation predicted to over- 
whelm them and plunge them in despair. But when their fond dreams of 
nationality and prosperity are cruelly crushed under the tyrannical reign of 
Antichrist (whom they first receive, and then in some way offend); when 
the day of the Lord Jesus has arrived and the nation, covenanted and 
elect, is at last to be qualified for the contemplated Theocratic ordering, 
then we find (Zech. 14 and 12) that the Lord and His saints shall come in 
behalf of the distressed portion of the nation, and bestow (through the 
sanguinary overthrow of Antichrist) to the distressed the prayed-for 
deliverance. ‘The Lord shall save ‘‘ Judah first’? (Zech. 12:7) and He 
(v. 10) ‘‘ will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, the sparit of grace and of supplications : and they shall look upon 
Me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourneth 
for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitter- 
ness for his first-born. In that day shall there be a great mourning in 


\ 


86 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 113. 


Jerusalem,’’ etc. (Some representatives of the ten tribes are also present, 
as in ‘‘ house of Levi, family of Shimei,’’ or Sep., ‘‘ Simeon,’’ but Judah 
is largely predominant and hence most prominently mentioned.) When 
these unbelieving Jews are thus brought through terrible chastening to 
find their fond hopes crushed and themselves in a direful extremity, the 
sudden, supernatural appearance of Jesus on the Mount of Olives with His 
associated army—the magnificence of the King and the splendor of His 
companions—the Divine exertion of power on their enemies—the astonish- 
ing and sublime accompaniments of the Advent evidencing the miraculous 
—the glory transcending all that mortal eye ever before witnessed—the 
Spirit of God impressing this upon hearts softened by fearful suffering—the 
words of authority, mercy, and love enforced by Divine power—all this 
will so affect these Jews that the most heart-felt repentance will ensue. (God 
has predicted it, and it will, therefore, be verified. ? 

Judah is saved by the personal interference of Jesus, the Messiah, while 
Antichrist is crushed before them (the remainder of Judah being afterward 
gathered and added), but Israel (the ten tribes) is brought in at least forty 
years after the overthrow of Antichrist and after the restoration of Judah. 
The evidence of a separate conversion and restoration in time, is over- 
whelming, and has been noticed by numerous ancient and modern writers. 
If we turn to Ezek. 37 : 15-28 we are assured that the ten tribes shall be 
joined to Judah so that they form ove nation and one kingdom in their 
own land, wherein their fathers dwelt, where God will cleanse them, mul- 
tiply and abundantly bless them under the rule of the glorious David. But 
they must first pass through a purifying process, for in Ezek. 20 : 33-44, 
when God ‘‘ will bring you out from the people and will gather you out of 
the countries wherein ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with a 
stretched out arm and with fury poured out,’’ it is added, to indicate the 
process: ‘“‘ And I will bring you into the wilderness of the people, and 
there will I plead with you face to face. Like as I pleaded with your fathers 
in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so will I plead with you, saith the 
Lord God. And I will cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring 
you into the bond of the Covenant ; and I will purge out from among you 
the rebels, and them that transgress against me: I will bring them forth 
out of the country where they sojourn, and they shall not enter into the 
land of Israel ; and ye shall know that Iam the Lord.’’ When thus purged 
they shall be brought ‘‘ into the land of Israel, into the country for the 
which I lifted up mine hand to give it to your fathers,’’ deeply penitent 
(for ‘* ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye 
have committed’’), and God shall be sanctified in them.’ 

Why this preference is shown to Judah is known to God ; but past history 
suggests that it may be done because Judah is more directly in line attached 
to the Dayidic house, manifested its adhesion to it more strongly, was less 
addicted to idolatry, and has the King Himself in tribal lineage. If it 
be objected (as some do), that if Jesus thus appears for the conversion of 
the nation, it is then ‘‘ a special favor’’ and He thus becomes ‘* a respecter 
‘of persons,’’—this is a confounding of things that differ. The prophets 
speak of it as a special, distinguishing favor, for which the nation is 
indebted to God’s mercy and love, and which grows out of the elect cove- 
nanted position of the nation, and must, of necessity, be manifested to realize 
the Theocratic Kingdom, which becomes an inestimable blessing to Jew and 
Gentile. Paul’s argument in Rom. 11 culminates in the declaration that 


EE —_ 


Prop. 113.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 87 


this very favor of reception and restoration results in increased riches and 
happiness to the Gentiles. ‘This promised mercy precedes the call of the 
Gentiles, and belongs to the nation as covenanted and confirmed by oath, 
Now, in this dispensation, God, in view of the fall of the nation, is no 
respecter of persons, but receives both Jew and Gentile, but in the new 
dispensation and ordering, God, who has not limited Himself or His 
promises, can and will, owing to the then instituted Theocracy, fulfil His 
covenanted promises given to the nation, and which take fundamental 
precedence of all other things. We must not forget that ‘‘ the times of 
the Gentiles’ are to end, and anew period, the gracious day of the Lord 
Jesus, is to be inaugurated. We must not overlook the lesson taught e.g. 
in Rom. 9 : 18-21; 2 Tim. 2:20, etc., and sit in judgment over that 
which G'od has determined to perform. A believer’s position is that of 
faith, and a “‘ Thus saith the Lord,’’ is the end of controversy.* 

In this repentance of the nation, whether it be Judah and his companions 
in Palestine, or Judah and others notified by the escaped of the nations 
(Isa. 66 : 19-20), or the tribes in the wilderness, all of them, according to 
the prophets must, and will, acknowledge two things : first, their iniquity, 
and second, their just punishment, followed by a hearty and reverent 
submission to the Messiah given to them. ‘The conditionality of some 
promises pertaining to the dispersion (for God must necessarily, ever 
foreseeing the result, tender mercy in view of confession and submission— 
as He does to-day to those who will refuse to the end) must not outweigh in 
our estimation the absolute, unconditional declarations that such a repent- 
ance shall assuredly occur, which is confirmed by detailed statements of 
the blessedness and glory that shall follow. The Spirit employs a variety 
of expressions to indicate the time of national repentance, and one of the 
most remarkable is to be found in Hosea 5: 14-15, and 6: 1-3, where 
(comp. Prop. 137, Obs. 5), after declaring how God will tear Ephraim and 
tear Judah asa lion, and will go away to His place, then when none can 
rescue, it is said : ‘‘ in their affliction they will seek me early,’’ or, as many 
critics, ‘‘ they will seek me in the morning,’’ which is the evident meaning, 
corresponding (as general analogy proves) with ‘‘ the morning’’ of ‘‘ the 
day of the Lord Jesus, the Christ.’’ 'This is confirmed additionally by ch. 
6 : 3, where reference is made to the Lord’s Coming in the morning, and by 
v. 2, where the time is specified by days (a thousand years as one day in 
the sight of the Lord) of their fearful dispersion, and in the third day God 
will raise them up. ‘The work of conversion and restoration shall proceed, 
after the wicked one (2 Thess. 2 : 8) is slain, as seen e.g. in Isa. 11 : 4-16 ; 
Isa. 66 : 15-24; Zeph. 3 : 8-20, etc., until every one is gathered, and Gen- 
tiles shall assist in bringing them to the land.° 

One feature of this subject must be briefly alluded to, viz., the mission of 
Elijah to the Jewish nation. The prediction is plainly recorded in Mal. 
4:5, 6. The success of his efforts and the time of his coming are clearly 
mentioned, and this prediction cannot be regarded as fulfilled (excepting 
in spirit) in John the Baptist. The reasons for looking beyond John to 
the future for a realization of this prophecy are given in detail under Props. 
38-41, 144, 174, etc., to which the reader is referred. Elijah is a forerun- 
ner of the Sec. Advent (the open Parousia) just as John was a forerunner 
of the First Advent (the public appearance of the Messiah). Now, owing 
to the exceeding brevity of the prophecy, where no details are given, we 
can only—judging from the general order and material given in other 


88 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 113. 


places—hazard an opinion as to the time and manner of Elijah’s work. 
Down to the siege of Jerusalem by Antichrist (Zech. 14, etc.), he has not 
appeared, as is evidenced by the sad fate which has overtaken Judah and 
his companions, but when the city is taken, etc., hem he comes to relieve 
the despair of ‘‘ the residue of the people’ who have not been driven from 
the city. The words of hope imparted by him are eagerly cherished ; the 
descriptions of a speedy Coming Messiah, David’s Son, as a Deliverer, 
are ardently contemplated ; and we may reasonably believe that by an 
appeal to the prophets and the history of Jesus as well as to their own past 
history as a nation, Elijah will prove the Messiahship of Jesus, and thus 
prepare the way for the hearty reception of Jesus when He comes to Mount 
Olivet with His saints. The personal appearance of Jesus, etc., fully con- 
firms the mission of the prophet. Then, again, he may be sent to the 
wilderness to meet the ten tribes as a forerunner, preparing them for Him 
who shall ‘‘ plead with them face to face.’? Other missions, for aught we 
know, may be in store for him in behalf of the nation. However we may 
locate the exact period of his appearing and work, one thing is certain, that 
he will be an important agent in this gtand work of leading the nation to 
repentance.°® 

We conclude with this declaration: Whatever agencies God may employ 
in this conversion, and whatever wonders of an astounding nature He may 
vouchsafe to manifest, He immeasurably exalts Himself and forever 
enshrines Himself in the love of a recovered people : for ‘* Who is a God like 
unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth by the transgression of the 
remnant of His heritage? He retaineth not His anger forever, because He 
delighteth in mercy. He will turn again, He will have compassion upon us ; 
He will subdue our iniquities ; and Thou wilt cast all their sins into the 
depths of the sea. Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob, and the mercy to 
Abraham, which Thou hath sworn unto our Fathers from the days of old.”’ 
Amen." 


1 Hence we deprecate all movements, suggested by a pious but misguided zeal, to 
colonize Palestine with converted Jews. It can only result disastrously, for if such would 
be left at the first stage of the Advent (which introduces a resurrection and translation 
of living ones) they place themselves, voluntarily, in the country which, according to 
prediction, is to suffer the special vengeance of Antichrist (Zech. 14 ; Dan. 12, etc.). 
Let unbelieving Jews colonize if they desire, and thus pave the way tor a future fulfil- 
ment, but let the believing refrain, well knowing that when the restoration once takes 
place under the Messiah, they too, wherever they may be, shall be called to see its 
greatness and glory. ‘Those colonization movements are based on the mistaken idea that 
previous to the Sec. Advent a believing, converted portion of the nation shall be re- 
stored ; while prophecy —if we properly discriminate the order —teaches the exact 
opposite. ‘The conversion, the fitness, and fruitfulness of the land, etc., are all the result 
of supernatural power under a present, personal Messiah. It is, therefore, the wisest 
and best to wait for Him to do this work, and when He has inaugurated it, then also will 
the nations—awed by the manifestations of His power—willingly—as prophecy teaches 
us—assist in restoring the nation. 

2 Although prophecy so distinctly announces the means and manner of conversion, yet 
men fettered by their Church-Kingdom theory must give a different version of the 
- matter. Thas e.g. Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 362), reasoning from the gradual con- 
version of the Gentiles, advocates a gradual conversion of the Jews—a slow and progres- 
sive work by the use of present instrumentalities. And yet in other places (as e.g. 
in his work On Prophecy) he speaks of extraordinary and supernatural manifestations, 
forced to such an admission by the language of prediction. Brown (Com., Rom. 11), 
admitting the ultimate conversion of the Jews, ascribes this to the agency of the Church, 
and exhorts to missions to the Jews to realize it, and asserts that God had pledged 
Himself and “‘ assigned the honor of that ingathering to the Gentile Church.” A multitude 


Prop. 113. | THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 89 


of writers declare the same, and eloquently present imaginative pictures of the work thus 
accomplished. But where has God thus pledged Himself? The passage cannot be pro- 
duced. God has pledged Himself that this shall be brought about through Him whom 
He has ordained for the purpose. We are not to neglect the Jews, but through mis- 
sions, etc., we are to try to save them that believe ; we are to gather out individual Jews, 
just as individual Gentiles are gathered, while the nation at large remains untouched 
until the Sec. Advent. This is unmistakably proven (1) by the condition of the Jewish 
nation at the Sec. Advent ; (2) by the condition of the Ch. Church at the same period, 
for it is then under persecution ; (3) and by the supernatural means employed, under 
the personal supervision of Jesus, for their conversion. The fact as represented in e.g. 
Rom. 11 (comp. Fausset’s Thoughts on, Com., Isa. 66 : 19) indicates that the Jews instead 
of being converted nationally under the instrumentality of Gentile missions, will be, 
after their conversion and restoration, the grand instrumentality of the conversion of 
the Gentiles—the fulfilment of God’s Word in them, in their exalted Theocratic relation- 
ship fully manifested, etc., materially aiding. 

3 This restoration and repentance is frequently referred to without discriminating the 
order of events ; the simple fact being announced as the resultant of Messiah’s Coming. 
Then again, a distinction (only noticeable when contrasted in the more detailed predic- 
tions) is intimated, as e.g. in Jer. 23 : 6, ‘* In His days Judah shall be saved and Israel 
shall dwell safely.’’ The critical student will observe that in those general affirmations 
both are included, and that even in the restoration and repentance of Judah, some of 
the ten tribesareincluded. Brookes, Faber, and others, have pointed to Ezek. 37, where, 
in describing the two bodies that are to be united in one, by repentance and restoration, 
one stick represents ‘‘ Judah and the children of Israel his companions” (i.e. Judah, and 
those of Israel, his companions, that were attached to him at the captivity and came up 
with him from Babylon), and the other stick represents ‘‘ Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, 
and all the house of Israel, his companions’’ (i.e. all the ten tribes, not afew). These 
two sticks thus clearly and unmistakably represent two separate bodies —one Judah and 
a small portion of the ten tribes attached to him, and the other, not Judah at all, but the 
whole ten tribes remaining, who are to be united under the coming Messiah. This 
feature answers with irresistible force the Babylonian return theory, for history testifies 
that no such a return of the twelve tribes was ever witnessed. Ezra (1 : 5) makes 
‘‘ Judah and Benjamin” most prominent, while, in accordance with Jacob’s title com- 
mon to all, and in view of these included companions, he speaks (6 : 17-21) of them 
altogether as ‘‘ the children of Israel,’’ and because of their common origin, common 
guilt, common destiny, etc., he includes in his sacrifices for the nation as such (8: 35), 
** all Israel.’’ The union and consequent greatness, etc., of these two bodies has never 
been verified in their own land and under one king, and a comparison of Scripture 
shows that it follows after the personal Sec. Advent, and after the overthrow of the last 
culminated Antichrist. We dare not degrade the majesty, and universality, and bless- 
ings of these predictions by applying them to anything in the past. 

4 Unbelief, however, suggests every kind of objection. It is asserted that this conver- 
sion borders too much on “ the miraculous,” and is inconsistent with God’s dealings 
with man. Of course it is ‘‘ miraculous,” as the conversion of the multitude on the day 
of Pentecost was miraculous, and the prophets unite in describing it as produced by a 
supernatural power—a wonderful outpouring of the Holy Spirit, the exhibition of 
miraculous wonders, etc. Such objecters ought to refuse Paul’s conversion, which was 
produced in a miraculous manner, just as these will be effected, so that many writers 
believe that 1 Cor. 15 : 8 (comp. 1 Tim. 1 : 16) has a direct reference to this future conver- 
sion of the nation, Paul being born out of due time, i.e. prematurely, before the time of 
this special predicted conversion of the nation through the appearing of the Messiah. In 
the discussion of this subject, so vast in its scope and so blended in its predictions, we 
must not overlook the fact that the divine and the human agency are united. God acts, 
the Spirit is given, the judgments are witnessed, the glory is manifested, but man 
himself must allow these things to produce an abiding repentance ; those who refuse to 
allow all these things to effect an enduring turning to God are to be purged out and cut 
off. Thus e.g. take Isa. 4 : 2-6, God will make the “‘ escaped of Israel,” those that are 
‘‘ left?? and “ remain,”’ holy, but the process of washing and purging is done “ by the 
spirit of judgment and by the spirit of burning.’’ In the predictions, we find this re- 
pentance and conversion variously effected : some are converted in Palestine, some 1n 
the wilderness, some among the nations, and all of them must, by a due acknowledg- 
ment of sinfulness and of the rejection of the Messiah, evince a proper disposition of 
heart before they are accepted. God will mightily work in their behalf, and they will, 
by grace received, work with Him. As Saul, wonderfully met, humbly inquired what 


90 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 113. 


was the will of God concerning him, and earnestly prayed that it might be performed in 
him, so these, astoundingly arrested, will humble themselves before the Lord, and pray 
for His long-promised blessing to descend upon and abide with them. 

°'The combination of circumstances given by prophecy establish this conversion and 
restoration beyond a doubt. ‘The election of the nation, the rejection for a time, the 
Theocratic relationship, the absolute promises, the gathering from all countries and 
bringing into their own land, the personal appearance of the Messiah and effect upon 
them, the time of this Advent, the distressed condition of the nation, the miraculous 
attending the conversion and restoration, the aid tendered by Gentiles, the formation 
into a State, the union of the two nations, the vast multiplication, and a hundred more 
particulars, are all of such a nature, and so connected, that they forbid any other view. 
The great spiritual blessings are promised to the identical people that suffered dispersion 
from their land, and are so repeatedly linked with a return to the same land from which 
they were driven, that it is folly to apply these to the Church as now constituted, and 
not to the time, place, and people for whom they are intended. We add two thoughts 
in reply to an objection anda theory. (1) It is objected that there are several types of 
Jews, and that they cannot be recognized. It is true, as the Bible predicts that, scat- 
tered among all nations, they by affiliation with their conquerors (in some instances by 
intermarriage) have become mixed, so that in some cases the preponderance of Jewish 
blood is difficult to decide. Two types are prominent—one with fair skin, light hair, 
straight nose, regular features ; the other with Assyrian features, eagle nose, dark hair 
and eyes—and these may—for aught we know-—have existed, at least, from the days of 
Solomon, when foreign wives introduced a variety of feature. In the main kept pure 
and easily recognizable, where difficulty exists, this will be decided by the Divine, 
Supernatural guidance controlling this restoration. If man cannot tell in some isolated 
cases, God will determine. (2) A theory is advanced by some that this repentance and 
conversion precedes the Sec, Advent, and is now progressing in the religious attitude of 
the nation. We have shown from the prophecies that down to the Sec. Advent the 
nation as such, both Judah and Israel, do not acknowledge Jesus as the Messiah. Now, 
whatever confessions of sin the nation may have in its liturgical services, or in their 
private prayers, there certainly can*be no true repentance and conversion so long as they 
reject God’s dear Son, the Messiah provided for them. At least, it is not the repentance 
and conversion predicted of them nationally, when they shall be restored to their own 
land. Hence it is misleading to lay so much stress on it, as many do, because it lacks 
the essentials which can make it well pleasing to God and bring His promised blessings 
upon them. We concede that this attitude of the nation, as far as it goes, must be pain- 
fully interesting to the believer ; we believe even that God must hear with compassion 
the lamentations and beseechings of pilgrims at the wall of Jerusalem, that He must 
regard with pity the formularies of humiliation, the penitential confessions and sup- 
plications, continued so many weary and suffering centuries ; and we trust, too, that this 
very disposition thus exhibited to acknowledge unworthiness and implore Divine favor 
will prepare them for a more acceptable confession in the future. Whosoever rejects 
the Son rejects the Father ; whosoever rejects the Messiah is unrepentant and uncon- 
verted. At the First Advent, as we showed in detail, the Kingdom was conditioned on 
repentance which the nation, as such, declined ; at the Sec. Advent repentance is again 
presented as the requisite moral preparation, and it is accepted. The Jews themselves 
have frequently asserted that repentance is essential at the Coming ofthe Messiah. Thus 
Meyer (Com., Matt. 3 : 2) auotes ‘‘ Sanhdr. f. 92, 2, If the Israelites exercised penitence, 
then they are liberated by the Redeemer.’’ And Herzog’s Ency., Art. Messiah, quotes 
the Jewish opinion (which accords with predicted fact as to Judah’s fate under Anti- 
christ), taken from J//ieros. Taanith, f. 63—Ugol. 684, how this repentance is brought 
about : “The Holy One brings over them a cruel king, like Haman, and forthwith will 
they repent and be delivered.’’ As illustrative of the Jewish prayers, the following are 
presented, taken from the Galaxy, Jan., 1872, which, in Art. The Jews, gives them as 
taken from their prayer-books. “Oh! return with mercy to Jerusalem, Thy city, and 
reign therein as Thou has promised to do! Rebuild it soon, during our existence, to 
remain imperishable, and speedily re-establish in it the throne of David. Praised be 
Thou! O‘fEternal! who buildest up Jerusalem.’’ ‘‘ Fill us with rejoicing, O Eternal, 
through Elijah the Prophet, Thy servant, and through the royal house of David, Thy 
anointed ; may He soon come and gladden our hearts. Upon His throne let no stranger 
sit, no others take unto themselves His glory; for by Thy holy name hast Thou 
sworn unto Him that His light shall never be extinguished in all eternity. Praised be 
Thou, O Eternal! the Shield of David!’ Such prayers evince such faith in God’s 
simple word as contained in the Old Test., that they put to shame the faith of many 


Ee — 


Prop: 113.] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 91 


Gentiles, who have become “ high-minded” through a spiritualizing and appropriating 
the promises of God to this nation. Pity that such faith is not extended to the recep- 
' tion of the provided Messiah! But, on the other hand, we must not forget that latterly, 
since the conversion of numerous Jews, the most sincere and ardent prayers are tendered 
by them (assisted by the prayers of believing Gentiles), in the all-prevailing name of 
Jesus, in behalf of the Jewish nation. These petitions, ascending to heaven from all 
parts of the earth, and made acceptable by coming through the Mediator, are not uttered 
in vain. God hears, and God will answer. It is an honor, a blessed privilege, to be 
among these praying ones, for God will remember their interest and faith and hope. 
A member of the Boston Bar, in his Art. The Present Shame and Future Glory of the 
House of Israel, after forcibly depicting both the shame and the glory, concludes : ‘* Let 
us, then, hasten Israel’s Millennium, even as we would speed our own. ‘There will be but 
one Millennium. If we could stand by in indifference, or open opposition, or false 
construction of the sacred text, or by spiritualizing away its plain import, Israel’s Mil- 
lennium, we should retard in the same degree our own. Let us, then, as we would 
hasten the Millennium of all, bear the land of the Covenant, and the people of the Cove- 
nant, and the city of the Covenant, even on our hearts.”’ 

6 The restoration of the entire Jewish nation will take at least forty years, for it is 
said, Mic. 7 : 15, ‘‘ According to the days of thy coming out of the land of Egypt will I show 
unto him marvellous things.’’ And from Isa. 8 : 14 it is inferred that Jesus must be ‘‘ for 
a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel,’’ and as he 
was such to Judah at the First Advent, He will be the same at the Sec. Advent to Israel, 
working at first with them through the agency of this prophet, and at length coming 
personally and pleading ‘“‘ face to face.” Some writers, in view of Judah’s more speedy, 
and Israel’s more lengthy, conversion make the mission of Elijah exclusively one to the 
ten tribes, but we are not forced to such a conclusion because the prophecy is general 
and seems to include the whole nation (and was so understood by the Jews), which 
appears to be confirmed by the language of Jesus concerning him. Thomas (Kingdom 
of God, p. 42) suggests a second passage of Israel through the Red Sea, and that ‘‘ the 
nation will be baptized in the Red Sea into Jesus as it was before into Moses,”’ giving as 
proof Ps. 68 : 22 (which, however, may be an expressive figure of deliverance from 
mighty enemies, as e.g. illustrated in Hab. 3); Isa. 11 : 15-16 (but this seems to be 
descriptive of the destruction of a portion of the sea, in order to realize the 6riginal 
grant of the land to the Nile) ; and Zech. 10 : 10, 11 (which is sufficiently illustrated by 
the usage of Scripture where rivers and seas are employed to denote great enemies, etc.). 
Besides, this overlooks that a prominent portion of the nation are not present (Judah and 
Benjamin, and their companions), and that there is, too, not only a gathering out of 
Egypt, but from Assyria, and all other countries. Even Dr. Rutter (Roman Catholic), 
in his Life of Jesus, p. 6, foot-note, makes the Jewish conversion to be completed under 
Elias at the end of the world. So others concede the prophecy to have a future fulfil- 
ment. In another place this point will be discussed. 

1 The reader may well ponder the great change of view, the mighty revulsion of feeling 
as then manifested in the Jewish nation! To acknowledge Jesus, the once despised and 
cursed, to be the Messiah will, indeed, demand the severest judgments, the special 
exhibitions of power, predicted. Once Jesus was contemptuously called ‘‘ The Hung,”’ 
““The Fool,” ‘‘ The Blasphemer,” etc., and of Him it was said, ‘‘ May His memory be 
destroyed and His name be blotted out,” but then He will be called ‘‘ The Blessed,’’ ‘* The 
Messiah,’ ‘* The Redeemer,” and of Him it will be said, ‘‘ This is our God.” While 
bitterness and hatred are perpetuated among the more illiterate and bigoted of the 
nation (largely attributable to the past dealings of professed Christians), yet every in- 
telligent reader must have noticed that in many, the more intelligent, a change for the 
better is transpiring. While unwilling as yet to admit the Messianic claims of Jesus, 
many of their writers speak respectfully of Jesus as a great moral teacher, and seem to 
take a pride in His having been a Jew, and instrumental, through His teaching, in 
keeping the Jewish nation so prominently before the Gentile nations. Indeed, some of 
the finest eulogies (Renan-like) of Jesus as a man and moral teacher, now come from 
Jewish sources. 


92 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 114. 


Proposition 114. This Kingdom, being identified with the elect 
Jewish nation, its establishment at the restoration embraces the 
supremacy of that nation over the nations of the earth. 


This follows legitimately in view of the mutual and inseparable 
relationship. The Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom committed to, and 
organized in, that nation, makes it the special depository of the 
trust of the Kingdom itself. It is covenanted to the nation, and 
only in and through the nation, by the power of David’s Son, will 
it be re-established, and from this establishment extend its sway 
over the nations of the earth. The result is, that the nation, so 
highly favored and honored, must, in virtue of so distinguished a 
relationship, sustain @ certain well-defined pre-eminence among 
and over the other nations. Itis the natural outgrowth of Cove- 
nant and promise ; the result of Theocratic ordering. 


Obs. 1. This is abundantly confirmed by the direct teaching of the 
prophets. Thus Micah 4 : 8, ‘‘ And Thou, O tower of the flock, the strong- 
hold of the daughter of Zion, wnto thee shall rt come, even the first dominion, 
the Kingdom shall come to the daughter of Jerusalem.’’ ‘The context shows 
that this is spoken of the same Zion and Jerusalem that was ploughed and 
in ruins, which are to be restored and made glorious. The same idea 
pervades even other expressions contained in the chapter: ‘‘ But in the 
last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the Lord 
shall be established in the top of the mountains and it shall be exalted above 
the hills,’’ etc. ‘To ‘* be established in the top of the mountains”’ and to 
be ‘‘ exalted above the hills’’ denotes supremacy ; for mountains and hills, 
being symbolic of kingdoms and nations, the meaning is, that the first 
position among the nations, an elevation above all others, is assigned to this 
‘*mountain of the house of the Lord.’’ That ‘‘ the house of the Lord’’ is 
the Davidic house has been frequently proven, He having incorporated it in 


His Theocratic rule, and claimed it in view of His Son and Dayid’s Son, in ~ 


one person, being destined to rule therein. What ‘‘ the mountain”’ of this 
house is can be readily seen by what the Spirit says, Zech. 8 : 3; and when 
God thus defined it, man can only accept of the definition. 


Hence, as our entire line of argument effectually proves, the theory of Barbour and 
others, that this future Messianic Kingdom is entire ‘‘ spiritual,’’ is certainly erroneous. 
Admitting fully the high degree of spirituality in such a restored Theocratic Kingdom 
under the direct rulership of glorified ones, etc., yet the covenants, the prophecies, all 
forbid this transposition into a ‘‘ spiritual Kingdom.” The most weighty reasons have 
been assigned (and more will be given) for the rejection of such an opinion, which if 
consistent ought then to spiritualize all that pertains to covenant and prediction. The 
fundamental defect in the theory is this: it has not a correct apprehension of the 
Kingdom of God (actually and really God’s) as it once existed, and that this identical 
Kingdom is to be restored under David’s Son, with increased splendor and glory, but to 


——EE—E——E—_————— in 


Prop. 114.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 98 


favor its own views of spirituality, virtually has two Kingdoms, an inner and outer, a 
visible and invisible one. Covenant and prophecy present us only with one Kingdom, 
and that the restored Theocratic, which, in the nature of the case, is visible, etc. 


Obs. 2. The same is taught by Dan. 7 : 27, etc., which, while particu- 
larly describing the ascendency and rulership of ‘‘the people of the 
saints,’’ a peculiar and distinguished class (Props. 118 and 156), yet in virtue 
of their being also ‘* the seed of Abraham,’’ grafted into the elected nation, 
it indicates, since this rulership is exercised at and during the restoration, 
that the dominion of power is to be attributed ¢o connection with the King 
of the Jews, the fulfilment of the Abrahamic-Davidic Covenants, and the 
restoration of the nation. Hence ‘‘ the greatness of the Kingdom under the 
whole heaven’’ given to them, only proves the exaltation of the Jews 
through the appointed Seed. The reigning of the twelve Apostles over the 
twelve tribes, the reign of the saints as coheirs with Christ, in the Davidic 
Kingdom, etc., enhances the pre-eminence and glory of the nation, through 
whom alone all covenanted blessings can be obtained. This rule of Christ 
and of the saints cannot be separated from Jewish supremacy ; while some 
of the promises more particularly relate to the saints, the first-fruits (as 
shall be explained hereafter), yet in view of an elected relationship they 
are also indicative of the high position of the Jewish nation and Kingdom. 
This is easily corroborated by an abundance of predictions, such as the 
following: 1. By that class of passages in which ‘“‘ the horn’’ (symbol of 
power, etc.) of this nation shall be exalted, as e.g. Ps. 89: 17-18; Ps. 
148 : 14, etc. 2. All nations then shall regard Jerusalem ¢he centre of wor- 
ship, Micah 4 : 2-3; Isa. 2:35; and notice, this in the same Jerusalem 
formerly destroyed. Jet the reader refer to Zech. 14, and see the con- 
nection and ¢he yearly worship at Jerusalem (v. 16), and the punishment 
threatened against those who refuse, and no other conclusion can be con- 
sistently formed than the one given by us. And indeed, if such a Theo- 
cratic-Davidic Kingdom as predicted is established, it is eminently suitable 
that, aside from the spiritual worship extending everywhere, there should 
be a national acknowledgment of nations through ¢heir representatives of 
the Theocratic King and Kingdom. It is not conceivable how such “ a 
world-dominion’’ having its centre at one point can exist without a fixed 
public acknowledgment of it, etc. 3. They also shall esteem Jerusalem 
the centre of power. Let once the idea of this covenanted Theocratic- 
Davidic rule be admitted, and the beauty and propriety of various proph- 
ecies appears, such as Mich. 4:2; Isa. 2:3, ‘* the law shall go forth of 
Zion and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem’’; Zech. 8 : 22, “ Yea, 
many people and strong nations shall come to seek the Lord of hosts in 
Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord’’ (comp. Amos 9:12; Zech. 12, etc.).’ 
4. The nations shall regard it as the centre of glory. This arises from 
its being the metropolis of the Kingdom (Prop. 168), being “‘ the city of the 
great King,” *‘ the throne of the Lord,’’ etc. Millennial descriptions fully 
portray this feeling of reverence, etc., for the city, as universal (Isa. 62 : 2, 
ete.) over the earth. 5. The nations shall respect and honor the Jewish 
nation on account of its special relationship. Thus, e.g. Isa. 61:9, * And 
their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their offspring among the 
people ; all that see them shall acknowledge them that they are the seed which 
the Lord hath blessed.’? “ven the individual Jews in that day shall be 
highly esteemed ; ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord of hosts (Zech. 8 :23), in those 


94 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 114. 


days tt shall come to pass, that ten men shall take hold of all languages of 
the nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying: 
We will go with you; for we have heard that God is with you.’ 6. All 
nations shall contribute to their prosperity, wealth, riches, etc. Thus e.g. 
Isa, 60, 61, ete. 7. The Gentiles shall fear and reverence the Jewish nation. 
Thus e.g. Isa. 49:22, 23. 8. The nation shall be a praise among all 
nations, where it formerly was treated with derision. ‘Thus Zeph. 3:19, 
20, “* L will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been 
put to shame. At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I 
gather you, for I will make you a name and a praise among all people of the 
earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes, saith the Lord.” 
9. The Gentiles shall aid in glorifying this nation. Thus, e.g. Isa. 66:12. 
10. Those nations that shall not acknowledge this supremacy shall perish. 
Thus e.g. Isa. 60:12; Zech. 14 : 12-19.’ 


''The only passage which at a cursory reading might be thought to conflict is Isa. 
19 : 24, where Egypt and Assyria are also promised a special greatness. When Israel is 
mentioned as ‘‘ the third,” it does not mean the third in power or rank, for it is in the 
context particularly denominated God’s “‘ inheritance” (thus showing its supremacy), 
but that these three—once so hostile and at enmity—shall be united and friendly, having 
—owing to contiguity and relationship—familiar intercourse. It is a representation 
of that unity between the Jewish nation and other nations which results in preventing 
rivalry and contention, crushing war and its attendant evils. 

* Archbishop Whately (Corruptions of Christianity, Diss. 3, Ap. Rees, Encyclop., vol. 1) 
is unfair in his statement of our doctrine, declaring that we teach that “ superior privi- 
leges, as God’s peculiar people, are then to be restored to the Jews ; that is, to such 
Jews as shall have continued unbelievers.” ‘* The remnant of the Jews who shall have 
obstinately rejected the Gospel up to that time are then to be restored to their own land, 
and to have a superiority over men of Gentile race.’’ In the preceding Propositions 
and in this we have shown that such supremacy is accorded only to them after a hearty, 
cordial repentance ; that it is bestowed in view of God’s Theocratic relationship with 
the nation and for the sake of the pious of the nation, the Fathers, their descendants, 
and the engrafted ones ; that it is done in order to secure God's own glory, the re- 
establishment of the covenanted Kingdom and to make all this a blessing (e.g. Zech. 8 :13, 
etc.) to the nations. Can we ignore the Scripture on this point, or the Divine Purpose 
which it is to subserve? No! This very supremacy, so positively asserted and re- 
peated, so linked with the faithfulness and glory of God Himself, forbids us to make 
these predictions conditional. The details prevent such an interpretation. The same 
is true regarding the popular method of spiritualizing them, as if they simply indicated 
the exaltation of the Christian Church, For, the reader can readily see that this su- 
premacy is promised to the identical nation and land which suffered so long and terribly 
under Gentile domination, and that a marked distinction is made between it and 
Gentile nations—the latter seeing, participating in, and enjoying the pre-eminence she 
receives—the same, instead of promoting selfishness, etc., proving a source (as Paul 
repeats in Rom. 11) of incalculable blessing. Besides this, Scripture indicates that in 
virtue of such blessing resulting, this supremacy shall excite no jealousy in those who 
come under and experience its sway. 


Obs. 8. The simple fact that Jesus, David’s- Son, ‘‘ the King of the 
Jews,’’is to be the Mighty King over them, evinces this pre-eminency. It 
is true that He is not only to be King over the Jews but also over the whole 
earth, for ‘‘ the sovereignty or Kingdom of this world’’ is to become His, 
and ‘‘-all dominions shall serve and obey Him,’ yet we must constantly 
keep in mind the covenanted fact, that this reign is manifested on David’s 
throne and from David’s Kingdom. 'Therefore it follows, that the nation 
identified with this throne or Kingdom is exalted proportionately with the 
extent and splendor of the reign of Him who sits on that throne thus 
associated with the nation. J¢ is this that gives them that peculiar and 


a 


Prop. 114.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 95 


honorable distinction, so landed by the prophets. This is reasonable and 
just ; for surely the people from whom the King is descended according to 
the flesh ; who hold in covenanted possession the throne and Kingdom of 
His inheritance ; who are restored by His power that the throne and King- 
dom may be re-established in its integrity ; who enjoy the privilege of 
having His throne and majesty in their midst ; who are under the particu- 
Jar rule of appointed judges, coheirs with Him—must realize, from the 
nature and extent of their position and blessings, az eminence far above 
that of all others, viz., that stated in Ex: 19 :5, 6. 


Obs. 4. If the question is asked, why this supremacy is given to the 
Jewish nation in preference to all others, the answer is given Rom. 11 : 28, 
29. It has always enjoyed a peculiar, near relationship to God; and it 
should not surprise us to see it restored to its high and distinguishing 
privilege of being the nation through whom the Theocratic rule will 
ugain be exhibited in a more glorious manner, being still ‘‘ beloved for the 
Father’s sake,’’ an elect nation, now indeed suffering for unfaithfulness 
but destined to a recovery (Deut. 32 :36), because God’s calling and Cove- 
nant relationship to them, bound by oath, is wnchangeable ; His mercy and 
Divine attributes are glorified through it; His dear Son, also the seed of 
Abraham and David, is exalted thereby ; and His rule as a gracious, con- 
descending earthly Ruler, the veritable King, is through it extended over 
the whole earth. Men may, in estimated superior wisdom, deny such a 
Divine Theccratic manifestation through His ancient people, and speak of 
it as derogatory to the Saviour, etc. [et such, however, see to it that they 
be not found speaking against the most blessed and exalted position of 
David’s Son, and of that nation which is His by ‘‘ cnheritance’’ and by 
‘‘ redemption.’? When the prophets say so much respecting this, and 
eulogize it in the highest terms, surely we ought to be guarded in saying 
anything that may be reproachful of it. 


Many passages cannot be consistently explained without a reference to this suprem- 
acy. ‘Thus e.g. Ps. 122 can only refer to this period (and not to the Maccabean age or 
to the church, as many make it), because it connects the prosperity, etc., with the 
setting up of “ the thrones of the house of David.’’ Even the promise, Gen. 22 : 17, etc., 
‘“‘ Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies,’’ in view (so Bush loci, etc.) of gate 
being significant of authority and dominion, is expressive of this future exaltation. It 
will poorly suit the promise to limit it to the past, especially when the spirit of it is so 
often represented as to be only realized in the future (for even Zacharias, Luke 1 : 71-74, 
refers it to a time to come) in connection with the Sec. Advent. Even the promises, 
expressly covenanted, of being*made ‘‘ a great nation,” etc., can only be reconciled with 
this supremacy, for, as unbelievers have too frequently remarked, the Jewish nation in 
point of greatness dwindles into comparative insignificance beside the mighty Babylonian, 
Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires. But God, foreknowing the future and His 
own determined purpose, does not give such promises without fully intending to verify 
them in His own time. Buckle (His. Civ., vol. 1, p. 570) censures Bossuet for ‘‘ making 
the Jews the chosen people of God,’’ and “ treating this obstinate and ignorant race as 
if they formed the pivot upon which the affairs of the universe had been made to turn,”’ 
and for excluding other nations superior to them in intelligence and power, etc. How- 
ever Bossuet, in a Universal History of the past, may prove to be one-sided, yet Buckle 
does not remedy the matter when ignoring the Theocratic relationship of the nation, the 
reasons assigned for its continuing so weak and finally losing even its special form of 
government, etc., when passing by its covenanted position, its predictions, its present 
disciplinary condition, its connection with Gentileism, its continued influence through 
its religious books, its future, etc.—and falling back upon its past insignificance as 
contrasted with other nations. This is far more one-sided than Bossuet’s attitude. It 
overlooks also a principle stated by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1 ; 27, 28. Celsus may scornfully 


96 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 114. 


ridicule the Jews as not ‘‘ masters of the whole world,’’ but ‘‘ left with not so much as 
a patch of ground or a hearth’’—time will vindicate God’s promises. 


Obs. 5. A number of observations on this interesting point might be 
appropriately made, which can only be indicated to the reader. (1) This 
pre-eminency among the nations of the earth shows that the position 
assumed by us concerning the wall of partition being broken down onl 
between believers in Christ and not between the Jewish and Gentile 
nations, is well taken. (2) This work is of God, and will be witnessed by 
the nations as aconfirmation of His power, etc., Ezek. 17 : 22-24, Isa. 
52:1-10, etc. (3) Jerusalem and Palestine (as the latter shall be extended 
according to promise) are most admirably situated (geographically) for the 
exercise of such supremacy. See Townsend’s Arrangement, Introd. p. 
68-9. (4) The promise to Abraham is only then literally verified, ‘‘ I will 
make of thee a great nation.’’ For David and Solomon’s reign (aside 
from its Theocratic arrangement), plays but a small part at the side of the 
great empires of history. God’s Promise unerringly points to the future ; 
and as His promises, long delayed, are sure, the greatness of the nation, as 
the prophets predict, will be more commensurate with the greatness of the’ 
Being who has promised. (5) The promise made to Abraham of being 
‘* heir of the world’’ is then realized, in the acknowledged pre-eminency of 
his seed. (6) How wonderful will then the history of this people appear, 
and how astonishing that the Divine Purpose so plainly revealed should 
have been, by lack of faith and with the notion of exalting the meaning of 
Scripture itself, so persistently overlooked by the multitude. (7) To 
occupy this position of supremacy, it is necessary that the division into two 
kingdoms, once existing, should be perpetually abolished. This is fully 
predicted, as e.g. Ezek. 37 : 21, 22, etc. (8) The folly of being indifferent 
to, or totally ignoring, the predictions on this subject, just as if they were 
not given. (9) That if, as many advocate, the phrase ‘‘ Times of the 
Gentiles,’’ 1s indicative of ‘‘ Gentile domination,’’ then the cessation of 
these times would of itself indicate that such dominion would come to a 
close. 


The critical student is reminded that then also the full signification of Jacob’s name will 
appear, after whom the faithful descendants and engrafted Gentiles are called, viz. that of 
‘* Israel’’—‘‘ princely prevailer with God’’ (Bush, etc.), or as the Scriptures (Gen. 32 : 
28) explain it, ‘‘ for as a Prince’ (hence Kurtz, ‘* Prince of God’’) *‘ hast Thou power with 
God and with men, and hast prevailed.’ This princely nearness to God, this prevailing 
power with God and with men is to be manifested. Even the singular remark of Philo- 
Judzus (vol. 4, p. 100) is to be realized : ‘‘ When the name (Israel) is translated into the 
Greek language it is called ‘ the seeing nation,’ which appellation appears to me the most 
honorable of all things in the world,” etc. Then, also, such Psalms as the 128, etce., 
shall be realized, for ‘‘ every one’’ of the nation shall be thus blessed ; and, in view of 
being brought back to forfeited blessings, such a state as described in Isa. 65 : 17-25 
(comp. Sep. on vy. 23), etc., shall be witnessed and experienced. When all this is 
accomplished, then Ps. 107 : 42 will be verified : ‘* The righteous shall see it, and rejoice ; 
and all iniquity shall stop her mouth.’’ For aught we know ‘‘ the lamp ordained” for the 
Christ (Ps. 132: 16) may refer (comp. 1 Kings 11: 36, 2 Kings 8 : 19, and 15 : 4) to this 
period, 


Obs. 6. This supremacy of the Jewish nation is a stumbling-block to 
many (who misapprehend its connection with the saints, etc.), and the 
most bitter and sarcastic remarks are levelled against it. We might con- 
tent ourselves with the simple and positive statements of the Word of God, 


Prop. 114.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 07 


which have been presented, but, desirous to vindicate that blessed Word, 
we distinctly trace the fundamental reasons for the same, showing conclu- 
sively (1) that their covenanted, elect, Theocratic relationship to God, as 
their King (earthly Ruler), in their national capacity, amperatively demands 
just such a supremacy ; (2) that this supremacy is fully required when the 
King and the saints are the rulers—the King being by inheritance the king 
of the nation and the saints being engrafted into the same Commonwealth, 
and regarded as part of Abraham’s seed—over the nation, from whence ‘“‘ a 
world-dominion’’ is to be exerted’’; (3) that in the estimate of this 
supremacy it is impossible ¢o separate the glorified (the king and co-rulers) 
from the unglorified, for they are united, the one as authoritative head 
and the other as specially exalted in view of this union (hence numerous 
prophecies make no distinction between the two, but speak of the nation 
as it shall be when restored and associated with the glorified seed of Abra- 
ham—which gives the key ¢o the magnificent language employed); (4) that 
the nation as it shall hereafter be composed, viz., with its Mighty King and 
with its resurrected and glorified patriarchs and descendants, and with its 
adopted Gentiles resurrected, translated, and glorified, and with its twelve 
tribes repentant and converted, forms collectively ‘‘ the rod of strength’’ 
(Ps. 110 : 2) which shall be exerted in a sway over the nations of the earth ; 
(5) that a Theocracy with a rule over the world, embracing a@ union of 
Church and State, has its foundation in the nation specially selected, in 
which its rudimentary form was set up but which was withdrawn on 
account of wickedness and rebellion, and yet which Covenant and prophecy 
declare shall again be restored under David’s Son (hence unity, God’s oath, 
Jesus’s inheritance, etc., demand it); (6) the union of the Divine with Civil 
power over the nations, to accord with a pure Theocratic ordering, neces- 
sitates, in order to preserve wnity, just such a supremacy as is predicted ; 
(7) that to prepare this nation for its supremacy it is (Ex. 19:6) to be 
made ‘‘a Kingdom of priests and a holy nation,’’ which is done (a) by the 
incorporated glorified ‘‘ Kings and Priests,’’ and (6) by the pre-eminent 
holiness of the nation, ‘‘all’’ being righteous, and brought into special 
nearness and service to the king ; and (8) that the promise ‘‘ 7m thee shall 
all the families of the earth be Oblessed,’’ indicates, as Hengstenberg 
remarked, ‘‘ the re-establishment of the lost unity, and in the gathering 
again of the scattered human race around Abraham as their centre,’’ which 
to be realized, according to Covenant and prophecy, demands @ visible, out- 
ward exhibition of civil and religious power according with the Divine 
Purpose as contained in the grammatical sense of the Word and advocated 
by us. Hence Ebrard (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, p. 749) justly observes, both in 
view of the elect, covenanted relationship, the incorporation of the Divine, 
and this supremacy : ‘‘ And then (in the Mill. age) shall the Old Test. 
prophecies of the re-creation of the kingdom of Israel attain their fulfil- 
ment, for, within the unglorified humanity upon earth, converted Israel 
shall form the middle point of the Kingdom of Christ.’’ The nation, with 
its attached glorified rulers, forms the dasis for that wide, extended, and 
ultimate universal dominion. 


That the student may judge for himself respecting the statements made against this 
supremacy of the nation, we append a few illustrations. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 2, ch. 
4) particularly scouts the idea of “ an Israelitish supremacy—at once religious and civil— 
over all the nations of the earth,” resulting naturally from his Church-Kingdom theory, 
which ruthlessly, and without regard to connection, appropriates the promises specifically 


938 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. (Prop. 114, 


given to the Jewish nation, and appropriates them in behalf of the Ch. Church as now 
established. But on p. 360 he says : ‘‘ The most remarkable fact of all is that those who 
held the Pre-Millennial theory in the second and third centuries seem not to have 
believed in any territorial restoration of the Jews at all—much less in their Millennial 
supremacy over all nations, and the re-establishment of their religious peculiarities.” 
But this is a clear misapprehension, as we have shown, step by step, in the history of the 
doctrine, and when any of the Apostolic or Primitive Fathers enter into a detailed state- 
ment of their views on Eschatology, they repeat the Jewish faith of a complete restoration 
of the Davidic throne and Kingdom, the rebuilding of Jerusalem, the reign of the 
Messiah and the saints from thence, not only over the Jewish nation, but over the whole 
earth, etc. ; and, what is more to the point, they (as e.g. Irenaeus, Justin, ete.) make 
this supremacy over the world contingent to a being of Abraham’s seed and identified 
with the elect nation—Abraham being ‘‘ the heir of the world.’’ Dr. Neander (Genl. His. 
Ch., vol. 1, p. 50, etc.) takes the Jews to task for receiving ‘‘ the letter’’ of covenant and 
prophecy, and anticipating a Messiah who should deliver them even from temporal 
enemies, saying : ‘‘ The deluded Jews, incapable of a spiritual apprehension of divine 
things, expected a Messiah who should employ the miraculous power, with which He 
was to be divinely armed, in the service of their earthly lusts ; who should free them 
from the yoke of bondage, execute fearful vengeance on the enemies of the Theocratic 
people, and make them the masters of the world in a universal empire, whose glory they 
delighted in depicting with the most sensual images that the wildest fancy could 
suggest.” Admitting that many could not receive the Messianic idea in its purity, and 
expected to be saved in their sins and selfishness, and allied with it much of their own 
worldly conceptions and wishes (particularly avoiding the references to a required repent- 
ance and purity of the nation), yet the reader will observe that ‘‘ the letter” contained 
these promises ; the ‘“‘ letter,” God-given, led the Jews into this belief (even evidenced 
by the pious Zacharias, Luke 1 : 74) ; the “‘ letter’’ has never been recalled, and we are 
not authorized to substitute something else in its place under the claim of ‘‘ a higher 
spiritual apprehension of divine things.’’ But as Neander has been answered in detail 
under preceding Props., we only add: it is very strange that ‘‘ the world-dominion,”’ 
** the universal empire,” which the Jews advocated under the leadership of a Messiah 
divinely endowed, and which we show from the Scriptures embraces the purest and 
noblest Theocracy under the guidance of God Himself, should be so distasteful, and that 
precisely such a world-dominion and empire, uniting Church and State, should be after- 
ward advocated (impelled by the force of prediction) and yet committed to mortal, fallible 
man for establishment and control. Look e.g. at the marvellous things said of this 
Kingdom and performed by it, and which view—aside from Scripture evidence—is the 
most reasunable. Dr. Alzog (Roman Catholic, in his Univ. Ch. His., vol. 1, p. 194), 
referring to the destruction of Jerusalem, says: ‘‘ The unfortunate Jews, having lost 
their national independence, were now forced to disperse among the nations of the 
earth, without the comfort of a promise that they should one day again return,” etc. (Matt. 
23 : 37-39 ; Luke 21 : 24, alone refutes this assumption). The Papacy (however some 
individuals may have expressed themselves favorably), owing to its claims of superiority 
and assumption of the promises of supremacy velonging to herself, has always had an 
evil eye for this doctrine. It certainly is unpalatable to all who strive to appropriate to 
themselves what lawfully belongs to others. Lest it be thought that we do not notice 
and meet all the objections that are urged against us, we will briefly present the extrav- 
agancies of Baldwin in ‘‘ Armageddon,” ch. 4. The chapter is headed ‘‘ Israel restored 
identical with the United States’? (which suggests that while Englishmen are engaged in 
making England to fulfil the predictions in ‘‘ Anglo-Israelism,” so Americans are 
striving to make the United States the great fulfiller—such are the perversions of God’s 
Word in support of some favorite theory). This is done for the purpose of eulogizing 
and exalting republicanism, giving it a scriptural support. He says: ‘‘ The Jews and 
speculative theologians have, for near eighteen hundred years, believed that Israel would 
be restored to nationality in Palestine, and that then it would become the head of the 
whole world, and be the great agent in its Christianization. We protest against this 
theory, because it is absurd, fanatical, and repugnant to Scripture, as well as to common- 
sense. We believe that the carnal Israel will be, to a certain extent, Christianized, and 
that it will resettle in Palestine, and form an integral portion of the Millennial republic, 
but that it will have no superiority at all over the other Christian states of the Millennial 
Confederacy; we think it will simply be a common beneficiary of good government, as 
all other Christian states will be. We further believe the United States to be the firsi- 
fruits of the promised restoration of Israel, and that the Millennial republic will be the 
salvation of £ all Israel,’ politically speaking.” Then to show ‘‘ the absurdity’ and ‘‘ the 


Prop. 114.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 99 


fanaticism’’ of our view (which dares not appropriate the promises given to the same 
people dispersed, etc., and which cannot make republicanism the medium through 
which to look at the prophecies), he assigns the following reasons: (1) The geographicak 
position of Palestine is not favorable to its being ‘‘ the capital,’’ but America is ‘‘ the 
natural capital ;’ (2) Palestine is too small to be ‘‘ the agricultural capital of the world’’ 
—the United States alone adapted; (3) Palestine cannot become ‘‘ the commercial 
capital of the world’’—the United States fitted for the honor ; (4) Palestine cannot 
become ‘‘ the manufacturing head of the world’’—this designed for the United States ; 
(5) “It cannot become the intellectual head of the world’—this glory designed for a 
country that produces such writers as himself; (6) ‘‘ The Jews cannot become the 
political head of the world in Palestine” —this distinction reserved for those who intro- 
duced Republicanism. After contrasting the resources, etc., of the Jewish nation with 
other nations, he says : ‘‘ It is most ridiculous to think of such a thing. Will Russia, 
Britain, Germany, France, and America become the vassals of the Jews? will they give 
their sceptre to a patch of country that could not supply the world with cabbage ; and to 
a people that can never become their mental and political superiors? The very thought 
is full of absurdity and fanaticism.” He then proceeds : (7) It is ‘‘ chimerical” to make 
the Jews ‘“‘ the spiritual head of the world,’ because all Christians are on an equality ; 
(8) It is ‘‘ utterly impossible’’ to restore ‘‘ the ten tribes ’’; (9) If the Jews were ‘‘ Chris- 
tianized then the Hebrew ceremonial law would cease to be a wall of separation between 
them and Gentile Christians.” Hence, for these reasons, our view is ‘‘ repugnant to 
common-sense,’ and “a theory really at variance with the laws of nature and good 
sense,’’ because ‘‘the Hebrews were a typical people ; typical of the Christians ; and 
what purpose is to be subserved by the reconstruction of a typical people.” (We might 
well ask, if merely a type, why have them restored at all, or even converted, seeing that 
a type is cast aside when the antitype arrives.) His scriptural argument (sec. 2) based 
on Christians being also the seed of Abraham to whom the promises are given, does not 
affect our position, but confirms it, seeing that we clearly hold to this, but in addition 
make the engrafting essential to a connection with the elect Jewish nation, and hence 
participating in the inheriting of the Theocratic promises. This we have already given 
in detail. The denunciatory spirit of Baldwin, making our view “ altogether unscript- 
ufal and false,’’ ‘‘ false, fanatical, and full of evil,’’ etc., adds but little strength to his 
effort to prove that ‘‘ the United States is the Israel restored,” quoting just as much of 
the prophets as he thinks will make out a parallel, and meeting deficiencies by heaping 
the most fulsome eulogies on our form of government, etc. A writer that can deliberately 
apply Isa. 60; Isa. 33: 20, 21; Micah 4:1-4; Isa. 49; and Isa. 2:1-5, etc., to the 
United States, is so clearly removed from the slightest tinge of fanaticism, that he is 
eminently qualified to judge the merits of another theory dispassionately, so that we are 
forced to the supposition that it was with enlightened mind and unprejudiced heart, he 
speaks of our doctrine as “ positively arrogant and intolerable, and should be rejected 
as a fanatical delusion.’’ But Baldwin is not alone in this; multitudes form this 
estimate, and when the time of restoration comes multitudes, embracing Antichrist and 
the kings of the earth, will retain it, and with the greatest bitterness and the fiercest 
hostility attempt to prevent it. Precisely such views, carried into open opposition, give 
us the clew to the terrible carnage and bloodshed of the last days. All that we need to say 
to Baldwin’s objections (which are all answered under appropriate Props.) is this : they 
are based on the assumption of natural development, and ignore the Theocratic, the 
Divine, the Supernatural, which is inseparably united to this restoration and supremacy. 
‘The laws of nature and of common-sense” must not cancel the declarations of the 
marvellous respecting the future, as they do not those concerning the past (as e.g. in the 
birth, etc., of Jesus). This summary method of deciding God’s predictions by ‘“‘ the 
laws of nature and common-sense” is a dangerous weapon in the hands of a believer— 
entirely too unwieldy for his hands. Again: we have Barbour (Three Worlds) and 
others, who reject this national supremacy and give it exclusively to the saints, on the 
ground that the Kingdom is taken from the Jews and given to another people, and this 
last people inherit and possess the Kingdom forever, and the Jewish nation is outside 
of that Kingdom, having no part in it, and it “ shall never again be incorporated with 
the Jerusalem of Palestine.’’ This is a grave mistake, opposed alike to Covenant and 
prophecy. Waving sufficiently met this objection in the previous Props., we only now 
say that the fundamental defect in this theory is, that it does not receive the oath-bound 
Davidic Covenant in its plain grammatical sense (and the prophecies), which makes a 
restoration of the same Kingdom (which, of course, includes the nation) overthrown 
imperative ; it does not distinguish between the inheritors (rulers) and the Kingdom 
itself ; it does not trace the continuation of the election and see that the engrafted 


100 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 114. 


ones are considered as part of the Hebrew Commonwealth—an integral but exalted portion ; 
it does not perceive that the relationship of the Jewish nation restored (mortal) to the 
glorified portion, is an inseparable union, and that the supremacy accorded to such a 
union necessitates the language of the prophets respecting the supremacy to the nation, 
as it shall be composed in the future, without discriminating ; and it ignores the con- 
nection of prophecy which makes this supremacy (owing to the Divine Theocratic ordering) 
pertain to a nation which is described in conditions restricted to a mortal condition, 
and yet exalted to it in view of the overruling Divine government instituted in its behalf 
under the rulership of the glorified Messiah and His coheirs. Looking only at one side 
of the subject is doing violence to the unity of Covenant and prophecy, which has two 
sides, a human and a divine. 

We may properly sum up all objections by simply saying that they are all, without 
exception, based upon a misapprehension of the Kingdom actually covenanted to the 
Messiah. We give an illustration at length, for the purpose of showing that our repre- 
sentations of the Jewish faith are conceded by opponents (as has been shown by other 
quotations), and how unscriptural assumptions can be heaped together in a few sen- 
tences. Meyer (Com. on Malt. 3 : 2) says: ‘* The common idea of the Jews in regard to 
the Messianic Kingdom was predominantly politico-national, with the fanatical stamp 
of an universal dominion, to last a thousand years ; the Messiah awakes the descendants 
of Abraham ; then follows the reign of a thousand years; the resurrection and con- 
demnation of the heathen ; the descent of the heavenly Jerusalem and the eternal life 
of the descendants of Abraham on the earth, which is to be transformed, along with the 
universe. With Christ and the Apostles the idea of the Messianic Kingdom is not 
national, but universal, i.e. so that the participation in it is not conceived as depending 
on a connection with Abraham, but on faith in Christ and the moral state conditioned 
thereby, without distinction of nations ; hence the religious and moral point of view— 
the idea of an actual Theocracy—comes into the foreground, without the idea of the 
universal dominion, the expectation of the renovation of the earth, the resurrection, the 
judgment and eternal glory, losing their positive significance, truth, and worth.’’ While 
we might justly object to one or two features of this estimate of Jewish faith, we pass 
it by, saying that Meyer looks at the whole subject from a preconceived Church-Kingdom 
theory. We have shown, step by step, that ‘‘ the common idea of the Jews’”’ was not set 
aside or condemned by Jesus, but confirmed by Him in such a manner that it was 
perpetuated when the Ch. Church was established ; that ‘‘ a politico-national Kingdom” 
(Davidic) was the one covenanted and overthrown, and the same, identical Kingdom, in 
ruins, is to be set up when Jesus comes again ; that if the Jews were ‘‘ fanatical” in 
their belief of ‘‘an universal dominion” under the rule of the Messiah, it was a fanati- 
cism inspired by the God-given, plain, grammatical sense of the Word ; that neither Jesus, 
nor the disciples, nor the Apostles afterward, changed the idea of the Kingdom (Meyer 
asserts that they did, but does not give a particle of proof to sustain the assertion—we 
declare that they did not, and append the proof, under Props. 16-113 inclusive), but 
locate the realization at the Sec. Advent ; that while faith in Christ and the moral state 
conditioned thereby is requisite to entrance into this future Kingdom, such faith brings 
us into direct ‘‘ connection with Abraham,’’ being adopted and accounted his children 
in order that we may inherit the covenanted promises with him and his seed ; that no 
theocracy (as Meyer claims) is now existing, for the simple reason that an “ actual 
Theocracy” is an utter impossibility without the restoration of the Davidic throne and 
Kingdom, and God Himself, in the Person of His Son, again reigning as an earthly 
Ruler ; that the position of Meyer can only be sustained by appropriating to the Ch. 
Church, as at present constituted, promises which, if language has any definite meaning, 
appertain to a people and city, down-trodden for many centuries, and to a throne and 
Kingdom, cast down and remaining unrestored to this day. Alas! where is faith in 
God’s promises, just as they read, without the aid of type and spiritualizing ! 


Obs. 7. Milman (/Zis. of the Jews), Wines (Com. on Laws), and others, 
have shown that past history records the fact that science, art, philos- 
ophy, history, jurisprudence, politics, statesmanship, finance, education, 
etc., are adorned with splendid Jewish names—names suggestive of vig- 
orous intellect, large attainments, great skill, profound wisdom, and 
vast knowledge. Ifthe Hebrew race in its dispersion, under its disabili- 
ties and humiliation among nations, has exhibited such talent, genius, 


Prop. 114. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 101 


energy, learning, enterprise, and power, what will they not become when 
restored to their own land under the peculiar and elevating guidance of 
their long expected, and at length arrived, Messiah? What brilliant 
names will not the future develop, when specially ruled over by the glorified 
and powerful Apostles, when in close and intimate connection with glorified 
saints, when the Mighty King and the splendid New Jerusalem are in their 
midst? The position that they will then occupy geographically and theo- 
cratically, together with the elements of individual and national greatness 
bought together, fostered, and developed under the all-wise and all-power- 
ful Messiah, will bring forth a list of greater names to adorn the annals of 
the reign of Jesus and His saints—the evidence of a reign rich in all that 
pertains to the elevation of individual or national greatness. 


Wines (Com. on the Laws of the Anc. Hebrews, p. 339) makes a somewhat singular 
reflection (singular—for impelled by their remarkable preservation and the predictions 
of a future return, he holds to their ultimate restoration), and, overlooking their The- 
ocratic position and full of his cherished republicanism, adopts the following view : 
‘“‘ They retain, in their dispersion and after so many centuries of oppression, all the 
elements of greatness and of power, out of which to frame a model republic, and once 
again to become the light and glory of the world. Who knows whether Providence has 
not some such splendid destiny in reserve for them? Surely a preservation so signal 
cannot be without an ultimate object eaually remarkable.”’ Their destiny need not be 
guessed at, for it is freely delivered to us in the Scriptures by One who can accurately 
inform us ; a destiny fur superior to that of being ‘‘ a model republic,’ under fallible 
men, including as it does a magnificent, actual and real, Theocracy under the benign sway 
of the immortal and exalted David's Son, thus making it the great centre of mighty in- 
fluences radiating to all parts of the world,and felt and acknowledged even by an interested 
universe. Brookes (Maranatha, p. 444) quotes the biographer of the celebrated Hegel as 
saying that the philosopher ‘“‘ gave often and long thought to Hebrew history, and often 
changed his thoughts,’’ so that “‘ all his life long, it tormented him as adark enigma.” To 
which Brookes finely adds : ‘ It isa dark enigma indeed unless studied in the light of God’s 
prophetic Word, but all is clear when we follow with unquestioning faith the testimonies 
of the Holy Ghost concerning the future of this people.” Even the Sibylline books are 
more scriptural than some Protestant writers, insisting, as they do, on a restoration of 
the Jewish nation and its supremacy. Pre-Millenarian writers, generally, give a correct 
idea of the same, but too much overlook the Theocratic idea as covenanted and predicted. 
We are not concerned in the calculations of those (as e.g. Dr. Springfellow, of Man- 
chester, Va.—who has the restoration accomplished by 1884—and others) for reasons 
assigned under Props. 173 and 174. 


102 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 115. 


Proposition 115. The Kingdom 4¢s not established without a 
period of violence or war. 


In the nature of the case, if at any time God intends to re-estab- 
lish seach a Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, which is designed to 
extend its sway over the world, all, or nearly all, earthly Kingdoms 
will oppose it. This is precisely what the prophets, one and all, 
uniformly predict. 


Obs. 1. This is a terrible subject, and the writer was under strong 
temptation to suppress, in great part, this Proposition, lest to some it 
would prove ‘‘ a dead fly in the ointment’? (Eccles. 10:1), causing a 
rejection of the whole. But consideration urged that, as God proclaimed 
at, and frequently adverted to it, duty and faithfulness demanded its inser- 
tion as a testimony and warning to others.’ Reflection also will show 
that, fearful as itis, yet owing to its temporary nature it is not near so 
dreadful as the perpetual destruction, the everlasting cutting off of the 
wicked from the happiness and glory of the Kingdom. If any one objects 
to the war, slaughter, plagues, etc., that, as predieted, shall be meted out 
to the enemies of God when this Kingdom is to be inaugurated, on the 
ground that it is derogatory to God’s character and to Christ’s mission of 
love, etc., such are invited to consider, in addition, the following particu- 
lars. (1) What are we then to do with these predictions? Are they given 
merely as threats, God never intending to fulfil them? Or, are they con- 
ditional? That God intends their ample fulfilment is evident from the 
connection which they sustain, (a) to the Divine Plan ; (6) to the chain of 
predictions in course of fulfilment, the literal accomplishment of which 
thus far forbids the notion of a change in the future ; (c) and to the Sec. 
Advent of Christ; (d) to the future condition of saints; (e) and fo the 
restoration of the Jewish nation. (2) The identical reasons which would 
impeach God in allowing this war and awful destruction of life can be 
urged against Him for allowing past war, the Jewish tribulation, the 
destiny of the wicked in the future. Take e.g. the wars carried on under 
this same Theocratic, and Theocratic-Davidic arrangement, wnder the 
Rulership of God Himself and by His direct sanction. Ponder it well, and 
then dare to judge God. Ifthe Jewish nation was ¢hen justifiable, if God 
was then right in the destruction of His enemies, is it not equally so in the 
future? (3) This war, etc., in the future as expressly asserted, is not 
carried on because God delights in it, but because it will be waged against 
Him, His people and His Purpose by wicked, ambitious men, and the 
Almighty condescends to meet them in the same way to give them, through 
appointed agencies, a signal and deserved punishment and overthrow. The 


rise, progress, aims, slaughter, etc., of the confederation of wickedness 


arrayed against Him (Props. 160, 161, 162, 163) will fully vindicate the 
propriety and consistency of the means used in its downfall; which, as 


ee! 


Prop. 115. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 1038 


prophecy declares, wil] be freely and universally acknowledged the world 
over after its occurrence. (4) It is also not inconsistent with Christ’s 
mission of mercy and love for the following reasons. (a) During this very 
period of mercy, heavy judgments of God have been constantly poured out 
on the city and nation of the Jews ; (0) if this were purely a dispensation 
of mercy, how account for the wars, sufferings, terrible Providences, etc., 
pertaining to nations, individuals, and the Church. There evidently is a 
limit to be fixed somewhere. Mercy is indeed extended, but it is not all 
mercy ; judgment, justice, etc., are also to be regarded in forming our 
estimate, or it will prove to be one-sided, opposed to experience, fact, and 
Divine representation. The same Jesus, so desirous to save and bless, 
orders events according to His righteous will in blessing or in judgment 
as best suits the circumstances of the case. (c) This is a time of offered 
mercy, but even this will give place to a time of wrath and vengeance on 
the nations and persons that persistently reject Him. And we may well 
pause to ask that, if in a period so disposed to be gracious He allowed His 
just anger to burn toward a nation still ‘‘ beloved for the Father’s sake,”’ 
what will He not do when His wrath is kindled against the nations of the 
earth who are not thus protected by Covenant relationship? (d) Thisisa 
heavy judgment on the wicked only, who are directly arrayed against Him 
at His Coming. (5) The simple record ought to suffice ; for it is not 
becoming in us to sit in judgment on the propriety of God’s dealings, either 
past.or future. If God has revealed that thus it shall be,-that He has 
ordered it, and will surely bring it to pass, that ought to satisfy the believer, 
especially since many of the adverse Providences of God can only now be 
received by faith. (6) If it is terrible, it is so to those who are properly 
warned. Let the nations, let the wicked open God’s Word, and if they will 
receive His Record, not spiritualized away, but as it is written, there they 
find repeated solemn warnings against joining the confederation of evil- 
doers in the last days; against arraying themselves in hostility to Christ 
and His interests ; against any treacherous connivance against Jerusalem 
or the Jewish nation. If Jerusalem becomes ‘‘ a cup of trembling’’ and “a 
burdensome stone’’ to them ; if the wrath of the Lamb burns with consuming 
fury against them ; it is because they have rejected the most solemnly given 
warnings.” 


1 We are reminded of Dean Alford’s declaration : ‘‘ Christianity never was, and never 
can be the gainer by any concealment, warping, or avoidance of the plain truth, wher- 
ever it is to be found.’’ The reason is, that if God’s truth, it will stand against all 
human efforts. 

2 The writer must add, in order to avoid a misapprehension of his position, that he 
has no sympathy with the theory and spirit of the Anabaptists, Romanists, some Prot- 
estants, etc., that saints or believers now, under the present ordering, are to take the 
sword to advance the truth for the Church, or the cause of Christ. This is positively 
forbidden ; and, therefore, we must await the time and the ordering appointed by God 
Himself. The quotation (Mem. of Col. Hutchinson, p. 209) so common among the 
Puritans, “ that the saints should have the praises of God in their mouths, and a two- 
edged sword in their hands,’’ was in that day and time a misapplication of Scripture. 
So also the Huguenots (Smile’s Hug. in France, p. 115) before entering battle sung the 
68th Psalm. So ten thousand quotations found in history given by the Papacy, by 
men addicted to violence, etc., to palliate and defend the use of arms in advancing their 
own schemes, and which are drawn from the predictions wholly relating to the future, 
are wrongfully misappropriated. But this should not lead us, on the other hand, to 
forget that they also have an application, and to refer them to the period to which they 
belong. If Crusaders, Cromwellians, and others, under the mistaken idea of their 
fighting the Messianic battles, appropriated these passages relating to war—if John 


104 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 115. 


Brown encouraged himself in his Kansas and Virginia campaigns by “‘ the Old Test. 
encouragement to valor and enterprise on the Lord’s side’’—if priests, ministers, popes, 
and kings misapplied them in their self-interest, that is no reason why we should reject 
them, and refuse them an ultimate realization. 


Obs. 2. 'To appreciate this subject several things must be observed. (1) 
At the period of the Sec. Advent, as various prophecies show, Christ will 
find a mighty array of nations who will be hostile to believers, hostile to 
His ancient people and land. Rev. 19:2; Thess. 2; Isa. 63, etc. He is 
represented, not as converting, but as destroying them; and the most 
terrific figures and representations are heaped one on the other to describe 
the catastrophe, ‘‘ Making war, treading the wine-press, treading the wine- 
press of the wrath of God, smiting the nations, ruling with a rod of iron, 
treading the wine-press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God, tread- 
ing the people in anger, trampling on them in fury, staining His garments 
with the blood of His enemies,’’ etc., are a few of them, and under and in 
them is couched a dire reality agaiust which it is worse than folly to close 
the eyes, viz., a most fearful period of vengeance on God’s enemies. (2) 
That the ushering in of the Millennial era is immediately preceded by this 
period of vengeance. The context of numerous Millennial descriptions 
portray it as God then coming in anger, wrath, vengeance, etc., pouring out 
His indignation upon the nations of the earth, ase.g. Isa. 24, 25, 26, ete. 
(8) An antichristian confederation is represented as existing at that time 
which has slaughtered the saints, and is in open war with the Jewish nation, 
as e.g. 2 Thess. 2; Rev. 20; Zech. 14, etc. (4) The same is declared to 
exist just previous to the resurrection and deliverance of the saints, as e.g. 
Dan. 12:1, 2; Isa. 26:19. (5) The same is almost invariably linked 
with the restoration of the Jewish nation, as e.g. Joel 3; Dan. 12, etc. 
(6) The saints are also described as with Christ and participating in in- 
flicting the judgments of God, ruling with a rod of iron, as e.g. Rey. 
2:27-28, ete.’ (7) The Jewish nation is likewise an agency in this last 
overthrow of enemies, as e.g. Zech, 14, ete. It is scarcely possible in 
every instance to show in what way Christ, or the saints, or the Jews par- 
ticipate in it. The testimony of prophecy is this: that Christ as the 
Mighty King directly interferes in behalf of His people, that His saints aid 
in this work, and that the Jews are supernaturally sustained in the same. 
Christ as the Master Spirit and Supporter of all this, is sometimes men- 
tioned alone (as e.g. Isa. 63), the rest being implied ; again Christ and 
the saints in view of their associated capacity are spoken of as together (as 
e.g. Rey. 19), in the accomplishment of it; then again, when details are 
given, the Jews are described (as e.g. Zech. 12) as largely participating. 
The fearful picture is only completely surveyed, when ¢he several parts are 
brought together and viewed as one whole. Converging and irresistible 
proof is also established, because under several aspects the same tremendous 
scene is located at precisely the same period of time tntroductory to the 
Mill, age.? 

1 Lincoln (Lec. on Rev., vol. 2, p. 134) and others limit this pouring out of vengeance, 
bloodshed, treading, etc., to the Saviour, and exclude the saints, but this is to violate 
express promises, as e.g. Ps. 149 : 6-9; Rev. 2 : 26, 27, etc. Even the Jews are in- 
cluded in this last drama, as seen e.g. Zech. 12 : 3-8, and 14:14, ete. Such a view 
neutralizes a large class of passages, and makes the kings and Jews mere spectators, and 
not participants, etc. It is founded on a misapprehension of Isa. 63 : 3, ‘‘ and of the 


people there was none with me,’’ which Delitzsch and others properly render ‘‘ nations’’ 
instead of ‘‘ people,’’ thus preserving a unity of teaching on the subject. 


Prop. 113. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 105 


® Hence the student will observe that if ever a war was justifiable, this one will be so 
in view of its resisting a@ gigantic oppression, which aims to overthrow the highest interests 
of man and the obedience due to God and His Christ. The Theocratic Kingdom when 
first instituted was introduced by war and violence, vanquishing its enemies, and this 
only teaches us that when again set up, because of the opposition excited and the resist- 
ance audaciously exhibited, it will again fight its way over its enemies but under a leader 


immeasurably greater than Joshua. It is simply impossible—if believers in the Word 
nl willing to receive its contents—to ignore the Scripture relating to the subject. But 
on this point the reader is cautioned to observe, that in this day will be largely repeated 
that exertion of supernatural power exhibited when (Ex. 14 : 14) “‘ Jehovah shall fight for 
you”, for it is expressly predicted : “then shall Jehovah go forth and fight against those 
nations, as when He fought in the day of battle.’”” Hence, in our interpretations, it must 
not be forgotten that the future will repeat on a more tremendous scale the Divine inter- 
position in the overthrow of enemies typified to us by what took place in the day of 
Egypt, and afterward. 


Obs. 3. Therefore, the Kingdom is introduced by violence and conflict. 
This is seen by referring to the Scriptures (which sustain the previous 
Observation), and to what was stated under former Propositions Passing 
by for the present the numerous allusions to the objects designed by Christ’s 
Coming, such as to destroy the power of His enemies (Ps. 2:1-9; Dan. 
7 : 9-26, etc.), and bestow retribution (2 Thess. 1:8; Ps. 10 : 15-18, etc.), 
it is sufficient for our purpose to direct attention to one single feature of 
the last times, which, aside from others vindicates the Divine interference 
and frightful drama that will be enacted. Notwithstanding the tenders of 
Gospel mercy, the gracious call given to Gentiles, it is predicted that not 
only wickedness shall abound down to the Advent (Matt. 24 : 6-15, 37; 
Mark 13°-°6-13 ; Luke 17:26-31; 1 Thess. 5:2, 3; 2 Tim. 3:1-13; 2 
Pet. 3:3, 4,10; Jude 18, 19, etc.), that not only antichristian powers 
shall exist down to that period (2 Thess. 2; Dan. 7, etc.), but that at the 
time of the Advent and ushering in of the Mull. age, wickedness shall 
increase (Matt. 24:37-39; Luke 17 :26-30; 1 Thess. 5:1-3; 2 Tim. 
3:13, etc.) toa fearful extent until 2¢ culminates into a mighty confed- 
eration against the truth. Without entering into details respecting this 
antichristian power (Props. 160-168), its existence is most prominently 
set forth so that it is impossible to ignore it. Through seducing influences 
(2 Tim. 4: 1-3, etc.) and corrupting passion of nations (Ps. 2; Joel 3, 
etc.), there will result an organized effort to crush Christianity by persecu- 
tion, and even to destroy the Jewish nation. Leaving the names, charac-, 
ter, blasphemy, claims, etc., of this Antichrist, we again narrow our dis- 
cussion to a single point, viz., that of his efforts to crush the Jews at Jeru- 
salem. In comparing prophecy it is distinctly announced that he shall 
unite nations and armies into an expedition into Palestine and a siege 
against Jerusalem, Dan. 11, last part and 12:1; Isa. 14: 24-27; Joel 3; 
Zech. 14; Rev. 14:20; Rev. 16:16; Ezek. 38 : 8-19,’ and that he is to 
be destroyed by a revelation of Christ in Palestine, Ezek. 38 : 21-23; 2 
Thess. 2:8; Rev. 19 : 11-20, etc., compared with the positive order laid 
down in Zech. 14. So plain are these predictions that not only the entire 
early Church looked for such an invasion of Palestine and overthrow of 
the Antichrist, but many who are not friendly to Millenarian views have 
adopted and advocated them. The reader then will observe that such a 
confederation is predicted as in open hostility against Jerusalem, etc.” 


1 The reader will observe that it does not fall within our plan to discuss, at present, the 
order or the Scriptures. If it should be thought that some of our Scripture references 


106 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRrop. 115. 


cannot apply to this period chronologically, we take the liberty of directing attention, 
e.g. to what Faber, a scholarly writer, says, respecting them in his work Diss. on Proph., 
Sacred Calendar of Proph., and work on the Jews. The 1600 furlongs of Rev. 14 : 20 
serves to identify the locality, being as numerous writers, even back to Jerome, declare 
the width of Palestine, which is confirmed by more recent surveys ; and this again is 
corroborated by other passages describing the same event in Dan., Joel, and Rey. 

> It is a curiosity to pass over the commentary of one who spiritualizes largely (as e.g. 
Scott, etc.), for in one place he will crowd everything into the past siege and destruction 
of Jerusalem, however ill-mated ; and on another passage he will admit that it seems to 
refer to a future restoration of the Jewish nation, when, through the help of the 
Almighty, they shall powerfully overcome their enemies, who, at the time, are endeavor- 
ing to crush them. Zech., chs. 14, 12, and 9, are tests which develop remarkable 
attempts at interpretation. Some, not knowing how to apply those things to the Church 
(however plastic the spiritualistic process), even refer them to Maccabean deliverance” 
(thus degrading the predictions), as e.g. Moore (The Prophets of the Restor.) on Zech. 
9: 11-17; while others fall back on conditionality, or ignore them, or account for them 
as oriental exaggerations heightened by Jewish race prejudices. it is actonishing to 
witness the comments that the Word must submit to in order to meet the demands of 
the Church-Kingdom theory or of unbelief, which have no place in their system for a 
future Theocracy, restoring David’s throne and Kingdom against the opposition of the 
nations. The Jews, whom such despise as ‘‘ wretched interpreters,” with all their errors 
and Rabbinical additions, were immensely in advance of such when, relying on the 
grammatical sense and the plain connection, they firmly believed that the same identical 
nation, so long down-trodden under their enemies, should at some future time, under the 
leadership of the Messiah, gain a complete victory over all enemies. Their literature 
is full of this faith ; and the hope inspired by God-given sense has sustained them under 
sufferings and cruelties, oppression, and persecutions unparalleled in the history of 
nations. The Jews, in Pre-and Post-Christian literature, adhered to this view, and even 
Philo, so largely addicted to spiritualizing, says (De Pramiis et Penis, § 15-20: “* For a 
man will come forth, says the prophecy (LXX. on Numb. 24 : 7), who will go out and 
conduct a great war, and will overcome great and powerful nations, as God Himself will 
assist His saints.”’ 


Obs. 4. This, in the nature of the conflict described, and the results 
that follow, indicates a prior, partial restoration of Jews to Jerusalem, as 
many writers have observed. ‘his is mo¢ the restoration under Christ, dut 
one that will be effected under the auspices of some nation.’ At least one 
thing is certain, that the nation, as such, is at this very time represented 
at Jerusalem in such numerical force that prophets predict a gathering of 
the nations against the Jews. With one voice nearly all of them allude 
to this gathering, and describe the condition of the Jews as one of great 
troubleand misery. This gathering, too, is purposely allowed by God. In’ 
some predictions the nations are said to do this ; in others that God, ‘** He 
shall gather them.’? In Rev. 16:14, “‘ the spirits of devils shall gather 
them ;’’ in another place (Rev. 13 : 5-18), the last head of the beast and the 
false prophet shall assemble them ; and then again God will do it, as in 
Zeph. 3 : 8, *‘ Therefore wait ye upon me saith the Lord, wntil the day that I 
rise up to the prey, for my determination rs to gather the nations, that I 
may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them my indignation, even all my 
fierce anger,’’ etc. ‘This is reconcilable with the permissive Providence of 
God, and with the fact that the results of the free agency of these nations 
falls in with the contemplated design of God to employ the very period of 
their gathering and anticipated triumph for their terrible punishment. 
By wilfully closing their eyes to ‘‘ the counsel’’ of God, to His plain Word, 
they are led into the position of unbelief, etc., and God orders all things 
in such a manner that their purpose of gathering shall be fully carried out. 
Nothing shall intervene to frustrate the daring plans laid by them waéil 


ie ROP. LL). | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 107 


the decisive moment arrives. They shall agree among themselves, and be 
prospered wntil God is ready to pour out His vengeance ; and the gather- 
ing itself on a gigantic scale with the eyes of the world fixed on it, will 
make the punishment the more signal and overwhelming. God employs 
their design asa vehicle for the accomplishment of His own ; and there- 
fore, with the power to prevent it at any time, it is correctly, although the 
direct result of creature agencies, attributed to Him.’ 


' Writers have conjectured variously respecting this nation that will thus aid the Jews. 
England, France, Germany, Russia, and America have been mentioned. It is difficult 
to ascertain, owing to the exceeding brevity and purposely obscured allusions of the 
prophecy on this point. May the reader ponder another conjecture added to those 
given. It has occurred to the author that probably the clew is given in Isa. 30 (Alex- 
ander’s version) and other places, where the nation is represented as trusting in Egypt 
for help, and the result will be (as in this case) that their help is vain, etc, May it not 
be that the power now strengthening itself (or that may hereafter) in Egypt shall, in 
order to increase its strength against the Sultan, enter into a treaty with the Jews and 
replace them in Jerusalem, etc. ‘This would be the entering wedge of the complications 
that follow. England, however, is most favored by writers, and Isa. 17 is a passage 
often urged. This much, however, may be affirmed, that through the aid of some 
nation or nations, and especially under the favor (which will afterward be withdrawn) 
of Antichrist (who will make a covenant with them, and whom they will receive coming 
in his own name), the Jews will anticipate a glorious era of prosperity, a multitude will 
return to Palestine, a people in unwalled villages, having gold and silver, cattle and 
goods, Ezek. 38 : 11-13, etc. They will rebuild their temple and endeavor to equal, if 
not excel, Herod’s effort. The interest taken in the Jews, the policy of statesmen, the 
loans of Hebrew bankers to the Sultan, the societies formed in behalf of Jerusalem and 
Palestine, the exploring expeditions of England and America, the rebuilding and settling 
of Jerusalem, the increased pilgrimage, the colonization schemes, etc.—all point to such 
a coming restoration, confirmed, as it is, by the weakness of Turkey. 

* The many promises that the saints shall be eye-witnesses, shall see for themselves the 
vengeance of God poured out upon His and their enemies, are significant. A comparison 
of them will show that they point to this future period of the gathering of the enemies, 
and the fearful resulting conflicts. 


Obs. 5. Jerusalem will be taken by this last enemy, and great cruelties 
will be perpetrated. The Jews will be driven to despair, such as we can 
well imagine their blasted hopes, after long centuries of tribulation then 
excited by fondly anticipated prosperity, would produce. In a partial 
restoration attempted by themselves in reliance upon others, instead of 
waiting for the one to be gained through the power of ther King, they suffer 
the last outpouring of God’s anger. This causes a cry of agony, which is 
mercifully heard,.and in such a way that sorrow and despair are turned into 
joy and happiness. Zech. ch. 14, delineates the extremity and the deliver- 
ance, which is corroborated by Zech. 12; Dan. 13; Jer. 80:424. The 
Lord will fight for them ; and among the agencies employed is this very 
Jewish nation, as specified. Zech. 14:14, *‘ Judah also shall fight at 
Jerusalem,’ ete. 


The reader will notice that in this matter Zech. 14 bears an important part, and 
hence a few words in support of our interpretation of the passage is in place. That this 
siege, etc., of Jerusalem is still future is evident from its entirely differing from past 
sieges in these points: (1) No such fighting against the nations followed ; (2) No such 
Divine interposition was witnessed ; (3) No such Coming to the Mt. of Olives, no such 
Coming of God and the saints was seen ; (4) No such “ destruction’ was turned away 
and Jerusalem was again “safely inhabited ”’; (5) No such fighting at Jerusalem by Judah 
was experienced ; (6) No such smiting of the nations, no such tumult, no such plagues, 
no such worship, etc., followed. All this is future. Dr. Brown (Christ’s Sec. Coming, Pp. 
305, note) treats this view of bloodshed, etc., with the utmost contempt and scorn, 


108 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 115. 


Thus : ‘‘ But, judging from the prophecies to which Pre-Millenarians commonly refer, 
and the literal sense which they insist upon giving to them, they appear to expect one 
vast carnage—-slaughter in a literal battle or battles—‘ the land soaked with blood,’ and 
‘all the fowls filled with flesh.’ And this is what they term the judgment of the quick, 
or, at least, a principal part of it—miserable view.” It is very easy to denounce an 
opposite view, but to prove it to be erroneous is quite a different thing. If Dr. Brown 
can blot out of the record a literal guthering of the nations against Jerusalem, a literal 
siege, etc., as well as the numerous predictions of a terrible conflict resulting in the 
overthrow of the nations by supernatural and physical means, then he can rid himself 
of this ‘‘ miserable view.” We hold to it, because it is contained in Holy Writ. 


Obs. 6. The active part taken by this Jewish nation in the punishment 
of the nations who opposed Jerusalem, etc., is given in Zech. 12:1-9; 
Zech. 10:3-12; Micah 4:11-138; Isa. 41:15-16; Micah 5:8-10; Jer. 
51: 19-20, etc., verifying Dan. 2 and 7 and 12; Ps. 2, etc. The nation, 
by virtue of Divine Support, is invincible, so that ‘* they that strive with 
thee shall perish,’ and ** they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and 
as a thing of naught,’ becoming like “‘ chaff,’’? etc. The nations will be 
confounded at their valor and might, Micah 7:16, 17; Zech. 9 : 13-16, ete. 
The slaughter will be terrific, represented under the most im pressive figures 
that language can employ, as e.g. Ezek. 38 and 39 the awful supper ‘‘ upon 
the mountains of Israel’’ to which the birds and beasts are invited, Rey. 
19 : 17-20, same supper, Rev. 14:19, 20; Jer. 25 : 29-33, etc. It is im- 
possible to explain away these passages ; it is absurd do spiritualize them 
into something else, and we must receive them. ‘That they relate to the 
future 1s so apparent that it needs no discussion ; for such a Coming of 
the Lord and of His saints, swch a display of valor, etc., by the Jews, such 
an overthrow of enemies after a siege of J erusalem has never yet been wit- 
nessed. The hesitancy of many writers, who receive it, to dwell upon it 
arises not from disbelief or disregard, but from the fear that others not ap- 
preciating its relationship to the judgments of God preparatory to the 
establishment of [lis own 'Theocratic government, may become prejudiced 
against the truth in general. But let human opinion be what it may, one 
thing cannot be done, viz., to blot out these predictions, or to prevent their 
fulfilment. 


The simple predicted facts that Jesus, the saints (the ‘‘ mighty ones”), and the Jews 
participate in it is self-evident ; the exact order of events, the explanation of details, is 
more difficult and demands a close study and comparison of the prophecies. Some 
things, however, are self-evident : (1) that the Antichristian confederation inaugurates 
this war ; (2) that they are met in the first place by Christ and His saints ; (3) that Judah 
then also engages in it ; (4) followed by Israel. The conflict will be apparently waged 
for a number of years until both Judah and Israel are restored, and embraces not only 
the one pre-eminently against the confederation at Jerusalem, but all other enemies 
and resisting kingdoms. Some (as Faber, etc.) think that Judah’s restoration will take 
thirty-five years and Israel’s forty years, and that during these periods conflicts will, 
more or less, rage. However this may be as to time, the student will be impressed, by 
a comparison of prophecy and the hints given, not to limit this period to a short time. 
It may be added : writers of ability make Rev. 16 : 12, ‘‘ the kings of the East,’’ refer to 
the Jews (so Mede, etc.) or to the ten tribes (so Faber, etc.). This opinion is also given 
by authors without a chronological application (as e.g. Kurtz, His. Old Cov., vol. 1, p. 168, 
on the authority of Hengstenberg, etc., meaning ‘‘ Trans-Euphratics,’’ i.e. people from 
beyond the Kuphrates—with which compare Faber’s reason for the use of ‘‘ kings’’). It 
is certain that this subject explains Scripture that otherwise seems contradictory (as the 
imprecatory Paslms), or exceedingly obscure (as Jer. 31 : 22, etc.). Perhaps the last 
passage, ‘‘ a woman shall compass a man’’ refers to this very conflict, for (1) it relates 
to this period of restoration and to some occurrence then to take place ; (2) the Jewish 
nation is represented as a virgin or woman, vy. 21 preceding—see Prop. 118 ; (3) the 


PROP, 115.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 109 


renderings that are given by others, as e.g, Dr. Clarke (Com. loci), ‘¢ a weak woman shall 
compass or circumvent a strong man’’ (comp. the strong man of Ps. 10 : 15-18, ete.) ; 
Dr. Blaney : “ a weak woman shall repulse a strong or mighty man.’’ 


Obs. 7. In the face of all this array of Scripture, it will not answer for 
the objecter to quote the language (John 18 : 36) of Jesus : ‘‘ Jf my King- 
dom were of this world, then would my servants fight that I should not be 
delivered to the Jews. But now 1s my Kingdom not from hence.”? Will 
the Saviour contradict the predictions of the prophets? No, for He quali- 
fies His language, guarding it, by the ‘* dut now,’’ 1.e. at the present time, 
my Kingdom is not of this world and my servants do not fight, leaving the 
plain inference that at some future time, just as prophesied, His servants 
would fight. The time of wrath on the nations and of the Kingdom will 
also come, Rey. 11:15-18. Now, during the gathering out of the elect, 
vengeance is God’s; we are forbidden to exercise it ; but God’s fordear- 
ance with Gentiles will also end as it did with Jerusalem, as it now does 
with individuals, and then He employs what agencies He pleases to cause 
their destruction. . 


The critical student must, in the consideration of this subject, ever keep in mind 
that these terrific conflicts and judgments are part of God's mercy, as illustrated, e.g. in 
Ps. 136, ‘* To Him that smote Egypt in their first-born , for His mercy endureth forever: and 
slew famous kings, for His mercy endureth forever,” etc. It is not only mercy to the Jews, 
but mercy to the nations, owing to the great benefits and blessings that result from this 
crushing defeat of wickedness and rebellion. God must be judged by the end accom- 
plished ; and judged by this standard, as given by prediction, He is abundantly 
vindicated in His exertion of authority, even if it bring about the terrible predic- 
tion, Ps. 9 : 15-20: ‘** The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the net 
which they hid is their own foot taken. The Lord is known by the judgment which He 
execuleth : the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. The wicked shall be turned 
into hell (Sheol) and all the nations that forget God. For the needy shall not always be for- 
gotten: the expectation of the poor shall not perish forever. Arise, O God ; letnot man prevail ; 
let the heathen be judgedin Thy sight. Put them in fear, O Lord; that the nations may know 
themselves to be but men.’’ Comp. Ps. 110 (Heb. 1 : 13) with Isa. 63 ; Rev. 19, etc., and 
mercy and judgment are mingled, severity and goodness are blended, and all this to 
insure the peace, happiness, ete., of a glorious Millennial period. Hence we cannot 
possibly receive the exceedingly one-sided comments forced on John 18 : 36, illustrated 
e.g. by Farrar (Life of Christ, vol. 2, p. 370) when he says : ‘* Yes, He is a King ; but not 
of this world ; not from hence ; not one for whom His servants would fight,’’ leaving 
the impression (1) that He never would act as earthly Ruler, and (2) that atime never 
would come when He Himself and His servants will fight and overcome the bloodthirsty 
persecutors and enemies of God. Such an implication isnot warranted either by the 
text or by prophecy ; the clearest predictions, if language has any decided meaning, are 
opposed to all such inferences. It will be true that ‘‘ the Lord is King forever and ever ; 
the heathen are perished out of His land.” 


Obs. 8. This future overthrow of the nations is the key to the warlike 
spirit noticed in many of the Psalms, and which has been the fruitful subject 
of derision to unbelievers. Even many believers, not recognizing the 
period and the design God has in view, turn with unbelief from Ps. 
58:10; 68 : 23, etc., as if it were inconsistent for the righteous to see and 
engage in the specific, appointed work of Jesus, the Divine Master. Look at 
the Sec. Advent of the august Jesus and see the bloodshed, slaughter, 
fearful supper, vintage, etc., connected with it, and if the blood of His 
enemies shall flow so abundantly, shall stain His garments, etc., In the day 
devoted to wrath, is it wrong or inconsistent for His people in that day to 
see and engage in the same work? If we dare not censure the blessed 


110 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 115. 


Saviour, who will engage in this work, made necessary by the enmity of 
His enemies, made requisite by His determination to set up His delayed 
Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, which these nations will determinately 
oppose, can we blame the righteous if they do as stated in Ps. 149 : 6, 7, 
8,9? And can this be regarded as in opposition to the Christian spirit, 


when it 1s even added that the righteous shall rejoice when he beholds and ~ 


participates in it? He certainly does not rejoice in the necessity that 
exists for such a manitestation of power and vengeance—the whole tenor 
of the Bible forbids 1t ; but he rejoices in it because zncorrigible enemies, 
enemies who long violated God’s law and shed the blood of saints, are 
removed ; that the righteous are at length rewarded ; that Christ obtains 
His inheritance ; that Covenant promises are realized, including even that 
the seed shall possess the gate of his enemies ; that wickedness is utterly 
rooted out of the earth; and that now the whole world shall realize in 
Millennial blessedness and glory, that there is a God that judgeth in the 
earth, that God, His Son, and His people shall be sanctified, etc. A large 
number of reasons are given why this should cause exultation in the saints, 
arising from its being a removal of enemies and the introduction of prom- 
ised blessings that could not possibly be realized on earth without such a 
previous and complete subjugation and expulsion of these enemies. The 
employment, too, of just such agencies may be part of that “‘ snare’’ and 
‘* net’? which God plants, in which to take those nations. The perversion 
of those predictions springs from not locating their fulfilment properly. 
One party, not observing that the Holy Christ is the Leader in these 
things, the Introducer of this day of vengeance and resultant year of the 
Redeemed, either persistently closes its eyes to the existence of such pas- 
sages in the Scriptures, or declares them inconsistent with the Spirit, etc., 
of Jesus Christ. Another party takes a more dangerous position, for find- 
ing these prophecies and not noticing that they are identified with the See. 
Advent of Jesus, with His own appointed day of vengeance, presume 
rashly, without warrant, against even prohibition, to take up the sword 
and establish a Kingdom or maintain the truth. Both extremes are to be 
avoided, leaving God to take care of the ultimate fulfilment of His own 
Word, resting assured that such a terrible resource can only be taken under 
the directed auspices of Christ Himself, who as the designated ** Lion of 
the tribe of Judah,’’ etc., will make this *‘ war in righteousness.”’ 

That the reader may see how these Psalms are treated, a few illustrations are appended. 
Rogers (Superh. Origin of the Bible, Ap., p. 428, foot-note) endeavors to remove the force of 
them by observing that ‘* David was not a Christian,’’ i.e he did not live under a Chris- 
tian dispensation, and hence due allowance must be made for the terrible expressions 
indicative of vengeance, wrung from his sufferings, and quotes Isaac Taylor as indors- 
ing such a position. But what then becomes of David’s inspiration, and how can Christ 
Himself perform such a work? Even Christlieb (Mod. Doubt, p. 239) says’: “ We must 
acknowledge the imperfection of the Old Test. stand-point occupied by the sacred poets’’ 
(viz., in view of the principles, etc , introduced by the present dispensation). But it is 
not the poet merely that speaks, for the Spirit speaks through him ; and to attribute 
imperfection to them utterly unreconcilable with piety and holiness is simply to say 


that the Spirit of God is guilty of the same. Then to say that Jesus or the New Test. 
does not embrace these alleged imperfections is one-sided and unfair, as seen e.g. in the 


denunciations of Jesus against the Pharisees and unbelieving, and the fearful doom of — 


the enemies of God as represented in the Apoc. The truth is this : the Spirit sees the 
end from the beginning, and showing us that the enemies of God will surely triumph 
over the Church, persecuting it unto a bloody death, He then, seeing the time has come 
for the setting up of the Theocratic Kingdom, in a Theocratic spirit exclusively predicts 


the fate of those dreadful enemies and the exultant triumph of the saints. Of course it~ 


Prop. 115. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 1i1 


is not strange that Coleridge (Confessions of an Inquiring Spirit) thinks that “the cursings 
of David’’ are to be rejected as merely of human origin, for a low estimate of inspiration 
rids itself easily of this and a large part of the Bible. But it is strange that Davidson 
(New Ed. of Lorne’ s Introduction, p. 761) deprecates the language of Ps. 55, 69, 109, and 137, 
as improper and unchristian, ‘‘ the ebullitions of natural and unsanctified feeling,’’ the 
expression of “ personal feelings inconsistent with their prevailing disposition and with 
the spirit of true religion.’’ This is precisely what unbeliet is alleging against the future 
“‘ wrath ot the Lamb,’’ denunciations of the wicked, as recorded in the New Test., saying 
that it evinces a partisan spirit, etc. Even the noble song of Hannah (1 Sam. 2 : 1-10), 
and which, as Fairbairn (Typology, p. 93) has shown, is responded to in Mary’s song of 
praise, is made expressive of the ebullition of human teeling, so that (as Jebb, Sac. 
Lit., p. 397) her *‘ temper’ was not ‘‘ thoroughly subdued,” for ‘‘ she could not suppress 
the workings of a retaliative spirit.” Its relationship to the Christ is thus overlooked. 
Perowne (Zhe Book of Psalms), in a note on Ps. 35 : 22, attributes the imprecatory Psalms 
tothe sterner nature of the older dispensation, and hence that the spirit ot them is super- 
seded by the present one. We are, therefore, to conclude, that such promises given to 
believers (as e.g. Ps. 149 : 6-9) were merely intended to present a delusive hope, God 
foreseeing that they would not be realized because of a determined repealment of them! 
The Ch. Union, Jan. 10, 1877, remarks : ‘‘ David’s imprecatory Psalms are the expression 
of an experience far below that which a disciple of Christ ought to have attained in the 
year of grace, 1877. It is simply misleading to teach them as divine ideals to our 
children.” Hence these stern realities, designed for all, are only human productions, 
and only express the violence of David’s own passions. Alas! for inspiration if true. 
But we need not be surprised at such utterances, when in the same article appeared the 
following: ‘‘ It igs not true that they (viz., the Old and the New Tests.) are of equal 
authority or to be interpreted alike’’ (comp. Prop. 16). ‘‘ The Old Test. was made for 
the childhood of the world ; the New Test. for its manhood. One book is the primer ; 
the other book belongs to the graduating class.” This is a specimen of the flippant, 
esteemed smart style so largely prevalent in a class of religious periodicals ; its absurdity 
being self-evident, seeing e.g. that the covenants, predictions, and promises contained in 
the Old Test. are yet to be fulfilled. Next: ‘‘ The experiences and examples of the Old 
Test. saints are crude.’’ ‘* They are the experiences and examples of men living in a low 
moral state.’ ‘* They are no more worthy to be cited as ideals of Christian character 
than a fall pippin is worth eating in June,” etc. Alas! then Paul made a grievous 
mistake in holding up before us, as examples worthy of imitation, the Patriarchs and 
other ancient worthies. It is surprising, if this be true, that God has not yet favored 
the writer of such an article with a translation, seeing that he is so much superior to 
Enoch and Elijah! But seriously : the reader can see that the ancients must be depre- 
ciated in order to get rid of a class of passages and predictions, so full of terrible retri- 
bution and in which the saints rejoice, which these writers cannot fit into their 
spiritualistic and Whitbyan theories. They have no place for them, and hence denounce 
the authors of them. No wonder that such believers are forced to say that the only 
inspiration the Bible possesses is that common to all good men. In reference to the 
principle adopted by Rey. Keate (The 109th Ps., A Sermon, London, 1794, 4to) and Rev. 
Partridge (The 109th Ps., A Sermon, London, 1798, 8vo), that the imprecations are not 
those of David but of the enemies of David against him, it is utterly untenable and 
opposed to the general analogy of Scripture on the subject. We gain nothing by such 
arbitrary expositions, and but very few have thus far adopted it. 


Obs. 9. This subject in one of its features, ought to serve as a warning 
to Jews, not to allow themselves to be persuaded by any nation or party to 
establish themselves in Jerusalem and Palestine. The prophets plainly 
predict their sad fate ; that they shall fall under the persecuting power of 
this last confederation and experience its fearful effects. The restoration 
that God predicts for them, and which they should await, is under the 
Messiah, Jesus Christ, David’s Son. If they run before they are called, or 
if they accept of a restoration under the auspices of some nation relying 
upon their own efforts, etc., they shall certainly realize in their own un- 
happy experience what will befall Jerusalem and its inhabitants at this last 
great siege by the gathered nations, -------. --- 


112 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 115. 


This warning is the more necessary since repeated attempts have been made under 
the specious plan of a Divine calling, to induce converted Jews and believers to colonize 
Palestine, so as “ to prepare the way’’ for the Coming of the Messiah. When the Adams 
Colony was raised for this purpose, the writer then earnestly protested against the 
scheme, showed that the Christ did not require any such preparation, and that they 
were running without being called. In Nathanael Indeed, where the scheme was favor- 
ably mentioned, the writer insisted that in view of the future condition of the returned 
Jews under Antichrist, and that the work of predicted glorious restoration, the restored 
fruitfulness of the land, etc., was the result alone of direct Messianic intervention, any 
colonization thus carried out would inevitably result in injury—placing believers in a 
situation where they would particularly be exposed to hardships and to ultimate persecu- 
tion. The papers reported the complete failure of the colony, and that the government, 
through its foreign officials, aided in bringing many back. Warner (In the Levant, p. 7), 
after speaking of the disastrous outcome of the Adams Colony, refers to their successors— 
a colony of Germans from Wiirtemberg, who are ‘‘ striving to redeem and reclaim the 
land, and make it fit for the expected day of Jubilee,” or to prepare for the Advent. 
He says that they refer as authorizing their belief and mission to, especially, Isa. 32 : 1 
-and 49 : 12 et seg. and 52:1. A reference to these passages, taken in connection with 
the general analogy, shows that these persons are undertaking a work which is Mes- 
sianic—i.e. it pertains to Jesus to perform and not to man. A society was established 
(general meeting in 1854) on the Salon, near Ludwigsburg, to gather a people of God in 
Palestine (about 10,000 families) in order to bring about a renewed Theocratic arrange- 
ment (Kurtz, Ch. His., vol. 2, p. 333). In the Proph. Times (July, 1875), in a letter from 
Stuckert, it was stated that a pastor of Bavaria, Cloeter, ‘‘ who has a great party 
behind him,”’ is proclaiming that the people of God are to fly into the wilderness (Apoe. 
12 : 6, 14) and to remain there three and a half years, and this wilderness is in Russia, 
either the Crimea or the Caucasus. <A party of Swiss made the wilderness the Cape of 
Good Hope, and emigrated, with bad results, to that place. Now, all such things are 
mere folly, and indicate that the persons holding them have but the crudest notions of 
vhrist's appointed work, of the Theocratic Kingdom that is to be established, ete. Every- 
thing it seems must, through human infirmity, be caricatured. It is amazing how this 
doctrine of the future restoration and its results are perverted, and a following obtained. 
A noted instance of fanaticism isthat of R. Brothers, who, with Sharp (1794), was to 
lead the Jews to re-occupy Jerusalem. The title of the first production is sufficient : 
‘“* A Revealed Knowledge of the Prophecies and Times. Book the First. Wrote under 
the direction of the Lord God, and published by His express command ,; it being the first 
sign of warning for the benefit of all nations. Containing, with other great and remark- 
able things, not revealed to any other person on earth, the restoration of the Hebrews 
to Jerusalem by the year 1798 ; under their revealed Prince and Prophet.” This prince 
and prophet was Brothers himself, in whose favor as prince a Mr. Halsted, or Halhed, 
made even a motion in the House of Commons, His lunacy (for he was declared a 
lunatic by a State commission) is self-evident from his titles, ‘‘ Nephew of God,”’ etc., 
and making a Miss Cot the daughter of David and future Queen of the Hebrews. The 
student can recall the sad prostitutions of these prophecies by Jewish impostors in the 
past, a long and dreary list, resulting at times in terrible bloodshed. 


Obs. 10. This also should serve as a warning to the nations, not to allow 
themselves by any arguments or inducements fo enter into a league against 
Jerusalem. It is predicted that this will be done, and that all such nations 
shall be severely punished (as e.g. Zech. 12 ; 2, 3, 9) and destroyed. Wis- 
dom, prudence, ought to urge an acceptance of God’s Word. It is true, 
that the establishment of such a Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom may not 
prove very palatable to the nations, the governments of the earth, for it 
is destined to interfere materially with governments as now organized and 
conducted, and will not tolerate in any of them that sinfulness, etc., 
which, more or less, attaches to rulers, people, manner of conducting goy- 
ernment, etc. But considering the Divine Purpose and the blessed results 
that will flow from it to the world; regarding the Almighty Power that 
will enforce the successful accomplishment of it although all nations resist 
it—surely ¢rwe wisdom ought to indicate a persistent refusal to all solicita- 


PROP. 115.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 143 


tions to engage against the ancient city and people of God,and to suggest a 
ready compliance with all the demands that in that day may be made by 
the Mighty One who is to rule as the Father’s beloved Theocratic King. It 
is no idle caution or impertinent request which says, Ps. 2: ‘' Be wise 
now therefore, O ye Kings ; be instructed, ye judges of the earth. Serve the 
Lord with fear, and rejoiwe with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be 
angry, and ye.perish from the way when His wrath is kindled but a little.’’ 
This period will be ¢he crisis of nations. 

Brookes (Maranatha, p. 444) quotes Frederick the Great as saying: “ Meddle not with 
these Jews ; no man ever touched them and prospered.’’ How largely this has been 
fulfilled in the past, and how true it will be in the future. It is in view of England’s 
treatment of the Jews in later times, giving them the highest civil privileges and protect- 
ing them in their rights, that some writers base the opinion that God will, in the future 
contest with nations, show special favor to her. The United States might well put in 
such a plea, because she has been uniformly kind and considerate to the Jews. Such 


pleas, however, will avail nothing, if such nations resist the restoration of the Theocratic 
Kingdom and its intended sway ; all depends upon their future conduct. 


Obs. 11. This again reminds us of the extreme position adopted by 
peace congresses, etc. A portion of the Scripture, isolated or torn from 
its connection, is alone presented in their pleas, while lengthy predictions, 
which show that war exists down and at this period, are ignored as if they 
did not exist. The general analogy of the Word tells us that it is only 
after (not before) this terrible conflict of, and with, the nations, that war 
shall be banished under the then peaceful and triumphant reign of David’s 
Son. To locate this era at any other period previously, or to declare that 
it can be brought to pass without Divine interposition, is to indulge in 
dreams that will never be realized. 'To diminish war, suffering, etc., is a 
Christian duty, but this is very different from that of misinterpreting and 
misapplying the Word of God, and predicting ‘‘ peace and safety,’’ which 
God warns us against. It virtually closes the eyes of many to the predic- 
tions of the future, and prevents them from seeing that they should so live 
that they ‘‘ may be accounted worthy to escape the things that are coming 
on the earth,’’ for the principle recorded by Ezek. 14:16, 18, 20, will be 
fully carried out. 

Men, forsaking the Scriptures, are divided as to the instrumentality by which war is 
to cease. Some make it Christianity ; others the future religion of humanity : some, 
civilization ; others commerce; some, education; others suffrage of woman: some, 
spiritualism ; others, international arbitration. The last named is a great favorite 
with some, although it is admitted that an arbitration court, if the parties are dis- 
satisfied with its division, has no civil force to enforce it. Lord Lytton (The Com- 
ing Race, p. 45) presents the idea—strongly reiterated recently, owing to remarkable 
inventions, increasing the efficiency of war material—that reason will so prosecute its 
discoveries until destructive agencies are so perfectly understood and under control, 
that for armies to engage would involve mutual annihilation, so that wars will cease, 
nolens volens. In the Prize Essays on a Congress of Nations, it is generally argued 
that wars will eventually cease, and an appeal is made to, and the language quoted of, 
prophecies found in the Bible. But such language is torn from its connection, and instead 
of allowing the Scriptures to testify how and when it is to be realized, it is taken for 
granted that it will result exclusively through human agencies. Some of the ablest 
advocates, like Elihu Burritt, deny a future Second Advent, Jesus is ‘‘ the Prince of 
Peace,” but He brings it in His own way, 


Obs. 12. When this war is concluded, then, and then only, will Ps, 76 
be fulfilled in the manner we have presented. Then and ¢hen only shall 


114 : THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 115. 


the force of Ps. 110 be realized, as verified in the fate of the kings and 
heads over countries. Zhen, too, will men find that the confederation and 
its defeat are described in Ps. 83. Then Ps. 68 will stand forth with a 
significancy that will astonish, and Ps. 60 will present a clearness in the 
light of fulfilment that must surprise. ‘The rejoicing then prevailing is well 
foretold in Ps. 47. The struggle and glorious result is eloquently por- 
trayed in Ps. 46, and it then will be a matter of amazement that it could 
be applied to any other era. How wnpressive, viewed in this connection, 
becomes Ps. 48, delineating the judgment inflicted on the kings that 
were assembled, and the glory that results. Indeed, in that day, many a 
prediction now imperfectly understood, shall stand forth with a distinct- 
ness that will reproach the weakness of our faith in God’s Word, when the 
last prayer of Moses, the benedictions of Jacob, the covenanted relation- 
ship of the people, etc., are vindicated by this tremendous overthrow of 
enemies—then truly prophecy itself, now the sport of scientific unbelief 
and the butt of unscholarly ridicule, will secure the profound esteem and 
praise of all nations. 


E.g. such passages as Mal. 4:3; Zech. 1 : 20, and many others, either concise or 
obscure, are, perhaps, more fully explained in the light of this subject. It is certain 
that such passages as Ps. 45 : 6 are thus introduced by girding on the sword, performing 
terrible things, and making ‘* thane arrows sharpin the heart of the king’s enemies ;’’ that 2 
Sam. 22 : 35-47 comp. with Ps. 17, is descriptive of @ real eaperience that shall be fully 
realized in the future ; that, for aught we know, the 144,000 mighty men of war in 1 
Chron, 27, may be typical of the saints in the Theocratic Kingdom, the 144,000 first- 
fruits, since of the Lord Himsely it is said, when the Song of Mose: shall be sung in the 
future triumph: ‘‘ The Lord is a man of war, the Lord (Jehovah) is His name.” ‘ Who is 
like unto Thee, UV Lord, among the gods? Who is like unto Thee glorious in holiness, fearful 
an praises, doing wonders.” 


Obs. 13. This war, with the prominency, valor, success, etc., of the Jew- 
ish nation in it, corroborates tho supremacy of that people presented in the 
preceding Proposition, Thus verifying 2 Saml. 7 : 23, 24; Deut. 33:29; 
Isa. 43 : 1-7; Isa. 60; Zech. 9:16: Jer. 3: 17-19: Ps. 144; Jer. 33: 9— 
16, the ‘‘war,’’ Ps. 110, etc. 


Obs. 14. The reader, who has closely followed our entire argument, will 
not fail to see that it is highly appropriate for the Jewish nation to be thus 
employed as instruments in the execution of the Divine Judgment of the — 
King. The propriety springs from the fact that, as the Davidic throne 
and Kingdom embrace this nation, and as the judgments are to be poured 
out in consequence of the process of re-establishing this Kingdom in its 
Theocratic-Davidie form, the nation itself must, in the nature of the case, 
be used as an instrument in overwhelming His enemies. All pertaining to 
the Kingdom is thus engaged. Compare Jer. 51 :19-20. . 

This undoubtedly results from the fact that then it will be clearly acknowledged and 
felt. that the throne and Kingdom of David, identified with the nation, are to be restored 
under the Messiah, *‘ the King of the Jews.’’ This attempted restoration will prove hateful 
to many kings and nations, and they will unite in a tremendous effort to crush it. The 
nation thus identified, must, as prophecy fully indicates, occupy a prominent position in 
the movements of the new ordering, introductory and established. Judging merely from 
Zechariah’s predictions, the spirit of Jer. 48 : 10 will again be revived until the bloody 
enemies are effectually overcome. 


_ Obs, 15. One peculiarity in this conflict is the statement that every Jew 
1s specially under Divine protection, and endowed with supernatural 


fomeor., LID, | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 115 


strength, so that none of them are overcome by their enemies. The Spirit 
foreseeing this already foreshadows it in Deut. 32 :30, and gives it plainly 
in Zech. 12:6, 8; thus also fulfilling Ps. 140:7. Being under the super- 
vision of their King, and acting by His direct command, it will happen to 
them as in the battle with the Midianites (Num. 31 : 49), ‘ there lacketh 
not one man of us.’’ For, God says to them, Deut. 33:27; Lev. 
On ty Oe 

An earnest of this war and its success is given to Abraham, when with his born - 
servants, he overcame the army of Chedorlaomer, the head of a confederation. Comp. 


also Isa, 41, which will effectually be realized in the Messiah, His people, and the re- 
stored nation. 


Obs. 16. Owing to the fearful slaughter and the multitude of dead, we 
have described by Ezekiel and others the cleansing of the land. This 
gives us a direct clew to ‘‘ the cleansing of the sanctuary,’’ for the land of 
Palestine is called the sanctuary (Hx. 15:17, etc.), and, it being defiled 
with the dead, is carefully purified by their removal. 


Various writers, such as Bh. Newton, Andrews, Faber, etc., call attention to this 
cleansing. We prefer this vastly to the singular view entertained by the Seventh-Day 
Adventists, making the cleansing of the Sanctuary to be a cleansing of the Sanctuary in 
heaven. Much that is mystical, or purely inferential, is put on the phrase by various 
writers, which a simple comparison of Scripture avoids. 


Obs. 1%. The reader is reminded that these terrific scenes are connected 
with the closing period of Dan. 2 and 7, 1.e. during the divided period of 
the last empire, the last beast ; while powers arising from it are still exist- 
ing, this confederation, this tribulation, these results will also be wit- 
nessed. These kingdoms and beasts, with their outgrowths, describe, as 
Mede and others have well characterized it, ‘‘ the Gentile domination,’’ 
beginning with Jewish captivity and extending down during a long period 
of, more or less, oppressive Gentilism, wntid the mystery of God is 
finished. Even Jews have observed and commented on this peculiarity, 
Thus e.g. Mede quotes Rabbi Saadias Gaon on Dan. 7:18 as saying: 
‘** Because Israel have rebelled against the Lord, their Kingdom shall be 
taken from them, and shall be given to these four Monarchies, which shall 
possess the Kingdom vn this age, and shall lead captive and subdue Israel to 
themselves in this age until the age to come, wntil Messiah shall reign.”’ 
History corroborates this Gentile dominion, and it will continue until God 
shall determine that ‘‘ the Times of the Gentiles’’ have run their allotted, 
predetermined course, and then and then only under the restoration of this 
Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom will this domination come to a perpetual end 
(Prop. 164). | 


Obs. 18. Rejecting this prophetic war-spirit, commentators are greatly 
perplexed over the statement of Luke 22 : 36-38 and render corresponding 
singular interpretations. Jesus exhorts to the purchase of the sword, and 
when ‘‘ they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said unto 
them, it is enough.’’ And inv. 49 the question was asked, ‘' Lord, shall 
we smite with the sword ?’’ Jesus permitted, v. 50, so that ‘‘ one of them 
smote the servant of the high priest and cut off his right ear. And Jesus 
answered and said, Suffer ye thus far.’? Even Olshausen makes the al- 
lusion to be that they should purchase or obtain the sword of the Spirit ! 


116 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 115. 


He spiritualizes the whole matter to get rid of the idea that Jesus ordered 
material swords, because they are regarded as inconsistent with Christ’s 
character as ‘‘ Prince of Peace.’’ So Barnes, Bloomfield, and others, who 
try to make out a proverbial expression or prediction, indicative of future 
trials and a proper provision to be made for them. But against all such 
one-sided interpretations, they forget (1) that material swords were shown ; 
(2) the two material swords shown were esteemed sufficient ; (3) that one 


of the swords was actually used in inflicting a wound ; and (4) that this was. 


done with the connivance of Jesus is self-evident, seeing that He ordered 
them foreseeing the intended use. ‘To make “ It is enough’’ to mean, “ you 
do not understand me’’ is absurd, and, in view of what occurred in the use 
of the sword, would place Jesus in a false position. ‘The expression in vy. 
51, “* Suffer ye thus far,’’ gives the clew to the whole transaction. It is 
simply indicative that He can and will resort to arms and violence when 
(as all analogy proves) the proper time has arrived, but not then at that crisis 
(the time of obedience and humiliation, and suffering to perfect Himself as 


Redeemer), for to carry out the Divine Will, the resistance then offered—a. 


sign that the sword also belonged to Him—was amply sufficient. 


To show how unbelief handles this entire subject, attention is called to an article in 
the Westm. Review, Jan., 1852, entitled The Ethics of Christendom, which, while disbeliev- 
ing in the actual occurrence of these threats of war and violence (i.e. under the plea 
that they are interpolations, or of human origin), frankly concedes their existence as 
a spirit identified with the future estimated triumph of the Church. In controverting the 
non-resistance principle, the writer shows that the teaching of the New Test. is, that the 
saints were to await the Sec. Advent when ‘* physical force,’’ ‘‘ retribution,’’ etc., would 
be employed. He then adds: ‘‘ The new reign was to come with force ; and on nothing 
else, in the last resort, was there any reliance: only that the army was to arrive from 
heaven before the earthly recruits were taken up. Nothing, indeed, can well be further 
from the sentiment of Scripture than the extreme horror of force, as a penal and dis- 
ciplinary instrument, which is inculcated in modern times. ‘ My Kingdom is,’ said 
Jesus, ‘not of this world : else would my servants fight ’—an expression which implies 
that no Kingdom of this world can dispense with arms, and that He Himself, were He 
the head of a human polity, would not forbid the sword ; but while ‘legions of angels’ 
stood ready for His word, and only waited till the Scripture was fulfilled and the hour 
of darkness was passed, to obey the signal of heavenly invasion, the weapon of earthly 
temper might remain within the sheath. The infant Church, subsisting in the heart of 
a military empire and expecting from on high a military rescue, was not itself to fight ; 
not, however, because force was in all cases ‘ brutal’ and ‘ heathenish,’ but because, in 
this case, it was to be angelic and celestial.’’ We, however, are to disbelieve and reject 
the whole as of human origin! Well may it be asked, if we cut out of the Word all that 
relates to this subject, how much will be left, and what confidence could be placed in the 
remainder ? 


EEE 


Prop. 116.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 117 


Proposition 116. This Kingdom is a visible, external one, here 
on the earth, taking the place of earthly kingdoms (comp. 
Props. 122,111, 123, ete.). 


Covenant promises, prophecies, all produce the impression that 
as soon as if is set up, such will be the result. To deny this, is to 
pass over the plainest feature of this Kingdom ; and, therefore, no 
one but admits either that now it thus exists, or that at some time 
in the future the Church will assume this (thus making a change), 
or else that it is fulfilled (against prophecy) in the third heaven. 
The admission is favorable to our argument, for precisely such a 
visible Kingdom is demanded. 


Obs. 1. The Kingdom embraces not merely visibility but a divine-political 
dominion (Prop. 117) superseding all other Kingdoms, as e.g., Dan. 2 : 44 ; 
Rey. 11:15; Dan. 7 : 13, 14, 18-27; Zech. 14: 9, ete. This, too, is, ad- 
mitted by a host of our opponents ; and we are assured by many of them 
that, by some additions or transpositions, this will in the course of time be 
effected. But if this is a characteristic of the Kingdom and at its setting 
up, as prophecy indicates, then, if the Church is such a Kingdom, the 
Church should have presented this very appearance. On the other hand, 
the Kingdom of God at one time was visible, then it was overthrown, but 
its restoration under David’s Son foretold. Now, if ever restored, as 
covenant requires and as promise declares, then, as a matter of course, a 
divine political rule or dominion must be restored. Hence, the prophecies 
run in the current of the Divine Purpose in making these portrayals of the 
future Kingdom. 


While it is correct to affirm—in view (the highest ground) of the non-restoration of 
the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, and its postponement until the times of the Gentiles 
are ended (Prop. 66, etc.)—that the Church and State are separate and distinct, yet it is 
pushing the matter to an untenable extreme (as e.g. done by the Scottish Church, see p. 
158, etc., D’Aubigné’s Germany, England, and Scotland) to assert that they never will be 
united (even as a church claiming to exert rights pertaining to the civil power). This 
assertion is based on the declaration, ‘‘ My Kingdom is not of this world” (see Prop. 109, 
where this passage, so fruitful of misconception, is examined). But oath-bound Cove- 
nant, prophecy, the Theocratic ordering—aill evidences that the position is a wrong one ; 
what is true now, is no barrier to future fulfilment and realization. It is simply un- 
reasonable and extravagant to believe in a world-wide dominion, to which all nations are 
subject, etv., lacking such a union. The student is reminded that the Church nearest 
to the Apostles was far more logical and consistent in its faith. That child-like belief 
based on the grammatical sense of the Word, now so scornfully rejected by many as 
childish, is pre-eminently the scriptural faith. The denial, on the one hand, of its truth, 
or the perversion, on the’other, of the same to exalt the authority of the Church, does 
not cancel its ultimate fulfilment in the way God purposes. 


Obs. 2. The concession, that such a Kingdom is still im the future, is all 
that at present our argument needs. The manner in which it is made may 


118 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 116. 


be referred to as a matter of curiosity and confirmation. Whatever mysti- 
cal or spiritualistic interpretations Neander, Fairbairn and others, give, 
yet they are forced, against their theory, to find in an ultimate outward, 
visible manifestation in the Church, in a real political dominion, in @ sub- 
jection of all Kingdoms under a Theocratic government, the conditions of 
prophecy. Waving already quoted Neander largely, who contends for this 
feature, we pass to others. Pressense, who spiritualizes the prophecies 77 
extenso, still unable to entirely rid himself of what he calls ‘*‘ the material- 
istic’? tendencies of them, says (The Redeemer, p. 101) : ‘‘ Let us add that 
this spirituality of interpretation prevents us in no respect from admitting 
that the Kingdom of God will be triwmphantly established in the outer 
world also; the new heavens and the new earth are a reality to our 
minds.’’ Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 297), gives to the Church ‘the real 
universality and the absolute right of governing upon earth ;”’ alluding (p. 
447) to the language of Daniel respecting the Kingdom, he says, it is such 
as *‘ to indicate an actual remodelling of the state of things among men, and 
a fresh organization of the social fabric such as would formally commit the 
administration of affairs into the hands of the Lord’s people,’’ etc.; and he 
admits (p. 465) that this includes ‘* the formal elevation of the pious and 
God-fearing portion of mankind @o the place of influence and authority.” 
Lange (Bremen Lec. No. 8) advocates a future union of Church and State, 
asserting ‘‘ that State and Church are ¢o become one in the Kingdom of God,”’ 
and in his Com. (Matt. 3, p. 73) he declares that ‘‘ the Christian Church 
and the Christian State may be regarded as the twofold manifestation of the 
Kingdom of God.’’ Even those who are the most non-committal admit 
even on Isa. 2: 1-5 (as e.g. Alexander, Com. loci), that the description 
denotes something of authority, etc., ‘* permanently visible.’’? Dr. Arnold 
held that a development of the Church in its perfect form includes a 
blending or union of Church and State, thus constituting a properly 
developed Kingdom of God, saying (Hurst’s His. Rational.), ‘* there can 
be no perfect Church or State without their blending into one,’’ etc.' Such 
references might be endlessly multiplied, but these are amply sufficient to 
show, (1) that the Word of God demands such an outward dominion ; (2) 
that it will be swpreme over the earth ; (3) that the want is felt and acknowl- 
edged ; (4) the hope is expressed that 7¢ will finally, in some way, be 
realized. 


1 Arnold (Life of, by Stanley, vol. 2, p. 103), in a letter to Bunsen, says : ‘‘ Connected 
with this is Rothe’s book, which I have read with great interest. His first position—that 
the State, and not the Church (in the common and corrupt sense of the term) is the 
perfect form under which Christianity is to be developed—entirely agrees with my 
notions.’’ Rothe (Life, by Nippold, and Ethics) advocated the absorption of the Church 
by the State, the State and Church forming one, the latter being incorporated with the 
former, the State being the controlling power. The essential idea of such a visible, 
outward world Kingdom is strongly advocated by recent leading theologians, and the 
Chiliastic notion is doctrinally incorporated to suit their systems. Thus e.g. Martensen 
(Ch. Dog., 8. 281), proclaims his faith that Christianity will not merely be a ‘‘ struggling 
power in the world, but a world-conquering, a world-ruling power likewise.” ‘‘ The states 
and institutions of municipal life shall then be governed by Christian principle,” etc. 
He only forgets to tell us how to reconcile all this with e.g. sec. 279, when down to the 
Sec. Advent he gives no place for such a Millennial theory. The-fact is, many who refuse 
to be called Chiliasts entertain fully Chiliastic views—impelled to it by prophecey—but 
unfortunately do not follow the order laid down in the Word for its realization. Rev. 
Hall, in Christianity Consistent with a Love of Freedom, expresses his faith that in the pre- 
dicted Mill. age, State and Church will be united, ‘‘ for the professors of Christianity 
must then become politicians,”’ ete. 


Prop. 116.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 119 


Obs. 3. It is strange, however, that in such a delineation of prophetical 
language, fully admitting a divine political world-dominion, they forget 
the objections alleged against our view. In their case the very passages 
presented to teach an exclusively spiritual and invisible Kingdom as against 
us, are now no longer of force. But we may well pause, and ask the consis- 
tency of this; for, if they forbid an outward universal Kingdom such as 
the early Church advocated, why should they not also prevent them from 
entertaining a similar view? Again, in such admissions they also overlook 
what so many writers among themselves learnedly argue when writing in 
opposition to us, viz. that those predictions are typical of something else. 
Thus, e.g. Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 270) frankly admits that the prophetic 
language describes a literal Kingdom, but that this must be understood as 
typical, etc. Afterward he himself sets up a Kingdom corresponding with 
this literal description, and neglects applying to the plain grammatical 
sense his Origenistic derived typical one. If the predictions have been 
typical thus far in the history of the Church, and no change of nature 1s 
noted in the predictions themselves, how does it come that this typical ap- 
plication does not continue—that it suddenly changes, more or less, into 
literalness ? Does not this prove that the principles of interpretation 
underlying the Church-Kingdom theory are not entirely satisfactory to 
their own advocates. 


Obs. 4. The very concession of a visible ‘‘world-dominion’’ by the 
Church-Kingdom theorists is hampered by other difficulties, irreconcilable 
with the uniform tenor of prophecy. Thus, e.g. they concede that this 
Kingdom possesses an outward authoritative dominion, but, (1) they 
must, if they take the descriptions of wickedness, war, etc., preceding the 
Sec. Advent, have the saints or Church yield wp such dominion against 
positive assertions by the prophets to the contrary ; (2) with their theory of 
‘the ending of this dispensation, general judgment, winding up of the 
world, changes in the Church, they ad/ow no such permanency, everlasting 
duration (see Prop. 159) ascribed to it by the prophets. The only effort 
made to obviate this difficulty is to say that the Church is everlasting, and 
hence will ever endure. This we admit, but that is not the point at 
issue between us ; the point is, that a certain position or station is assigned 
to the Church, viz., that of exerting power, authority, dominion here on 
the earth, and the question is whether that will be retained as the prophets 
predict or not. Our doctrine gives this authority to the elect people—the 
seed of Abraham—but at a designated time, and retains it as a permanent 
possession ; the prevailing view gives such dominion, but finally brings it 
to a close to make way for an alleged ‘“‘ Kingdom of Glory,’’ somewhere in 
God’s universe. | 


Obs. 5. If the popular definition of the Kingdom of God, viz., that it is 
‘ God’s reign in the heart’’ (thus confounding God’s Sovereignty with a 
special Kingdom of promise) is correct, how comes it that the prophets 
assign it specified time and place in the future? How comes it that it 1s 
spoken of as established at a certain period, and as pertaining to the 
humanity of Jesus Christ? Surely something very different from the 
absolute eternal Sovereignty of God is denoted ; it may be, and is indeed at- 
tached to, and grows out of, that Sovereignty, but linked as it 1s with the 
elect Jewish nation, the Davidic throne and Kingdom, the human nature 


120 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 116. 


of Christ as David’s Son, the outward visibility and dominion, the ending 
of the times of the Gentiles, the restoration of the Jewish nation, etc., it 
cannot be referred to any other Kingdom but the Theocratic-Davidic as he- 
lieved in, and preached by the early churches. Admit this, and the 
significance and unity of covenant and prophecy are apparent ; deny it, 
and diversity and antagonism follow. 


Strange that men under the influence of a favorite theory will make the temporal 
blessings formerly connected with the Theocratic rule, and which are promised on its 
restoration to be greatly increased and enlarged, to be typical of spiritual blessings in 
order to make them suit the Church, even when they relate to the natural life, health, 
offspring, abundant harvests, increase of cattle, fruitfulness of land, etc., in brief, to the 
very things that are needed under a visible Kingdom. Stranger still, that a suffering, 
struggling church, without civil laws as the Theocracy possessed, without the distinctive 
features of the covenanted and predicted Kingdom, without the presence of its The- 
ocratic (in the strict sense, God ruling as an earthly Ruler) Head (so that believers are 
now to render civil’ obedience to earthly kings and rulers), should be so persistently 
elevated to the position of that still future Kingdom, called (2 Pet. 1: 11, etc.) Christ’s. 
And strange, with all this, men cannot wholly divest themselves of the idea of visibility, 
outward exercise of power, etc. God has permitted men to work out their ideas of the 
Kingdom of God. ‘The union of Church and State in the days of Constantine ; the 
Papal Hierarchy with its presumptions ; the State assuming to control the Church by 
its ‘‘ divine right ;’ the Church declaring, by virtue of its superiority, its power over 
the State ; the struggles century after century in many countries arising from a Church- 
Kingdom notion—these are matters of history and are written in letters of blood. Let 
the conflicts of Germany, France, England, Holland, etc., testify to the sad influence 
exerted by this theory. Let us illustrate by a single example: the practical result of 
this Church-Kingdom theory is seen in Calvin’s rule in Geneva. Calvin, under the 
impression that the Kingdom of God was now to be realized in the lives of the people (so 
Fisher, His. Ref., p. 217, comp. D’Aubigné’s His., Mosheim, etc.), so framed the State 
that the Church, through the Consistory, had the controlling influence, and the State was 
only co-operative in enforcing a code which was evidently based on the opinion that 
God’s Kingdom was already established, and that a sort of Mosaic legislation under an 
existing (so-called) Theocratic organization was in place, by which all—even such as were 
not predestinated unto salvation—were forced upon their good behavior and obedience. 
History records the conflict, and infidelity, overlooking the conscientiousness (however 
mistaken) of “ the Venerable Company,’’ makes itself merry at the bloody stringency of its 
laws, without considering that men who honestly entertained such views of the Kingdom 
could not act otherwise. This mistaken doctrine affords an apology for a code which 
advocated coercion in matters of religion, and made the State—as in the Papacy—the 
executioner. This applies, alas! to a multitude of other cases. 


Obs. 6. The Herald of the Morning (June 15, 1878, August 1, 1877, etc.) 
makes the future Kingdom “‘ spiritual,”” and denounces us in our belief as 
‘* materialists.’’ All that we need to say in reply is this: without discard- 
ing the spiritual aspects of the Kingdom (comp. Prop. 197), we are satisfied 
to receive the visible and materialistic view in connection with that which 
covenant and prophecy embraces. The reasons assigned for this purely 
spiritual Kingdom are too subtle and far-fetched for us, seeing that it is 
taken for granted that a glorification must necessarily result in an invisible 
and wholly spiritual state against the general analogy and specific teaching 
of the Scriptures. (Comp. next observation and Prop.) 


Thus Patton (Aug. 1, 1877) says: ‘‘ Many suppose the Kingdom to come is the 
restored Jewish Kingdom, earthly, visible ; forgetting or ignoring the facts that the 
Kingdom is to be a ‘ heavenly Kingdom’ ; that ‘ except a man be born again he cannot 
see the Kingdom of God,’ and neither shall they say, ‘ Lo here, or lo there,’ all of which 
they could not say, if it was visible.’’ (He might have added, that ‘‘ flesh and blood”’ 
do not inherit this Kingdom.) But certainly this is a plain denial of Covenant and 
prophecy, which insists upon the same Kingdom removed being restored, with which all 


Prop. 116.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 121 


these alleged objections can be easily reconciled and shown to be adjuncts. Thus e.g. 
this Theocracy is ‘* heavenly,”” as we have shown, for God rules in it ; that a birth (res.) 1s 
requisite to ‘‘ seeing’’ it, every concordance showing that “ seeing”’ is used in the sense of 
participating in, or experiencing its blessings ; that ‘‘lo here,” etc., is indicative of the 
manner of its coming, as the context shows ; that inheriting the Kingdom is the obtain- 
ing of a rulership, a Kingship in this Kingdom, which is only confined to the glorified 
saints ; that consistency in such applications would make everything, including even the 
regenerated earth, invisible and purely spiritual. The old Gnostic prejudice against 
matter is the basis of this objection, which is condemned in the most pointed manner 
by the plain grammatical sense of Scripture and the early faith of the Churches estab- 
lished by the Apostles. The objection has a few passages of Scripture which are pressed 
to an extreme, and this extreme is made the subject of numerous irrelevant matter, con- 
tradictory to both Covenant and prophecy. Another writer in his hostility to all earthly 
governments (Davis’s Seven Thunders) asserts that ii the Mill. Kingdom “there will be 
no family, no school, no ecclesiastical, no civil institution, but only a divine govern- 
ment,’’ which he attenuates so that it has no external, outward form. But this is utterly 
opposed by direct prophecy and promise, which declare that the Kingdom is an organ- 
ized government over the nations of the earth, so that e.g. the Apostles rule over the twelve 
tribes, the restored Jewish nation is extraordinarily blessed in its civil, social, and 
family relations (increase, etc.), there is a central place from whence issues the authority 
of government, the nations send representatives to Jerusalem, the Jewish nation enjoys 
a certain supremacy, etc. God has had in the past, as such admit, a ‘‘ Kingdom of 
God” in a visible form, and He will not allow this visible Kingdom to prove a failure, 
but is making his preparations to reproduce it, at the appointed time, in greater power 
and glory. 


Obs. 7. Barbour (Three Worlds) employs the same reasoning as given 
in the previous Observation, and insists that this Kingdom of ‘‘ the 
Christ’’ is spiritual and invisible, being something separate and distinct 
from ‘‘ the Kingdoms’’ given to Jesus in Rey. 11 : 15, laying special stress 
on the plural ‘‘ Kingdoms.’’ Now a reference to Rey. 11 : 15 shows, even 
in our version by the italics that in the latter clause the plural is assumed. 
The mss. 8. & A. (Tischendorf’s N. T.) have even ‘‘ the Kingdom of this 
world is become the Kingdom of,’’ etc., and hence many critics, making 
the correspondence with Dan. 7 the more striking, translate, ‘‘ The Sover- 
eignty of this world is become the Sovereignty of,’’ etc. Now that this is 
the meaning, and that it is visible on the earth, including the nations, is 
abundantly evident from Dan. 2 and 7,as comp. e.g. with Isa. 2, Micah 4 
ete. The prophecy not only takes it for granted that it takes the place of 
preceding Kingdoms, but expressly asserts that it 1s a Aingdom under 
heaven, here on earth, which embraces the rulership of the saints and the 
subjection of the nations. It requires the grossest perversion of language 
to make a purely spiritual and invisible Kingdom out of the one delineated, 
and thus corresponding with the covenanted one. The Kingdom promised 
to David’s Son dy oath, and which is His inheritance is not an invisible 
one—far from it. Barbour reaches his conclusions by pressing a few sen- 
tences of 1 Cor. 15, relating to the future glorified condition of the saints 
—a condition which only qualifies them for a visible and_ glorious reign—a 
condition, which, in Jesus and the saints, brings the Divine and Super- 
natural in visible relationship to humanity. It is by spiritualizing some 
predictions, making others conditional, applying the typical to some, and 
overlooking others, that this spiritual system, (nostic on tendency, 18 pro- 
duced. 

This view, too, is most unjustly and offensively presented by Barbour, showing 


either his lack of knowledge of our system or a wilful design to lower our doctrine by 
engrafting upon it opinions that we do not hold. Thus (1) that we deny spirituality to the 


122 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 116. 


Kingdom, which no one does, although we reject his purely spiritual theory ; (2) that we 
make the ‘ first-born,’’ the heirs and inheritors, to dig, plant, etc.,with the restored 
Jews (an ‘‘ agricultural Kingdom’’), which no one has ever done, because they carefully 
distinguish between the glorified saints and the nations (this is a revival of the old 
Popish falsehood, charged against Pre-Millenarians of the Primitive Church) ; (3) that 
we confine the Kingdom to Palestine, which no Pre-Millenarian, to my knowledge, does ; 
(4) that we do not unite with the restored Theocracy a higher development (leaving it to 
exist pretty much as formerly), even the union of the Divine with its resultant marvel- 
lous power and works (This work with its quotations, etc., gives all the answer that is 
needed). A theory, however plausible, that requires bolstering up by misrepresenting | 
others, must have but feeble supports. 

Russell (Our Lord's Return, p. 55), who was for a time in affiliation with Barbour, 
remarks in opposition to a visible Kingdom and Christ sitting on David’s throne in 
Palestine, that ‘‘ fleshly Israel is not, and never again will be ‘ the Kingdom of God.’ 
They were once, but it will be taken from them, and given to another people, children 
of Abraham by faith, the Church. Under the sounding of the seventh trumpet all the 
Kingdoms of the world (now under the control of Satan) ‘ become the Kingdoms of our 
Lord.’ They pass into the possession of Christ and under the rule of His Kingdom— 
the devil being bound, Rey. 20:2. Israel, with their capital at Jerusalem, will doubtless 
be the chief of these fleshly nations, but it will no more be the heavenly Kingdom than 
they.” Hence it is spiritual, etc. The inconsistency of making the Kingdom spiritual 
because ‘‘ heavenly,”’ and admitting that as ‘‘ the Kingdom of God ’”’ and as ‘‘ heavenly’’ 
it once existed in a visible form, is certainly very striking, especially when in this future 
Kingdom God’s will is to be done on earth as in heaven. The simple fact is this: 
Russell overlooks the elect condition of the nation, the necessity of our being engrafted 
into it, the express covenanted relationship of that Kingdom with the nation, the removal 
of God’s wrath which restores them to their ancient position, etc., as we have presented, 
in detail, in previous Propositions. All prophecy makes the setting up of this King- 
dom contingent with the restoration of that nation, for it is David’s throne and Kingdom 
(not a type or symbol, but the same Kingdom overthrown) that is the inheritance of 
David’s Son, the Messiah. As to taking the Kingdom from the nation and giving to 
others, the general tenor of the Scriptures, as we have shown at length, teaches that to 
the Jewish nation at the First Advent was tendered, on the condition of repentance, the 
honor of rulership, kingship, and priesthood in this Kingdom. This tender was refused, 
and now, lest the purpose of God fail, these rulers are gathered out of other repentant 
and believing ones that are engrafted. The nation as such, however high its position in 
the coming Kingdom, cannot, and does, not occupy the noble and exalted stations of 
honor and glory that these gathered ones—gathered because of their unbelief and rejec- 
tion—will sustain. But we must refer the reader to our previous statements, given with 
the scriptural proof, and logically step by step. This we, however, add : these engrafted 
ones to whom the honor of rulership (inheriting the Kingdom) is given are united with 
previous ones selected from the nation previously, for they inherit the promises with 
the ancient worthies. These promises only include the Kingdom advocated by us, and 
embraced in “ the sure mercies of David.’’ The purely spiritual Kingdom of Barbour, 
Russell, and others has no existence either in Covenant or in prophecy, and was never 
heard of until mysticism and spiritualizing exerted their influence upon scriptural inter- 
pretation and application. 


PRop. 117.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 128 


Propostrion 117. The Kingdom of God re-established will form 
a divinely appointed and visibly manifested Theocracy. 


It is not a political body of human institution, for its divine 
origin is found in its covenanted relationship, and in its history. 
Its visibility we have seen in its ancient establishment ; and when 
re-established, it must, as the case absolutely requires, again thus 
appear. It cannot exist without this external appearance in view 
of its direct connection with the Jewish nation, etc. Its Theocratic 
element is seen in God again condescending to act as an earthly 
Ruler in and through and by David’s Son (comp. Prop. 110). 


The reader is reminded that we have already abundantly shown (Props. 25, 31, 33, 35, 
45, 46, etc.) the nature of a Theocracy, and from this we cannot deviate, secing that God has 
promised—and His promises, confirmed by oath, are faithful and true—that the identical 
Theocratic Kingdom overthrown shall be restored. In this hope we humbly and rey- 
erently trust, because of the abundant provision in its behalf. Therefore, it may be 
appropriate to append a few more quotations from writers, who have no sympathy with 
us, illustrative of the meaning of a Theocracy. Thus in addition to those given—Archb. 
Whately, Diss. 3, vol. 1, Ency. Brit., p.470, remarks : ‘‘ The Lord (Jehovah) was not only 
the God, but also the King (Civil Governor) of this peculiar people. And hence the word 
‘ Theocracy’ is often applied to the system under which the Israelites lived.’’ On p. 479, 
‘It was a Theocracy ; a system of direct, special, temporal government by God’s extra- 
ordinary Providence.” The same Ency., in Art. ‘‘ Moses,” says in reference to ‘‘ the 
worship of God and the political government of the Jews,” that ‘‘ this was a Theocracy in 
the fullest extent of the word. God Himself governed them immediately by means of 
His servant Moses, whom He had chosen to be the interpreter of His will to the people ; 
and He required all the honors belonging to their king to be paid to Himself.’”’ “God 
was not only considered as the Divinity who formed the object of their religious worship, 
but as the Sovereign to whom the honors cf Supreme Majesty were paid.’’ Rees’s Cyclop., 
Art. “ Theocracy,” makes it ‘‘ a state governed by the immediate direction of God alone,” 
but falls into the error of making it to cease with Saul (which we have abundantly dis- 
proved, Props. 28, 31, 33). Other cyclopedias give the same definitions ; all agree in 
the fundamental part, viz., that God condescended to act as the earthly Ruler over the 
nation, so that (ov. of the Hebrews, Relig., Encyclop.) “God was, in fact, the Monarch 
of the people, and that the government was a Theocracy.’’ The democratic element 
(brought out by Wines, Lowman, Michaelis, and others) was largely incorporated with 
an aristocratic one, working in unison with the Theocratic ordering, so that (as Marten- 
sen, Ch. Dog., p. 230) ‘‘ The Theocracy was the Kingdom of God.” 


Obs. 1. This is a Theocracy in deed and in truth, for in this reorganized 
Kingdom we find the Theocratic idea—God’s idea of a perfect government 
—fully consummated. The Rulership is safely and powerfully lodged in 
one Person, who in Himself unites the human and the Divine, who becomes, 
according to ‘‘ the everlasting covenant’’ and ‘‘ the sure mercies of David”’ 
(Isa. 55 : 3,4, Alexander’s version), ‘‘ the Chief and Commander of na- 
tions.’’ See Prop. on Humanity, ete. 


Obs. 2. The restoration of the Jewish nation, the supremacy of the 
nation, the reign of the Messiah as David’s Son in connection with it, in 


124 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 117. 


brief, a// the details given by the prophets of this era, are only reconcilable 
and in harmony with a re-establishment of the Theocratic government. 
This insures divinity and visibility. 


Obs. 3. As already intimated, the highest possible position that we can 
place the Kingdom of God in, is that of regarding it such a Theocratic 
State or Empire, universal over the earth, founded, governed and developed 
under Divine authority personally manifested. This, as admitted by 
nearly all, was foreshadowed by the ancient Jewish Theocracy. Something 
like it has been the desire of nations, as can be seen even in the Utopian 
theories of philanthropists, philosophers, statesmen, and more recently in 
the expressed wishes of spiritualists to attain to it through the medium of 
spirits, etc. But originally founded by Divine power, it can only be 
restored by the same power ; it can never be realized through human in- 
strumentality, requiring, as we have all along shown, a higher agency to 
introduce it. 

The Theocracy itself includes the divine, but it embraces it in its purest form, viz., 
in direct union with and rulership over a Kingdom, i.e. God is the earthly Ruler. 
Hence we object to the use of the word as employed by various writers, applied to the 
Papacy, the Church, etc. Men have only produced base imitations of a professed The- 
ocracy. Campanelia’s Monarchia Messice, an Apology for Popery, is expressive ; likewise 
De Cormenius’s His. of the Popes, as well as the latest caricature of Mormonism. The 
same, too, is inapplicable to the Church, seeing that the distinctive Theocratic rule is 
lacking. Hence, too, we must reject the idea advocated by some that this Kingdom is 
purely spiritual. It cannot possibly be such if it is the Theocratic Kingdom, once with- 
drawn, again restored, for that unites the divine and human, the heavenly and the 
earthly, the spiritual and the temporal. If David’s throne and Kingdom, now in ruins, 
is to be set up by the Messiah, as both Covenant and prophecy teach us, then the The- 
ocracy, necessarily, must have this union ; to substitue the Church or some spiritual 
existence or Kingdom, is to depart from the plain meaning of language. The perver- 
sions by fanatical sects, the appropriations by Popery and Protestantism, do not vitiate 
God’s purpose as presented in Covenant and prophecy. 


Obs. 4. The inconsistency of some able writers on the subject of a The- 
ocracy is remarkable. Some who admit that the fundamental idea of a 
Theocracy is something very different from that of the Divine Sovereignty, 
embracing, as it does, God condescending to act in the capacity of an 
earthly Ruler, a union of Church and State under direct Divine rule, etc., 
yet apply this Theocratic idea, stripped of ¢hat which gives it its peculiar 
vital force, by the wholesale to the Church and world. Numerous excellent 
writers who do this will occur to the student, ‘The most surprising part 
is that, in the application of this theory, they contradict themselves with- 
out apparently being conscious of the impropriety. Thus, e.g. to illus- 
trate: Neander, Life of Christ, B. 4, ch. 1,8. 51, says: ‘‘ The form of a 
State cannot be thought of in connection with this Kingdom ; a State pre- 
supposes a relation to transgression ; an outward law, the forms of judica- 
ture, the administration of justice, are essential to its organization. But 
all these can have no place in the perfect Kingdom of Christ ; a commu- 
nity whose whole principle of life is love.’? The first sentence has force 
only as it applies to the Church (and it was Neander’s church view that led 
to it), but is erroneous when thus applied to the Kingdom, for he himself 
in his theory of progressive development loses sight of the principle thus 
Jaid down and expressly anticipates a period when the Kingdom of God 
shall (in the same section) ‘‘ exhibit an external stately fabric’? and 


Prop:.117.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 125 


‘* regenerate all things and thus appropriate them to itself’? while in other 
places, previously quoted, he advocates this future perfect union of Church 
and State as the highest development of Christ’s Kingdom on earth. The 
fundamental error in this theory is, that it attributes to the Church, its 
development, etc., what the Bible only represents as performed under the 
direct auspices of David’s Son, at and after a time of vengeance, etc. If 
God Himself in the establishment of a Theocracy did not regard the union 
of Church and State an inconsistency ; if He through the Spirit sounds 
forth its praises-and portrays vividly the blessings that can flow from it, it 
surely does not become us virtually ¢o impeach His wisdom in such an 
organization. Besides, love, exceedingly precious and cementing, is not 
government, but is most admirably adapted to preserve and perpetuate it 
when established. The highest exhibition of love will be that which is 
manifested, not in individual life, but in associated life in its greatest of 
worldly relations, the civil. 


Obs. 5. Surely no one should object to this consistent Theocratic-Davidic 
Kingdom, so precious to the pious Jews and early Church, when many, who 
reject Millenarian views, still are forced by the peculiarity of predictions to 
concede that there will be a Theocratic reign, a union of Church and State, 
a universal, visible, external government. In addition to the illustrations 
given under previous Propositions, another may be presented. Ralston (On 
Apoc., p. 162, etc.) when describing the Millennium of Rev. 20, says : ‘‘ we 
find a reference to thrones which represent the dominion of the saints in a 
Theocratic form of government,’’ and adds, that prophecy teaches not only 
a destruction of earthly governments, but ‘‘ also the erection of a govern- 
ment founded in righteousness and guarded by heavenly influences;’’ that a 
new form of government will be established when the Jews are reorganized 
as a nation, clearly Theocratic, having its seat in Judea, so that ‘* Judea 
may be most distinguished in that day as the Redeemer’s Kingdom on earth,”’ 
and all other nations will render homage, etc. Why—when thus making 
out a Kingdom distinguished by political power, etc., exerting the same 
over the earth from the central seat in Judea—not admit all that the 
prophets declare, and accept of the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom fully re- 
stored in David’s Son? Why leave out the Divine chain which binds the 
whole together ? Why shrink from the divine throne and Kingdom of David, 
claimed by God as His own, specifically covenanted to Jesus, now in ruins 
but promised to be rebuilt, and, turning away from this divine, etc., still 
in some way attach Origenistic derived ideas to this Kingdom, constituting 
it a progressive development of the Church ? 


Obs. 6. If such a Theocratic Kingdom, as God Himself instituted, is not 
permanently and gloriously re-established here upon earth, then it follows 
that God’s efforts at the establishment of government and the interest 
which He manifests in it are fruitless of abiding results. Or, in other 
words, His own Kingdom has proven a failure. If the rebellion, etc., of 
the Jews is urged as a reason why it was not carried out, the reply is plain : 
why then, with His foreknowledge institute it at first, and then when over- 
thrown predict its restoration, etc.? Besides, why adopt it in the sacred 
covenant relationship? Such questions might be multiplied, showing that 
God’s honor, majesty, etc., are immediately concerned in its restoration, or 
otherwise it will be said that the Almighty undertook a work which, owing 


126 ; THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 117. 


toman, He could not accomplish. If the general opinion is to be received, as 
expressed by numerous theologians, that it would be foolishness to expect 
such a restoration; that it has given place to a much higher, refined, 
spiritual Theocratic order, etc., then it leaves God’s direct attempt at exer- 
cising the functions of an earthly Ruler an inscrutable riddle. If the 
original Theocratic idea is lost, if God Himself is not at some period of the 
world’s history to be its actual, earthly Sovereign, ¢hen certainly the earth 
will lack in its history the completion of a form of government indorsed 
and adopted as the most desirable by the Omniscient Himself. Recent 
writers, as Wines and others, insist that the Theocracy was entered into by 
God to teach man the true science of government. This is true, but not 
the whole truth, for we would add: to teach man that perfect government 
can only come directly through God. But take this half-truth, that God 
teaches man how true government cannot be justly separated from the re- 
lations that man sustains to God, etc., and does it not directly lead to the 
conclusion, that if God’s own teachings are to be realized, then a govern- 
ment must at some time exist here on earth, in which He is the recognized 
Lawgiver and Sovereign, to whom all can apply? Shall these teachings be 
defeated by depraved human nature, or by the combinations of Gentile 
domination? Or, shall they be spiritualized away to mean something 
else? Shall the now ‘‘ Prince of this World’”’ gain the victory in the most 
dignified and exalted of man’s relations, viz., in that of organized society in 
its national, governmental, and monarchical arrangements ; or, shall the 
victory be given, as the Bible does, to the Son of Man, David’s Son, in this 
very direction? ‘The glory of God, in virtue of His beginning, is deeply 
concerned in the completion of His own system of government ; and we ma 
rest assured, from a multitude of concurrent predictions, that He will 
sanctify Himself in this particular, exalting in the eyes of all people the 
identical form, now the scoff of unbelievers and even so difficult of accept- 
ance by many believers (comp. Prop. 201). 


The establishment of such a Theocratic Kingdom is the most reasonable expectation, 
finding its basis (1) in the Covenant ; (2) in the initiatory establishment of it ; (3) in the 
withdrawal of it on account of sin, but with the promise of restoration ; (4) in God’s 
honor as Theocratic Ruler ; (5) in the predictions relating to it ; (6) in the postpone- 
ment made of it ; (7) in the provision already made for it ; (8) in its adaptation to meet 
the wants and longings of humanity. It fully accords with our ideas of propriety, 
justice, and God’s own glory, as well as the redemption of man. Take the popular, 
prevailing view, and then indeed God’s effort at rule is a failure, and this world with 
civil government (for down to the Sec. Advent they are represented as more or less 
hostile to the truth) are given over as trophies to Satan. Our trust is in God, that the 
Kingdom of this world shall yet be His in the appointed, covenanted Theocratic order. 
Plato (and with him many others) will yet be verified : “In the end, lest the world 
shotld be plunged into an eternal abyss of confusion, God, the author of the primitive 
order, will appear again and resume the reins of empire ; then He will change, embellish, 
and restore the frame of nature, and put an end to decay, sickness, and death.” Un- 
belief sarcastically tells us, if the Bible is true, why does not God in our day appear, 
set up a Theocratic Kingdom, and make Himself felt as a Ruler indeed. The fact of a 
non-Theocratic government in acutal force influences them to reject the entire The- 
ocratic idea as of mere human invention. We point, however, to the most solid reasons 
for the withdrawal of the Theocracy (evidenced e.g. even in the past history of the 
Jewish nation), and its delay to the future Advent (shown e.g. in gathering out a people 
to sustain it in power and glory when restored). 


Obs. 7. The delay in this Theocracy is no reason for refusing credence to 
it, seeing that God so plainly foretells the reason for its delay, viz., in 


PROP, 117. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 127 


punishment of the nation with which it is connected ; and seeing that He 
also reveals to us a long period of Gentile dominion during which it cannot 
exist. God, having, for the sake of man only, shown by the experiment 
of its previous establishment (designed also as a covenant basis, to secure 
the heir, etc.), that human nature as now constituted is utterly inadequate 
to bear and perpetuate such a Kingdom, during this season of delay is 
gathering out ¢he material, i.e. the saints, who, as co-heirs, joint-rulers 
with ‘‘ the man ordained,” shall form such an illustrious, all powerful body 
identified and incorporated with this Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, that 
re-erected it will be sustained with purity, dignity and stability. God’s 
ways are marvellous in preparing for His own government, overruling the 
freedom of man and his bias for sin, and constantly, slowly but surely, ad- 
vancing toward His intended goal. Having repeatedly shown this gather- 
ing of elect destined to co-operate with David’s Son when their number is 
completed, we may add : that the Jewish nation and the race itself will after 
so long a trial of Gentile domination and its historical results, especially as 
witnessed at the time of the end in its confederated wickedness, be the 
better prepared to acknowledge the incomparable superiority of God’s form 
of government. 


Therefore it is that the remarkable language of Jer. 22 : 30 is employed, calling special 
attention to the establishment of this Theocracy. When God determines, owing to the 
continued rebellion of the Jewish nation, to subvert for a time this Theocratic Kingdom, 
and not to allow the seed of Coniah upon David’s throne, the fact is announced in terms 
expressive of the whole earth’s interest in the matter: ‘‘ O earth, earth, earth, hear the 
Word of the Lord,’’ etc. Men may now pass it by as of little consequence, but it is of 
vast importance, and we, if believers, will do well if we take heed to this instruction. 


Obs. 8. The eulogistic phraseology of the prophets which some critics 
ascribe to Oriental usage, respecting this Theocracy is well deserved. For, 
if we consider the King, David’s immortal Son, with the Divine inseparable 
with Him ; the redeemed saints, also immortal, inheriting with Christ, 
and qualified by their trial, experience, etc., to act as rulers with Him ; the 
Jewish nation restored to favor, and its coveted position after an education 
that never will be lost ; the Gentile nations receiving the blessings accruing 
from a government which ever has been the need of the world; the 
glorious results ever flowing in free and abundant streams from God’s own 
fountain of order—all this ought to lead us to feel that language is too 
feeble to express what will be realized. 


Obs. 9. This Theocracy will realize the idea of wniversal Hmpire, the 
darling wish of mighty monarchs. David’s Son, King Jesus will, with His 
own power, His associated rulers, His restored and exalted nation, in the 
Davidic throne and Kingdom by its grandeur cause all nations to become 
tributary and joyful supporters of its authority. The throne of David 
will become the great, recognized throne of the world, all others being 
subordinate to it. The prophecies relating to this need not be repeated, 
for the reader in our argument must have observed that one design God 
has in re-establishing this Kingdom is, to advance through it, and perfect 
by it, His own universal rule, so that finally all people without reserve 
shall fully and freely acknowledge the supremacy of God as manifested in 
_ and through the Ruler of this Kingdom. 


128 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 117. 


Obs. 10. This Theocracy, as frequently intimated and implied, is 
designed ¢o create blessings. Fruitful as it may be at the beginning in ven- 
geance to nations who interfere with God’s purposes, yet its main object 7s 
to procure blessings. It is not to gratify the ambition of the Jewish nation 
that it enjoys such supremacy, but that, as Paul in Rom, 11; Zech. 8 : 13, 
etc., it may dispense richness to others; it is not to gratify pride that 
saints reign with Christ, but that they may be instrumental in promoting 
the welfare of others, etc. Of David’s Son itself it is said that His reign 
shall bring showers of blessing upon all, so that all families of the earth 
shall be blessed in Him. ‘The Millennial descriptions abound with things 
productive of happiness. It is only necessary, as our subject suggests it, to 
point to one, the fruitful parent of many others, viz., a perfectly safe, 
reliable, stable righteous government, with King, rulers and subjects bound 
together by the interests arising from manifested Redemption. 


Obs. 11. This Theocracy embraces not only perfected salvation as in the 
Rulers, i.e. those who reign with Jesus Christ, who are crowned as the in- 
heritors of the Kingdom, but it includes the contemplated salvation of 
others, and the redemption of the race as a race. Leaving the classes that 
are to be found in this Kingdom for separate consideration and proof, it 
may now be said that it will be fully proven, at the time this Kingdom is 
set up by the mighty confederation then existing which is to be overcome, 
and by the continued sinfulness of the world down to that era, that owing 
to the corrupt nature of man, notwithstanding the provision made for sal- 
vation, the appeals, truth, etc., the tendency of man, against light, is toward 
evil. vil will in a most fearful aspect be in the ascendency when the 
King comes, and it is positive folly for any professed believer in the Word 
to deny the record on this point. This conclusively establishes the proof, 
that to bring the world under subjection to God, to bring it even to accept of 
the blessings tendered to it, something more is needed than present instru- 
mentalities. What will God introduce to break down, and keep down, this 
spirit of wickedness and rebellion? The prophets all declare that it will be 
the pouring out of His heavy judgments, and the setting up of this King- 
dom. This Kingdom thus introduced is the bulwark erected by God 
against the enemies of God, by which they are either overthrown, destroyed 
or brought into subjection ; by which all evil shall be rooted out, and the 
race itself be perpetuated in a state of purity and happiness just as pre- 
dicted. It is the Divine means by which all are brought to feel and recog- 
nize the relations sustained to a Creator, Preserver, Redeemer, and Bene- 
factor ; removing all causes of war, national jealousies, civil disturbances, 
diversity of church government and worship, and bestowing peace, rejoicing 
and happiness. 


Obs. 12. The reader’s attention is briefly called to consider, what, in such 
a Theocratic arrangement, must be the honor and dignity of the Rulers 
associated with the Mighty Son of Man. The position of the twelve 
apostles ruling over the twelve tribes, and that of the saints in their various 
stations of kingship and priesthood, all linked with the glory of this King- 
dom. (See Props. 154, 156.) 


Obs. 13. How vain is the boast of statesman or king, that this or that 
nation and land will become the greatest that earth shall ever behold. If _ 


Prop. 117. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 129 


wise, they would see that this is reserved for the now despised people that 
stand in covenanted Theocratic relationship with Jesus. 


Obs. 14. In every aspect that we view the subject, it seems suitable and 
necessary to have such a Theocracy as predicted. Besides the reasons 
adduced derived from covenant, the faithfulness of God, the redemption of 
the earth, etc., it does appear eminently proper that the theatre of King 
Jesus’ humiliation, sufferings, and death should witness also His exaltation 
and glory. ‘The Bible, in addition to the pleas presented by us, points to 
the time coming when Christ shall be openly and visibly recognized as the 
glorious One, who, as the Second Adam, having substituted Himself 
through love, is the efficacious Head of Humanity in its newly begun 
destiny ; who, as Redeemer, having offered expiation to and honored the 
justice of God, now practically manifests the fruits of salvation ; who, as 
Prophet, having taught restitution, now exhibits Himself as the Truth evi- 
denced by the work performed before Him ; who, as Priest, having made an 
acceptable sacrifice, now presents before the world the fruit resulting from 
it; who, as King, in virtue even of His Divine union and showing it by 
guidance, supporting, etc., now manifests it in the special ordained manner 
as Sovereign Ruler. In brief, this Theocracy is the restoration of a God 
again dwelling with man, accessible, and constituting in Jesus an infallible 
Head, just such as the world needs, just such as man for ages has longed 
for, and just such as will place David’s Son in honor and glory in a world 
where He suffered and died. ‘The past treatment and brief stay of the Son 
of God and David’s Son insures a triwmphant return, and a sojourn in power 
among men whom He will save, verifying the name Immanuel, God with 
us, 1n the Theocratical sense. 


130 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 118. 


Proposrrion 118. Zhis view of the Kingdom is most forcibly 
sustained by the figure of the Barren Woman. 


Turning to Isa. 54 : 1-17, the exact order of events advocated by 
us is distinctly announced as follows: (1) the elect condition of the 
Jewish nation and union with God in Theocratic relationship ; (2) 
the rebellion of this nation and temporary rejection of the nation ; 
(8) during this period of rejection another people is to be gathered 
out to which God will be specially united in the same relationship ; 
(4) that when this gathered people enter into this relationship God 
will again restore the Jewish nation to its original position. in 
virtue of His former union with it ; (5) and the results of such a 
restoration to favor shall be of the highest importance, etc., to that 
nation. 


Obs. 1. Because this passage is not regarded in the light of the solemnly 
covenanted relationship of the Jewish nation, which God’s faithfulness and 
oath can never alter or break, however it may be held in abeyance on ac- 
count of sinfulness, men have attached to it the most inconsistent and 
contradictory interpretations. Leaving the logical application given to 
this passage by the early Church, the majority of commentators, etc., involve 
themselves in absurdities, gross difficulties, and unnecessary perplexities. 
It is sad to find able and learned men who make ‘‘ the barren woman” and 
‘‘the married wife,’’ although the one is contrasted with the other, the 
same ; or, who make both to be the Church in different aspects; or, 
who make it simply a figure of Jewish prosperity exceeding that of 
other nations who then exist; or, who even make it out to be a kind of 
proverbial expression indicative of increase ; or, who make “‘ the barren’’ 
the Christian Church largely increased by Gentile nations which are sup- 
posed to be ‘‘ the married wife,’’ etc. Surely, if mere fancy or imagina- 
tion has had full play in exegesis, it has been on this Scripture.’ Instead, 
however, of dwelling on the looseness of exposition on this passage, let us, 
following step by step the teachings of the Word, endeavor to ascertain the 
meaning which accords with the general tenor of prophecy, and with his- 
torical fact. 

1 Popes, Mormons, Protestants, etc., appropriate these predictions as belonging to 
themselves in the present dispensation ; and many unhesitatingly use portions as texts 
for missionary services, and apply them to the Church in its supposed mission to con- 
vert the world by existing instrumentalities. The only view opposed to ours that is not 
extravagant, is that of Maurer, that “‘ the married wife’’ refers to the previous married 
condition or state of this barren woman. But this does not bring out the contrast, as 
evidenced by—as we shall show—the facts, when this is to be fulfilled, viz., two parties, 
both Theocratically united to God, existing together in Theocratic union. Again: it would 
make the period of former Theocratic rule to bear but a small proportion of prosperity 
to the time of desolation, unless (as Fausset does) the fulfilment is referred to a future 
restoration of the Jews. The meaning to be attached to ‘‘ the married wife’’ must be 


Prop. 118. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 131 


determined by the general analogy on the subject. If Maurer is correct, then the 
restoration of Theocratic order is announced, in which, as the grandeur and magnifi- 
cence of the language evidence, the engrafted saints, Abraham’s seed, participate. 


Obs. 2. Who is this “‘ barren woman’? 'The definite answer is given by 
the entire scope and order of the prediction. For the present, we reply : 
It is the Jewish nation as the covenanted elect nation, or, if the reader 
chooses, Jerusalem as the type of the nation, its chief representative,’ 
the nation itself being thus designated. For, (1) This nation is repre- 
sented as married to God, being His wife. The marriage relation being 
thus used as a figure to denote the intimate, Theocratic relation that God 
sustained as earthly Head or Ruler over it. Many passages teach this, in 
which the nation, under the same figure, is declared to be treacherous as a 
wife, guilty of whoredoms, etc. In this same chapter she is therefore 
called ** a wife of youth,’’ a woman that was married when but young, ete. 
Compare Hzek. 16; Jer. 3 : 20, etc. (2) She is a ‘‘ darren woman.’’ Be- 
cause, (a) she forsook the Lord and followed her own devices, so that God 
said, Hos. 2:4, “‘ And I will not have mercy on her children, for they be the 
children of whoredoms ;’’ Hos. 4 : 6, (0) she persecuted and destroyed her 
children ; Ezek. 16 : 20, 21, ‘* Moreover thow hast taken thy sons and daugh- 
ters whom thou hast borne unto me, and these hast thou sacrificed unto them 
to be devoured. Is this of thy whoredoms a small matter, that thou hast slain 
my children,’’ etc.; (c) hence the increase that would have resulted had she 
proven faithful, was, owing to her wickedness, not realized, Hos. 
9 :14-17; (d) by her sinfulness she defeated the gracious purposes of God 
respecting her. This is apparent from numerous declarations in which 
God promises to her to perform such and such things if she only prove 
faithful. ‘The lamentation of Jesus over her is sufficient evidence. The 
nation, persistent in its evil course, instead of blessings receives the curse 
which is productive of barrenness ; (e) she brings forth fruit unto herself 
and not of God, Hos. 10 : 1, “‘ begotten strange children,’’? Hos. 5: 7% (8) 
She is not only a “ darren’’ but “a desolate woman.’’ In view of the 
wickedness of the nation God forsook her and in wrath hid His face from her 
(vs. 7, 8), so that in verse 6 she is called ‘‘ a woman forsaken;’’ and, owing 
to this forsaken condition, in verse 4 it is designated by way of reproach 
a ‘*‘widowhood’’ (a condition, notwithstanding the assertions of some, 
that can never be applied to the Church). How amply this has been ful- 
filled is evident from Scripture (Hzek. 16 : 36, etc., Hos. 2, etc.), and 
from history. Down to the present day she is yet in her ‘‘ widowhood,”’ 
yet ‘*a woman forsaken,’’ yet ‘‘ judged as a woman that breaketh wedlock.” 
Right here the reader may pause and ask, if all this has been so minutely 
fulfilled that it is a matter of record in the languages of the earth, wedi not 
the remainder, also asserted of this very ‘‘ forsaken woman,”’ be verified ? 
Certainly ! 

1 The Chaldee renders it : ‘‘ Rejoice, O Jerusalem, who hast been as a sterile woman 
that did not bear.’’ The Jewish Rabbis were accustomed to call the Jewish nation, in 
view of its unproductiveness, etc., “the Barren.” ‘Thus e.g. Rabbi Simeon (Book of 
Sohar) says : ‘* Woe to those who shall live in the days of the Coming of the Messiah ; 
woe, and also hail to them! For when He, the Holy One, blessed be His name, will 
appear to remember the barren,’ etc. 


Obs. 3. Who is this “‘ married wife’’ that is contrasted with the other? 
For ¢wo women are spoken of, ‘‘ the barren woman’? and ‘‘ the married 


1382 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 118. 


wife,’? and some things are asserted of the one that do not pertain to the 
other. If our line of argument has been noticed, there will be no difficulty 
in recognizing this ‘‘ married wife.’’ After ‘‘ the barren woman,”’ i.e 
Jewish nation, had forsaken her husband, and God had, owing to her 
sinfulness, forsaken her, God takes to Himself another wife, here called 
‘‘the married wife’’ to distinguish her from ‘‘ the desolate’ one. If we 
open the Bible and read what follows the rejection of the Jewish nation 
and its miserable fall, we find that God during this period of abandonment 
proceeds to raise up a seed unto Abraham of those, out of all nations, who 
fear and obey God. (See Prop. on election and continued election.) It is 
this seed, this nation thus gathered to whom the Kingdom in a high, special 
sense is to be given—i.e. they also will de married, i.e., enter into this The- 
ocratical relationship with God. 'This seed is said in the New Test. in 
its aggregate (not before) to form “‘ the chaste virgin,’’ ‘‘ the Bride” that 
is to be married just previous to the ushering in of the Millennial age at the 
sec. Advent of Christ, 2 Cor. 11:2; Eph. 5:27); Rey... 19 = 710. eee 
too, of course, as intimated in the text, and as necessarily included in our 
argument, occurs here on earth previous to the restoration of the Jews. It 
is a matter of profound admiration to see how harmoniously the spirit 
speaks, even in the most delicate of figures, through inspired men separated 
by intervening centuries. ‘There is a marriage, 1.e., such a Theocratic 
affinity, consummated at the coming of the Bridegroom, which gives the 
saints the inexpressible privilege and honor of reigning with Christ. In 
Gal. 4 the apostle contrasts these two women. ‘Those gathered out of this 
dispensation are ‘‘ the children of promise,’’ i.e. tnherit with Abraham, and 
they are the children of the New Jerusalem, she being “‘ owr mother,”’ i.e. 
when the New Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven, they are 
identified with her, etc. But, on the other hand, the earthly Jerusalem is 
_ the mother of those in bondage, 1. e. of those who are now “‘ forsaken.’’ 
The earthly Jerusalem is the central figure of the power and glory of the 
Jewish nation, and this runs its allotted course now in bondage and in 
cruel subjection, now grievously ‘‘ desolate,’ etc. (But will she remain 
thus?) ‘The New Jerusalem is the central figure of the power and glory 
of this gathered seed, who in this married state inherit the promises 
that ‘‘the barren woman,’’ owing to her unfaithfulness, has forfeited, 
viz., that of being specially associated with Christ as Rulers, ete., in this 
Theocratic Kingdom. ‘The reader’s indulgence for proof 1s asked until 
we come to the Propositions pertaining .to the reign, etc., of these saints, 
showing that, although identified with it, yet they are a separate dis- 
tinguished body in point of honor and privileges from the restored Jewish 
nation. ‘The apostle’s quotation from Isa. (Gal. 4 : 27), and immediate 
reference to inheriting, indicates that his eye of faith was directed to this 
‘‘ married wife.’’ What follows in Isaiah’s prediction is evidence of the 
correctness of our deductions, preserving a connected series in the order of 
events. 


How the figure of marriage is used to denote the Theocratic union will be found 


under Prop. 169 ; and how God distinguishes between the body of associated Theocratic 
rulers and the restored Jewish nation will be presented under Props. 153, 154, 156, 166, 
169, etc. We only now say to the critical student that, at present, our argument is con- 
cerned, not with ‘‘ the married wife,’’ but with ‘‘ the barren woman.’’ Whatever view we 
may ascribe to the former, one thing is certain that the latter cannot consistently (in 
* view of what is stated in the chapter) be applied to the Ch. Church, for it alone, in 
every particular, fits the Jewish nation. 


Prop. 118.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 183 


Obs. 4. For, this ‘‘ barren,”’ ‘‘ forsaken,’’ ‘‘ desolate,’’ and ‘‘ widowed” 
one is again reconciled. In the fourth and fifth verses it is said, that she 
shall forget her shame and her widowhood because “‘ thy Maker is thy Hus- 
band,’’ and a mighty increase of children is to result from God thus again 
receiving her back. ‘Therefore, most impressively it is stated : ‘‘ For a 
small moment have I forsaken thee ; but with great mercies will I gather thee. 
In a litile wrath [hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting 
kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.’’? This re- 
ception and subsequent union, under the figure of marriage, is delineated 
in many places. ‘To keep within the shadow of the same, men may argue 
that God will utterly forget His marriage vows most solemnly given when He 
took to wife this nation, but, however unfaithful she has been, God, as the 
prophets testify, is faithful to His own. Hence the intense beauty and 
force of Hos. 2, where, after describing the desolation and sorrows of this 
‘“barren woman ;’’ after declaring ‘‘ she is not my wife, neither am I her 
husband,’’ the prophet goes on to predict that the day 1s coming when God 
shall again ‘ speak comfortably unto her’’ and ‘* she shall sing as in the 
days of her youth,’’ and she shall *‘ call me Ishi,’’ i.e. My Husband (marg. 
reading), for ‘* J will betroth thee wnto me forever,” etc. So Isa. 49 : 138-17 
declares how the Lord will comfort this afflicted one, although she, ‘‘ Zion 
said: The Lord hath forsaken me and my Lord hath forgotten me.’? The 
reply comes: ‘‘ Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not 
have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will I 
not forget thee. Behold I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands ; thy 
walls are continually before me. Thy children shall make haste; thy de- 
stroyers and they that made thee waste shall go forth of thee.’? God cannot, 
will not forsake this woman, but intends, such is His purpose, to restore 
her to favor. A thousand predictions proclaim it. Asif purposely to meet 
the objection that some urge, viz., that this woman is put away forever 
(Isa. 50 : 1), God asks of the Jews at Babylon: ** Where is the bill of your 
mother’s divorcement whom I have put away, or which of my creditors is vt 
to whom LI have sold you? Behold for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves, 
and for your transgressions is your mother put away.’’? Keeping in view 
that the mother is Jerusalem (Gal. 4, etc.), we may ask to-day, where is 
that bill of perpetual divorcement? It has no existence; it never was 
given ; the estrangement that God Himself asserts arose not from such a 
divorcement, but was owing to their transgressions. The bond is andis- 
soluble, although a temporary separation intervenes. If man desires to see 
in this matter the most amazing condescension and unalterable love in God, 
let him ponder well Jer. 3 : 1-22, and notice that ‘‘ the bill of divorce’ in 
the case of Israel is only a@ temporary one, and is the fruit of her own 
doings, verse 20, and that a blessed reconciliation will yet be effected. 


Obs. 5. Notice the increase of this ‘‘ barren woman.’’ The most astound- 
ing assertion is made which those not conversant with Scripture will regard 
as contrary to fact, viz., that the children of ‘‘ the barren woman’? shall be 
more than the children of ‘‘ the married wife.’’ This is the Divine purpose. 
(1) In reference to ‘‘ the married wife,’’ i.e. the elect, royal, chosen body 
of kings and priests, gathered out and associated with Christ, no such in- 
crease as is attributed to ‘‘ the barren woman”’ can be ascribed, seeing that 
they are glorified saints of whom Jesus Himself tells us that they *‘ neither 
marry nor are given in marriage.’ They compose a definite, determined 


134 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 118. 


number to which none are to be added and from which zone are to be taken. 
Their peculiar relationship to Jesus as co-heirs, their identity with Him in 
acts of judgeship, etc., is well represented under the figure of marriage, the 
most intimate and endearing of earthly relations. But of this marriage 
relation no increase of children can be predicated, seeing that its nwmber is 
fixed. This wife is the inheritor of the Kingdom, i.e. exalted to actual pos- 
session of its governmental power, etc., with her Bridegroom Jesus Christ, 
and ‘‘ flesh and blood’’ cannot inherit or attain to this power. (Prop. 
on Reign, etc.) Besides this, the idea of the original may be that ‘‘ the 
married wife’’ with all the increase which such an elect body has attained 
to, although in the aggregate large, is comparatively small when contrasted 
with that which shall characterize the Jewish nation when restored. That 
is, ‘‘the married wife’’ are ‘‘ the few’’ saved when compared with ‘‘ the 
many’’ that shall experience God’s favor in, and through, this ** barren 
woman.”’ (2) ‘‘The Barren Woman’’ being restored, as we have seen, 
shall have a wonderful increase of children, so that she is called on to en- 
large her habitation to receive them. ‘There is a remarkable contrast given 
by the Spirit for the wise, who compare Scripture, through David in Ps. 
113. For, at the very time that God’s poor and needy are remembered 
“< to set them with princes even with the princes of His people’’ (which only 
occurs when this Kingdom and Mill. era is ushered in), it is added: ‘‘ He 
making the barren woman (Jewish nation) to keep house (marg, reading : 
to dwell in a house, i.e. the Theocratic-Davidic house, as covenant calls it 
the ‘ house’) and to be a joyful mother of children.’’ The same idea of in- 
crease is conveyed under another form in Isa. 49. After describing the 
restoration of this nation, calling on heaven and earth to sing for the com- 
fort and mercy extended to ‘‘ the forsaken’’ one, the prophet predicts : ** Thy 
waste and thy desolate places and the land of thy destruction shall even now 
be too narrow by reason of the inhabitants, and they that swallowed thee up 
shall be far away. The children which thou shalt have, after thow hast lost 
the other, shall say again in thine ears, The place is too strait for me; 
give place to me that I may dwell. Then shalt thou say tn thine heart, Who 
hath begotten me these, seeing I have lost my children and aim desolate, a cap- 
tive and removing to and fro,’’ etc.’ Many and precious are the predictions 
relating to this increase, and if the reader will peruse such as are contained 
in Isa. chs. 60, 61, 62, etc., he may then form a faint idea how unexampled, 
vast, and glorious it will be. Notwithstanding those plain predictions, 
such is the unbelief of many, that it almost seems necessary to send again 
the angel to say, Zech. 2 : 3-5, “‘ Jerusalem shail be inhabited as towns 
without walls for the multitude of men and cattle therein,’’ and as if to 
check such lack of faith, ‘‘ for J, saith the Lord, will be unto her a wall of 
jire round about, and will be the glory in the midst of her.’’ Well may in- 
fidels smile and laugh, when professed believers, learned men, not seeing 
that the restoration always connected with it looks beyond the first one 
from Babylon, narrow such magnificent promises of the Almighty God 
down into a dwarfed, enfeebled fulfilment in the past. No! the early 
Church, the pious Jews, regarded by many as very ‘‘ weak’’ and possessing 
only ‘‘ the germ’’ of truth in ‘‘a materialistic husk,’’ had at least nodler 
conceptions of God’s promises and a higher estimate of His faithfulness 
than to emascuiate the Word in this manner. 


1 We give Delitzsch’s translation, wishing to direct the reader’s attention to a delicate 
reference. ‘* Lift up thine eyes round about and see : all these assemble themselves together 


Prop. 118. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 1385 


and come to thee. As truly as I live, saith Jehovah, thou wilt put them all on like 
jewelry, and gird them round thee like a bride. For thy ruins and thy waste places and 
thy land full of ruin—yea, now thou wilt be too narrow for the inhabitants, and thy 
devourers are far away. Thy children, that were formerly taken away from thee, shall 
say in thine ears, The space is too narrow for me; give way for me, that I may have 
room. And thou wilt say in thy heart, Who hath borne me these, seeing I was robbed 
of children, and barren, and banished, and thrust away ; and these, who has brought 
them up? Behold, I was left alone ; these, where were they?” Isa. 49 : 18-21. Now, 
to realize the force of this divine portraiture of the surprise, and exuliation, and 
glory of the Jewish nation at this period of restoration, we must keep in view that the 
ancient saints and the saints of this dispensation, and the restored nation, are brought 
together in Theocratic union ; all belong to the same commonwealth, occupying relative 
positions but still all connected with the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom. This manifested 
union gives us the key to much of the exalted descriptions of the prophets. 


Obs. 6. Let the foundation of the promise of this increase be especially 
noticed. After describing this increase, and that He shall again be her 
husband, we have the wnalterable determination of God to bring it to pass: 
‘* For this is as the waters of Noah unto me ; for as J have sworn that the 
waters of Noah should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I 
would not be wroth with thee nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall 
depart and the hills be removed ; but my kindness shall not depart from 
thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that 
hath mercy on thee.’’ ‘This fully accords with Ezek. 16, where, after being 
informed how God married Jerusalem (i.e. established His Theocratic re- 
lationship there), how she became barren, how she was forsaken and 
punished for her sins, it is finally added : ‘* Nevertheless (i.e. notwithstand- 
ing the past) I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy 
youth, and L will establish unto thee an everlasting covenant,’ i.e. He will 
make manifest that ‘‘ the sure mercies of David’’ are, as David calls it, ‘‘ an 
everlasting covenant’’—1i.e. one that cannot be broken or altered. Then 
the prophet continues, filled with the Spirit to meet objections : ‘‘ And 
I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shalt know that Iam the 
Lord. That thow mayest remember and be confounded and never open thy 
mouth any more because of thy shame, when [am pacified toward thee for all 
that thou hast done, saith the Lord.’’ Now, if we turn to the basis of this 
promise in the covenant made with Abraham, we read of an increase which 
has never yet been realized in the history of God’s people. Thus, Gen. 
22:16, 17, “By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast 
done this thing and hast not withheld thy Son, thine only Son, that in bless- 
ing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars 
of the heaven and as the sand which is wpon the sea shore, and thy seed shalt 
possess the gate of his enemies.’’ SoGen. 15.:5; 13:16; 26:4; 28:14; 
32:12. These are not proverbial sayings, as some imagine, indicating 
simply a multitude, etc., for occurring in a covenant sworn to by God they 
become intensified. They have not been fulfilled in the Jewish nation thus 
far, for (1) this increase is to take place when the seed Christ inherits the 
land ; (2) it is connected with a period after a certain restoration to their 
land ; (3) after the Jewish nation had passed through its brief period of 
prosperity, etc., and it had begun to enter upon its desolate condition, the 
increase founded on this covenant is still predicted by the prophets as _ 
future. Thus, e.g. Hos. 1 : 10, “ Vet the number of the children of Israel 
shall be as the sand of the sea which cannot be measured nor numbered, and 
it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are 


136 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 118. 


not my people, there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living 
God.’’ (4) Isa. 49: 17,18 says that if the nation had hearkened to the 
commandments of God, ‘‘ thy seed also had been as the sand and the off- 
spring of thy bowels like the gravel thereof,’ showing that disobedience de- 
ferred its fulfilment.’ (5) That it is future, notwithstanding the partial 
fulfilment under the Mosaic and present dispensations appears from what 
Jer. 33:22 mentions. For, giving a Millennial description, vividly portray- 
ing the glory of the coming Davidic Kingdom, and testifying that ‘‘ the 
covenant’? which God made cannot be broken, he appends: ‘* As the host of 
heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the seas measured, so will I 
multiply the seed of David my servant and the Levites that minister wnto 
me.”’ (6) In the Mill. delineations we have repeated assurances that after 
the restoration of this ‘* barren woman’’ this increase shall beso great that, 
Ezek, 36 :10, 11, 37,38, ‘‘Z will multiply men upon you, all the house of 
Israel, even all of it ; and the cities shall be inhabited and the wastes shall 
be builded. And I will multiply upon you man and beast ; and they shall 
increase and bring fruit ; and I will settle you after your old estates and 
will do better unto you than at your beginnings ; and ye shall know that I am 
the Lord,’’ etc. Jer. 81: 27, ‘‘ Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I 
will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man and 
with the seed of beast. And it shall come to pass that like as I have watched 
over them to pluck up and to break down and to throw down and to destroy 
and to afflict, so will I watch over them to build and to plant, saith the 
Lord.’’ Who can resist such evidence as this, when the folly of spiritualiz- 
ing away such promises is properly, and perhaps designedly, checkmated by 
the direct allusions to the multiplication of beasts—creation itself partici- 
pating in these times of restoration? Who can resist the declaration made 
by God in Isa. 49 : 3-8, or in Isa. 27 : 6, etc., unless he is regardless of 
what specially belongs to the nation as such, and appropriates to Gentile 
nations what 1s xo¢ promised to them.’ 

1 Our argument includes the partial fulfilment (1) of the seed already secured to 
Abraham through the nation (2) of the Gentiles engrafted who are also accounted the 
seed of Abraham, as Paul shows (and embraces in the future (3) the Gentiles who are 
incorporated by faith into this Theocratic-Davidie government, and thus recognized as 
belonging to it), This in the aggregate forms a vast, mighty army, and many suppose 
that this amply covers the Covenant promise. That it very materially aids and in a 
certain sense fulfils it, is evident, but that it covers the same is not so apparent since the 
Covenant requires this in a manifested form here on earth, visibly exhibited, as prophets 
* declare in the nation itself, i.e. in a multitudinous existing nation on earth. The Cove- 
nant certainly demands a continued seed to be raised up unto Abraham (and rather than 
fail in it, John says that God can raise up such a seed from stones), and this seed aids 
to swell, when once manifested, the fulfilment, but this even, evincing how true and 
intensive it is, fails to cover the whole ground, which is only done when the nation, as 
such, stands forth a mighty empire with a vast population, etc. Such is the natural 
interpretation that the promises require. 

2? Many writers take out of these predictions just so much as will suit their idea of the 
present dispensation, just so much as they can well appropriate to the Christian Chureh— 
without the least regard to the connection or its relationship to the Jewish nation. It is 
saddening to witness the quotations misapplied, totally ignoring the promise made to 
the Jewish nation. Illustrations so abound that they need not be given. We only say 
this : neither piety nor sincerity, neither zeal nor ignorance, afford a full, ample apology 
for such misapplications, seeing that simple faith in God’s promises, with a comparison 
of Scripture, should prevent them. 


Obs. 7. The stability of this promise to ‘‘ the Barren Woman”’ of in- 
crease is worthy of attention. (1) Her Husband is no ordinary one; He is 


Prop. 118. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 137 


(v. 5) ‘‘ the Lord of Hosts’’ and her ‘‘ Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, the 
God of the whole earth shali He be called.’’ We will verify His own promises. 
(2) The assurance given (v. 8) that the long period of Jewish tribulation 
and desolation, embracing century after century of ‘‘ widowhood,” is only 
“‘ for a moment,’’ i.e. a brief space of time, when compared with ‘‘ the ever- 
lasting kindness’’ that she shall experience when again reconciled to her 
Husband. ‘Thus we have again indicated the abiding covenanted relation- 
ship of this nation. (3) His covenant, as firm and immovable as that contract- 
ed with Noah, v. 9, is ¢has made with this ‘* barren woman.’’ (4) His cove- 
nant with her more enduring than the mountains and hills, v.10. (5) He is 
not merely bound to her by a promise, which in itself is sure, but by an oath, 
v. 9. This oath is found originally in the Abrahamic covenant, commenc- 
ing (Gen. 22:16), “* By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord,’’ etc. It is 
adverted to in Luke 1 : 73; Heb. 6:13, 14, etc. This marriage relation 
is confirmed by what Paul calls an ‘‘ immutable thing.’’ The same oath 
was made to David, Psls. 89, 132, etc. Therefore, we may well say with 
Micah 7 : 20, who, after stating the restoration of this ‘‘ barren woman,”’ 
remarks : ‘* Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob and the mercy to Abra- 
ham, which Thou hast sworn unto our Fathers from the days of old.’’ (6) 
All things are under the control of this husband, vs.16 and 17, and no ad- 
verse events can prevent this reconciliation. His power is superior to the per- 
formance of the promise, and therefore this ‘‘ barren woman’”’ is exhorted, 
v. 4, ‘‘ Fear not,’’ etc. She has no cause for apprehension, ‘‘ For the Lord 
of Hosts has purposed, and who shall disannul it? and His hand is stretched 
pe and who shall turn it back?’’ ‘Therefore God says so emphatically by 
er. 31 : 85-37. 


Obs. 8. The period when this reconciliation with ‘‘ the barren,’’ ‘‘ deso- 
late,’? and ‘* forsaken woman’’ is effected. (1) It is after the nation is 
gathered, v. 7, restored nationally to Jerusalem and the Holy Land ; for 
the Theocratic relationship, the marriage is restored, and then, as shown, 
the increase will be witnessed. (2) It is after ‘‘ the married wife’’ is 
elevated to the New Jerusalem state, after the New Jerusalem (the one 
Mother) has completed the elect number of her children, that ‘‘ the barren 
' woman’’ js reinstated and has her promised abundance of children. ‘This 
most accurately corresponds—showing the Divine Spirit revealing these 
precious things—with the condition of things in Rey., when the nations 
that are saved, after the erection, etc., of the New Jerusalem state, walk in 
the light of it and kings of the earth bring their honor and glory to it. 
This ‘‘ barren woman’’ is to rejoice in the blessings added by this New Jeru- 
salem state as appears from vs. 11, 12, 13, etc., compared with Rey. 21 and 
22, and Isa. 60, ete. (3) It is when the Mill. age is ushered in; which is 
already confirmed by the passages quoted. (4) The extraordinary versa- 
tility of the Spirit in exhibiting this matter is seen in Hos. 3. A re- 
markable command is given to the prophet. He is ordered to take a 
woman, an adulteress, forsaken but still loved. This wasa type of the 
Jewish nation, forsaken but still ‘‘ deloved,’”’ *‘ according to the love of the 
Lord toward the children of Israel;’’ and the action of the prophet is sym- 
bolic, indicating that God also is waiting to receive ‘‘ an adulteress,”’ for- 
saken woman. Then the direct application of the symbolic representation 
follows : viz., that Israel shall thus be forsaken ‘‘ many days’’ having no 
Theocratic relationship with her God, but that ‘“‘ afterward’’ they shall 


138 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 118. 


again return and fully realize it in ‘‘the Lord their God and David 
their King.’? That is, the woman, i.e. nation, guilty of sin, and long 
punished for the same, shall be reinstated in the old relationship that she 
sustained to her Husband. And this, as parallel passages prove, 1s when 
the Jews are restored, and Mill. blessedness is introduced by the setting up 
of the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom. (5) This is done at the time, as we 
have previously shown, when a confederation is gathered against this 
‘* barren woman.’’ For, in verse 15, it is said : ‘‘ Behold they shall surely 
gather together, but not by me ; whosoever shall gather together against thee 
shall fall for thy sake.’’ Just such a confederation arises and endeavors to 
prevent the Jewish nation from reoccupying their city and land, and, as 
here intimated, meets with a complete overthrow. This sufficiently identi- 
fies the period of reinstation to Divine favor. Prov. 15 : 25 will yet be ful- 
filled (comp. Props. 161 and 163). 


Obs. 9. Briefly, as it also serves to fill out the identification of this 
‘barren woman,’’ we may regard the altered condition of this woman when 
thus reconciled. She was forsaken, desolate, in reproachful widowhood. 
but now again in intimate relationship with her former husband clad as 
He will clothe her ; fed as He will feed her ; dwelling as He will place her ; 
she is to sing and break forth into singing (so also Zeph. 3:14; Isa. 49 : 
13; Isa. 12:6; Zech. 2: 10, etc). She shall also inherit (v. 3) the Gentiles, 
thus indicating her national supremacy over all other nations. (Prop. 114.) 
She shall be ‘‘ far from oppression,’’ she “‘ shall not fear,’’ etc., as she 
once endured and suffered. ‘* Wo weapon that is formed against thee shall 
prosper ; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in gudgment shalt 
thou condemn.’’ All her children shall de taught of the Lord, and great 
shall be their peace, ete. 


Obs. 10. If we take all these particulars, and see how minutely they are 
given ; how all the prophets, separated by ages, so accurately preserve the 
shading of the most delicate figures to teach who this woman is, what her 
present and then her future condition, how distinguished, etc., it seems 
almost incredible that the wisdom of man, so freely exercised over these 
things, should, as in multitudes of instances, cast them aside as ‘* Jewish,”’ 
etc., gust as if God was not the Husband of a Jewish wife ; 7ust as if God 
was like unto man and could and would forever, against His protestations 
solemnly given to the contrary, break His marital relations. 


Obs. 11. With the Spirit insisting upon the wnalterable covenant relation- 
ship that this ‘‘ barren woman”’ sustains to her Husband, what folly it is for 
churches, religious organizations, fanatical bodies, and Gentile nations to 
assume that they compose this Barren Woman, and are to exhibit this in- 
crease, etc. It would be, if not so fearful a perversion of Scripture, sim- 
ply ridiculous. Need we wonder that the Spirit complains of the lack of 
faith that men shall manifest, when such unwarranted pretensions are 
seriously set forth, upheld, and defended ? 


This will enable us to estimate the mystical extravagances of multitudes in past 
centuries, who professed to enjoy a present (i.e. in this dispensation) marriage relation 
with Christ, often prostituting the same both by improper language and the claims of 
superior sanctity. The pictures found in some Romish books are sufficiently expressive. 
Even the early Moravians were charged (justly or unjustly—see Kurtz, Ch. His., vol. 2, 


ee ee es a a ee 


Prop. 118.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 139 


p. 261) with such a prostitution. Ann Lee’s extravagance is well known ; so also Joanna 
Southcote’s professing to be the bride, and that of other Mystics, including those who 
claim to be ‘‘the New Jerusalem.” It is sad to reflect that not merely fanatics, but men 
of intellect and ability make such a perversion of that which clearly and unmistakably 
relates to the future. 


Obs. 12. The observant student will not fail to notice the Oneness that 
exists between the Father and the Son in this marriage relation (i.e. Theo- 
eratical) with this woman. What is said of God is directly asserted of His 
Son ; and when the Holy One of Israel occupies the Theocratic-Davidic 
throne, restoring the ancient relationship, it is positively asserted that God 
does this for the Divine Ruler, the God who formerly condescended to act 
as Israel’s earthly Ruler is again favoring the nation in and through 
David’s Son. ‘This might easily be developed into a strong argument for 
the divinity of Jesus Christ. 


Obs. 13. If the two women thus married, i.e. received in Theocratic con- 
nection, are thus properly distinguished the one from the other, and their 
mutual standing is observed and discriminated in the Coming Kingdom, 
new light is thrown on many of the more obscure allusions to the same in 
the Word. ‘Thus, e.g. in Ps. 45, where the heart of the Psalmist (marg. 
reading) ‘‘ boils or bubbles up a@ good matter,’’ *‘ things touching the King,”’ 
he describes the beauty of this King’s appearance, the dreadful overthrow 
of His enemies, the establishment of His throne, and then we have a dis- 
tinction made between several women. For we have (1) ‘‘ the Queen in gold 
of Ophir (Justin, in garments of gold, variegated,) standing upon thy right 
hand ;’’ (2) ‘‘ King’s daughters (i.e. other nations) were among thy honorable 
women ;”’ (3) the Aing’s daughter, her clothing of wrought gold ; (4) the 
virgins that accompany her ; (5) the daughter of Tyre. ‘This corresponds 
with what has been said, viz., that one, ‘‘ the married wife,*’ sustains a 
peculiar relation to this King, and that the Jewish nation is also restored, 
glorified through her, and that other nations will acknowledge the same 
and minister to her, and this is after this King’s hand has performed the 
‘‘ terrible things’’ upon His ‘‘ enemies.”’ 

These two married women show clearly that both ‘‘the Church of the First-born’’ and 
the Jewish nation enter into the same Theocratic relationship (thus expressed under the 
figure of marriage), and hence are in union in the same Kingdom. This corroborates our 
position against those who make virtually two Kingdoms, one for the saints and one for 
the Jewish nation, or against those who deny that the Jewish nation hasa kingdom, 


the saints only being entitled to the same. The simple fact that ‘‘ the barren’’ is thus 
restored, gives the best answer to all such objections. 


Obs. 14. When this marriage relation is renewed with ‘‘ the barren’’ one, 
the king Himself will be present, and tender Himself, too, in a way that will 
prove irresistably attractive, as David and others represent. Comp. Zeph. 
3; Isa. 12:6, ete. The happiness and glory of the once desolate woman are 
invariably connected with an abiding, accessible King dwelling with her. 


Obs. 15. Will the reader pause and reflect to what special privilege and 
honor we are invited in this dispensation, viz., to an identification with 
and participation in the blessings of ‘‘ the married wife.’ She, indeed, will 
number less than that of the other one when God’s purposes are all carried 
out, but her lot is the more exalted and ennobling, as her ‘‘ Mother’’ 1s the 
greater and nobler. 


140 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 118. 


The reason why ‘‘ the married wife’ has a greater portion than “ the barren woman” 
is this : She is “ the first-born,” and as such is entitled to a double portion. (Comp. Arts. 
on ‘‘ First-born,’’ in Bib. Dicts., etc., and observe their distinctive privileges.) The 
first-born” is always regarded as the most excellent, most distinguished, and this prin- 
ciple, as all analogy teaches, must be applied to ‘‘ the Church of the first-born.’’ Some 
contend that others will be added to them, and participate in the same privileges, but 
this is opposed to their birth-right privilege, and to the representations of their being a 
select, separate, and distinct body. Others are born, but, distinguished as they shall be 
and abounding in blessing, they cannot be regarded as “‘ the first-born.”’ This evidently 
was the prize that Paul so earnestly sought to win. Such form Mal, 3 : 17, ‘* My Jewels,”’ 
My peculiar or special treasure’ (comp. Ex. 19:5; Deut. 7:6; 14:2, and 26:18; Ps. 
135 :4; Tit. 2:14; 1 Pet.2:9). Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., ch. 4) opposes this specialty, 
as taught by Bonar and many others. His system, of course, has no place for it. But in 
the restored Theocratic Kingdom we see that, necessarily, there must be different 
degrees of glory. The highest degrees are by the Divine Sovereignty allotted to this 
married wife, and those who find fault with it must sit in judgment on the propriety of 
God’s Will in the matter. 


Obs. 16. If it is our happy lot to be identified with this ‘‘ married wife,”’ 
then we shall see with our own eyes the fulfilment of this prophecy respect- 
ing ‘‘ the barren woman.’’ Now we behold her forsaken ; ¢hen we shall see 
this same desolate woman restored to favor, re-entering her married state, 
bringing forth her increase, revelling in happiness and glory. But we shall 
not only see it, but even be employed with Christ as instruments in pro- 
moting and extending the ‘‘ great mercies,’’ ‘‘ the everlasting kindness’’ 
showed unto her. May God indeed grant that our eyes may see her ‘‘ fair 
colored stones,’’ her ‘‘ sapphire foundations,’’ her ‘‘ agate windows,’’ her 
‘* gates of carbuncles,’’ her ‘‘ borders of pleasant stones,’’ and the unspeak- 
able ‘‘ peace’’ of ‘‘ her children.’’ The student must never forget that the 
New Jerusalem state and that of this woman are inseparable at the period 
of her restoration ; the former adding to the glory of the latter, being 
virtually the outgrowth, the first-fruits, of her covenanted relationship. 


3 
‘ 


Prov. 119. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 141 


Proposition 119. Zhe Kingdom of God in the Millennial descrip- 
tions 1s represented as restoring all the forfeited blessings. 


Attention is only called to the fact, that, explain it as we may, 
when this Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom is represented in the por- 
trayal of the Millennial era as existing, it embraces a restoration of 
blessings forfeited by sin. The prophets instead of separating that 
age from this restitution, making the latter, as many suppose, a 
result to follow afterward, distinctly wnile them. Now, this, as 
the argument thus far demands, is requisite to preserve the Divine 
order in the re-establishment of the Kingdom, seeing that it in- 
volves a resurrected, immortal David’s Son, resurrected and im- 
mortal Ruler, and the fulfilment of covenant promises designed. 
when accomplished to remove evil, sorrow, suffering, etc. 


Obs. 1. Three cautions are in place here: (1) Not to disconnect what 
the prophets have linked together as belonging to the same period of time 
here on earth. (2) Not to imagine that everything mentioned is to be 
instantaneously or quickly performed—time being required for the full 
realization of what may be commenced at the beginning of thisage. The 
exceeding brevity and sometimes obscure allusions admonish us to be 
guarded in our deductions.’ (3) Not ¢o force an interpretation which is 
directly opposed by other Scriptures, and then leave the same without the 
least attempt at reconciliation. ‘Thus e.g. in Isa. 2:1-4, we read: 
‘* Neither shall they learn war any more,’’ etc., upon which Alexander (so 
Barnes and others) comments : ‘‘ War ceases, the very knowledge of the 
-art is lost,’’ etc. But as these commentators apply Isa. 2 : 1-4 to the 
Church before the Sec. Advent of Christ, they fai to inform us what to 
do with the passages which teach, positively, that wars exist, more or less, 
down to the very Advent itself, thus leaving no room for such a period of 
time as Isaiah describes. Such interpretation is not only misleading, but 
it darkens precious truth, and inspires hopes that misguide, and is the 
result of not regarding the general scope of prophecy. 

The Millennial predictions are most loosely quoted, and applied in violence to the 
context, to the present period. An exhibition of the lavish mode of application is found 
e.g. in Eusebius’s (Eccl. His., B. 10, ch. 4) ‘* Panegyric on the Building of churches, ad- 
dressed to Paulinus, Bishop of Tyre.’’ The Popes, even in bulls and official papers, 
apply them to their viceregency. Popish adherents heap them upon the Church, or 
their heads, in ample profusion—reminding us of the elegant ode (15, B. 3) of Sarbiewski, 
- addressed to Urban VIII, freely rendered in Proude’s Reliques (p. 537) : 


‘*Myrtle groves are fast distilling 
Honey ; honeyed falls the dew, 
Ancient prophecies fulfilling 
A Millennium in.you!” 


Protestants of all denominations imitate this looseness in the effort to exalt the Church 
—the greatest wildness being observable in those classes that self-complacently appro- 


142 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 119. 


priate the whole and style themselves ‘‘ the Millennial Church,” or some kindred 
significant title. Many schemes of prophecy are utterly worthless, simply because they 
ignore the plainest order that even a slight comparison of predictions presents. Thus 
e.g. to introduce the Millennial era before ‘‘ the harvest,’’ or ‘* the last trumpet,’’ or ‘* the 
resurrection,” or ‘‘the Sec. Advent,” etc., cannot be sustained. It is identified with 
‘*the day of the Lord Jesus,’’ ‘‘ His appearing and Kingdom,” etc., and, this admitted, 
brings concord between the Scriptures. 


Obs. 2. As it is our purpose merely to show how the Spirit locates the 
performance of these things (preparatory to following Propositions), a 
brief summary of some of them must suffice. 1. Salvation is repeatedly 
predicated of this period. Indeed, the burden of prophecy concerning 
this era is Salvation, abundant and most glorious. God then is the 
Saviour—the Holy One of Israe] 7s the Saviour, and Salvation comes /¢o 
His people. And such is the significance of it, that it stands forth as the 
Salvation, the predicted, pre-eminent Salvation. Great is the number of 
passages bearing this impression, only a few of which we cite, sufficient to 
convey our idea, viz., such as Isa. 12:2; Isa. 49: 26; Isa. 26:1; Isa. 
35:43; Jer. 23:6; Jer. 30:7; Hzek. 37 : 23, etc. When this Mill. day 
comes, then, Isa. 25 : 9, ‘‘ at shall be said in that day, Lo this is our God ; 
we have waited for Him and He will save us ; this is the Lord; we have 
waited for Him, we will be glad and rejoice in His salvation.’’ Salvation 
is likewise ascribed to the Sec. Advent, as e.g. Heb. 9 : 28, etc. 2. Then 
is verified the promise (Gen. 3: 15) that ‘‘ the seed of the woman shall 
-bruise the serpent’s head’ (comp. Rom. 16 : 20 and Rev. 20 : 2, 3), Satan 
being bound, and the victory gained over him, all evil capable of injuring 
God’s people is removed, and this freedom from Satanic power is an 
exultant portion of these Mill. descriptions. So complete, too, is the same 
that no sorrow, crying, etc., 1s to be experienced. 3. The world beholds 
a change of Princes. Compare e.g. John 14 : 30 with Rey. 11 : 15, when 
the sovereignty of this world is taken from ‘‘ the Prince of this world’’ 
and given to Christ in open manifestation. 4. The original sovereign 
dominion over all given to Adam at Creation (Gen. 1 : 28) and forfeited 
by sin, is restored by the Second Adam (Ps. 8 : 6, comp. with Heb. 2:8; 
Dan. 7, etc.). 5. The judges and counsellors shall be restored as at first, 
Isa. 1: 26; and they will be righteous, Isa. 32:1; Isa. 60:17; Jer. 
30:21. 6. The righteous dead will be raised up, so that death is swal- 
lowed up in victory, Isa. 25, etc. % The saints shall participate in the 
dominion over the earth, Dan. 7 : 21, 22; Rev. 20:4; Isa. 32:1, ete. 
8. This divine rule so entirely subjects the world that all enemies are 


destroyed, Zech. 14; Dan. 7, etc. 9. Ohrist is the King, Micah 4 : 1-7; * 


Zech. 9:10, etc. 10. War will cease and wniversal peace be experienced, 
Isa. 2; Micah 4, etc. 11. There will be a general diffusion of revealed 
truth, Isa. 11:9; Isa. 25:7, ete. 12. Universal intelligence will char- 
acterize the people, Isa. 54: 135; Jer. 31:34. 13. Holiness is remarkably 
exhibited in all, Isa. 60:21; Isa. 52:14 Zech. 14721, 22) "ieee 
Jews are to be gathered from all places of their dispersion and enjoy their 
land of old, Isa, 11; Zech. 8, etc. 15. The Jews will be aided and joined 
by the Gentiles, Isa. 49 : 22; Ezek. 48 : 22, 23; Zech. 8 : 20-23, etc. 16. 
The Jewish nation sustains a pre-eminency, Micah 4:8; Zech. 12 : 6-9, 
etc. 17. The Jewish nation a great blessing to other nations, Zech. 8 : 13 ; 
Rom. 11 : 26, 27, etc. 18. Jerusalem shall be the metropolis, Zech. 14 : 
17-21 ; Isa. 24 : 23, etc. 19. The Spirit is marvellously poured out, Ezek. 


I ROPs 119, | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 143 


11:19; Joel 2: 28-82, etc. 20. All things shall be used as consecrated 
to God, Zech. 14 : 20; Isa. 23:18, etc. 21. The Jewish nation no longer 
divided, Isa. 11 : 13, 14; Jer. 50:4, etc. 22. There will be an increase 
of revelation, Joel 2 : 28; Isa. 2:3, etc. 23. A mighty increase of popu- 
lation will be witnessed, Isa. 49 : 19, 20; Jer. 30 : 18-20, etc. 24. Great 
rejoicing and praise owing to restoration, Jer. 33:11; Isa. 51 : 3, ete. 
20. Great prosperity evidencing increased progress in all that tends to 
promote the welfare and happiness of man, Zech. 8: 123 Isa. 60, ete. 
26. Jerusalem, rebuilt and the metropolis, shall never be destroyed, etc., 
Jer. 31 : 38-40; Joel 8:17, etc. 27. A renewal of earth will be experi- 
enced, Isa. 65:17; Isa. 66: 22, etc. 28. Perfect union will exist, Isa. 
52:83 Isa. 49 : 23, etc. 29. Riches will abound, Isa. 60 : 5, 9, 17, etc.? 
30. There will be no famine, Ezek. 386 : 29-35, etc. 31. Sickness will be 
removed, Isa. 33:24, etc. 32. Happy old age, bride and bridegroom 
rejoicing, boys and girls playing, deaf, blind, lame, etc., restored, fear 
absent—in brief, ad/ the blessings that mortal man can properly desire are 
embraced in these portrayals, Zech. 8; Isa. 35 ; Isa. 33, etc. All these 
things are directly, by the Prophets, assigned to this very period of time.*® 


1 The reader will carefully notice how in view of such predictions the Jews were ac- 
customed to call this period of the Messianic reign “ the Salvation.” This is an addi- 
tional argument in our favor, seeing that the Apostles use the phrase just as the Jews 
did without explanation and refer it to the Sec. Advent. It would be interesting to see 
how this word ‘‘ salvation” is employed by the prophets in connection with the restora- 
tion of the Davidic throne and Kingdom, or the Theocrati¢ order, and then to point out 
how it was used in the Jewish sense before and after the death of Jesus, but our argu- 
ment does not require it. So the word ‘‘ Consolation,’’ of which Farrar (Life of Christ, 
vol. 1, p. 22) says that “ waiting for the Consolation of Israel” is equivalent to Mark 
15 : 48, “ waiting for the Kingdom of God,’’ and that among the Jews a prayer for the 
Coming of the Messiah was, ‘‘ May I see the Consolation of Israel.” 

2 The nations, and especially the Jews, will enjoy the wealth accumulated and stored 
up by Gentile domination. Thus e.g. Prov. 13 : 22, ‘‘ the wealth of the sinner is laid wp for 
the just,’’ now rarely manifested, will be verified in the Jews (e.g. Zech. 14, etc.). All 
nations will honor the Theocracy with precious gifts as tokens of esteem and allegiance. 

3 Others might be specified, as (1) angelic communication restored, John 1 : 51 ; (2) 
long life characteristic even in the mortal state, Isa. 65 : 20-22 ; (3) removal of ignorance, 
Isa. 11 : 9; (4) a remarkable purity in God’s service, Zeph. 3 : 9 ; (5) an astonishing com- 
prehension of truth, both to convey instruction and receive it, Isa. 32 : 3, 4, 5; (6) the 
‘perpetuity of nature, as e.g. the enduring of the sun and moon, Ps. 72 : 5, 7, 17; Jer. 
31 : 35, 36; (7) singing and music will be a prominent feature, as e.g. Isa. 35, 51, etc., 
and Rev. 15, etc. ; (8) astonishing changes in the light enjoyed, Isa. 30 : 26 and 60 : 19; 
(9) the removal of demoniacal possessions, of which the detailed statements of the New 
Test. present an earnest in the removal of hysteria, epilepsy, mania or raving madness 
(as to the present existence of the same, comp. e.g. Art. ‘‘ Demonolatry, Devil Dancing, 
Demoniacal Possession,’’ April, 1876, in the Eclectic Mag., taken from the Contemp. 
Review). Prop. 114 also gives a variety of Millennial results. 


Obs. 3. But several particulars are, owing to their being so generally 
overlooked, worthy of more extended mention. 1. The /rwitfulness of 
the land, Amos 9:13; Isa. 29:17; Ezek. 34 : 26, 27; Joel 3:18; Isa. 
pol ioe 2): Isa, 54: 12,°13; Jor. 31:5, 6; Isa, 60.213-175 
Zech. 8:12; Isa. 65 : 25; Ezek. 36:8, 29, 30, 35, etc. This has been 
the object of ridicule by some (and we might quote very unjust things 
ascribed to our view), just as if the earth in this respect was not now 
placed under a curse (Gen. 3:18, 19), as if such a deliverance from the 
curse were not desirable to man, and as if God had not by direct promises 
of renewal determined to bring back the land to the Hden-like state (Isa. 


144 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 119. 


51:3) forfeited by sin. If this curse is not removed, then, as many 
theologians’ have well observed, one of the blessings forfeited is not 
restored, and Redemption in so far would be incomplete. The Bible, 
however, presents no such imperfect deliverance, and hence all reliable 
systems of theology have our feature, more or less prominently, in some 
way incorporated. The unfairness toward us is manifested by refusal in 
some to accept of the discrimination which we make, yiz., that this 
fruitfulness, planting, etc., is designed for the nations zm the flesh (which 
all Millenarians expressly teach), and persistently ascribing to our view, 
what we deny, viz., that all relating to this fruitfulness, culture of the. 
earth, etc., is purposed for the glorified saints. 2. Great miracles will be 
performed at that time, Isa. 11:15, 16; Zech. 14:4; Isa. 27:12; 
Micah 7:15; Isa. 19:20; Micah 2:12, 138, etc. Indeed, the entire 
current of prediction impresses the idea that the most astounding, mar- 
vellous events shall be then witnessed—in the removal of enemies; in the 
restoration of the Jews; in the resurrection and glorification of saints ; 
in the uniting, as declared to Nathanael (John 1:51), of the heavenly with 
the earthly, so that the angels of God shall be seen ascending and descend- 
ing ; in the fulfilment of the promise (John 14 : 12) that the believers of 
Christ shall perform the miraculous works of Jesus. Having shown that 
this Kingdom, in the nature of the case, demanded miraculous inter- 
ference (Prop. 6), that the miracles of Christ are an earnest (Prop. 7) that 
these things are predicted, it can be readily seen that the persons engaged 
in this work, Jesus Christ and His associated glorified brethren, with the 
mighty angels, are abundantly able to verify all these predictions. ‘There- 
fore, mighty and supernatural as the work is, our faith is constantly urged 
to steadfastness by the appeal that God will perform it, either directly or 
by imparting the ability, 3. The original grant of land to the Jews will 
then also be confirmed, Gen. 15 : 13-21; Ex. 23:31; Deut. 11 : 22, 
and extended. ‘The boundaries given are the Mediterranean, the Nile and 
the Euphrates ; thus including places no¢ before possessed. Some indeed 
(Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 12) think that in David’s and Solomon’s reign 
this was the extent, but others more accurately narrow their dominion in 
actual possession. Whatever may be the fact in reference to past fulfil- 
ment, three things are very evident, (a) that a portion was not held by the 
Jews, excepting by a precarious tributary arrangement ; (0) that it was 
only thus possessed for a short time, and hence is no ways commensurate 
with the promise ; (c) that the predictions relating to the future take it as 
a matter of course that at the future restoration this will be effected, seeing 
that all the covenant promises are then to be realized. 4. In connection 
with the outward manifestation of the Kingdom, the Millennial predictions 
indicate the greatest outpouring and cultivation of the graces of the Spirit. 
Indeed, all spiritual blessings are included; none that is desirable is 
excluded, for while not only an abundance of joy, peace, etc., in the Holy 
Ghost is given, others are added, by faith giving place to sight, hope to 
realization. All Millenarian writers of the early Church, as well as 
modern, have held to the spirituality connected with this Kingdom, and 
freely expressed their hopes of *‘ communion and unity of spiritual things 
with the holy angels’’ (lrenzeus), etc.* 5. The New Jerusalem blessings, 


* Vide the well-merited rebuke that Dr. Seiss gives to Corrodi, Seyffarth, and others, 
in Appendix, Last Times, note E, p. 335, 


PROP. 119.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 145 


the blessings of the restoration, etc., are inseparably connected in the 
Millennial descriptions. This is readily seen by comparing e.g. Isa., chs. 
25, or 54, or 60, with Rev. 21 and 22. God has thus joined them together, 
and we cannot, without violence, separate them. But this will be explained 
hereafter. 6. The Kingdom itself will be a great blessing over the earth, 
being designed for this very purpose. ‘There is a beautiful representation 
of this in Ps. 65, where, after declaring that God will answer the prayer 
of His people ‘‘ by terrible things in righteousness,’’ He will then enrich 
the earth “* with the river of God which is full of water’’ (river being repre- 
sentative of Kingdom—thus used) so th at ‘‘the year”’ (viz., ‘‘ the year of 
the redeemed,’’ Isa, 63:4, i.e. the Sabbatical year) is ‘‘ crowned with 
goodness’? and the earth with ‘‘ fatness.’? % Language itself has been 
corrupted by sin, for the confusion of tongues and consequent dispersion 
of mankind followed (Gen. 11) an exhibition of pride and arrogance ; it is 
therefore reasonable to suppose that an era which is again to bind the 
nations together and to bring them, through representatives, etc., to a central 
point of union and worship, should restore the forfeited wnity of language. 
This seems to be intimated in Zeph. 3:9; Isa. 32:4, etc. At least, we 
have a significant instance given (Acts 2 : 4) which shows, that as the 
Spirit is also marvellously poured out in this period, He can impart what 
power He pleases over the use of language. 8. Taking the language in its 
literal aspect, there appears to be described the intervention of miraculous 
power in behalf of diseases, as e.g. even so obscure an allusion as Isa. 
53:4, 5, is quoted Matt. 8:17 as applicable to the removal of bodily 
infirmities. Having such a warrant, the plainer predictions can scarcely 
be applied in any other manner. 9. Christ “‘ shall be a@ priest upon His 
throne,’’ Zech. 6: 13, being a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek 
(Ps. 110: 4). This is essential to our faith in order to preserve the con- 
sistency of the design of this Kingdom over the nations of the earth. 
Hence all Millenarians accept of it as a cardinal point in their system over 
against the Popish view, which makes this priesthood to cease at the end 
of thisage. 10. A materialistic element pervades the Millennial descrip- 
tions, chiefly confined to the Jewish and Gentile nations, and the earth. 
This is the rock upon which so many strike, regarding it inconsistent with 
the future state of the righteous, etc. Aside from what we have stated 
concerning the humanity of Jesus, how the Kingdom is promised to 
Dayid’s Son, evincing His continued humanity, although glorified—aside 
from the continued humanity of the saints (although also glorified), and 
their reign here on earth, it is sufficient for the present to say, that if the 
Millennial predictions lacked this materialistic feature, a very important 
and essential one would be missing in Redemption. Is it not true, that 
the materialistic Eden was forfeited by sin, that man, composed of soul, 
spirit, and body, is fallen under the curse, that a material creation groans 
under the same ; and is it not also true that if there is no deliverance of 
this material portion, Redemption in so far is incomplete? Extremes are 
here to be avoided ; gross materialism on the one hand, and a general or 
universal spiritualism on the other. If God pronounced a material Eden 
very good ; if it is linked with the most glorious period of Christ’s reign ; 
if it is united with the highest spiritual good ; if it has been assumed by 
God Himself to bring Himself condescendingly in contact with humanity, 
then surely we ought to be guarded, lest in ultra-spiritualism or in ultra- 
- materialism we mar the truth of God, bring reproach upon His work, and 
_ diminish the perfection of Redemption.’ 


146 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop, 119. 


1 Let the student compare the promises e.g. Gen. 15 :18 ; Ex. 23 : 31; Deut. 11 : 24; 
Josh. 1 : 3, 4, with what was actually possessed, and then with those predictions relating 
to the future, and it is self-evident that in view of the sinfulness of the nation and the 
withdrawal of the Theocratic Kingdom this grant is held also in abeyance until the future 
restoration of the nation under One who is infinitely superior to Joshua, David, and 
Solomon. Even in such passages as Isa. 26 : 15, this enlargement of the land is pre- 
dicated on the then increase of the nation. Our version (according to Barnes, Lowth, 
Noyes, Alexander, etc.) goes not give the force of the original, and hence they read : 
** Thou hast increased the nation, O Lord, Thou hast increased the nation ; Thou art glorified ; 
Thou hast extended far all the borders of the land.’’ Barnes (Com. loci) remarks : ‘* The 
parallelism requires this construction, and it is indeed the obvious one.’’ So Delitzsch : 
“* Thou hast added to the nation, O Jehovah, hast added to the nation ; glorified Thyself ; 
moved out all the borders of the land.” 

2 Several additional features may be briefly mentioned (1) In Isa. 4:5 we find that 
there will be exhibited a visible manifestation of ‘‘ the glory of the Lord’’ over the houses 
and the religious assemblies of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, somewhat similar to that 
which accompanied the Israelites in their journey from Egypt. ‘* And the Lord will 
create (afford or furnish) wpon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon her assemblies, a 
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night : for upon all the glory shall 
be a defence ;’’ or Delitzsch rendering : ‘‘ And Jehovah creates over every spot of Mount 
Zion, and over its festal assemblies, a cloud by day, and smoke and the shining of 
flaming fire by night : over all the glory comes a canopy.” ‘This is indicative of God’s 
constant presence, abiding care and protection. Surely a people thus constantly honored 
by the visible tokens of God’s favor and blessing must be joyful and happy. (2) The 

‘curse entailed (Gen. 3 : 16) in child-bearing will be removed. Fausset (Com., Isa. 65 : 23) 
says : ‘‘ bring forth for trouble —literally, for terror, i.e. they shall not bring forth children 
for a sudden death (Lev. 26:16; Jer. 15 :8).” Delitzsch : ‘‘ nor bring forth for sudden 
disaster ;’’ or Alexander : ‘‘ for distressing solicitude,’’ etc.; Sep. ‘‘ for the curse.” The 
writer is satisfied—from the general analogy of deliverance—that it includes more, viz., 
deliverance from the pains incident to child-birth. What a vast relief to the family 
relation, now, alas, so often and terribly anguished, even under the most skilful of 
attendance. The student will pardon a brief digression on this point. In 1 Tim. 
2:15 we read, “ she shall be saved in child-bearing.” Those who reject the early Church 
view of ‘‘ the restitution,’ including also that of the race, utterly fail to receive the 
significance of this passage. Not observing that Paul had just reminded Timothy of the 
fall of Adam and Eve, and of the curse entailed, and losing the connection and force of 
the ‘‘ nevertheless,’ they, not knowing what to do with the passage (for their system 
contains no redemption or restitution of the race, as a race), refer it to the present period. 
But in this application they are undecided ; some referring it simply to ‘‘ the maternal 
relation” or “ the duties of a mother ;” others, to the “ education’’ or ‘* proper training of 
children ;’ some, to ‘‘ evincing a wifely disposition and subjection ;’’ others, that a 
child-bearing woman is consoled, that even in her suffering, if she bears her trial with a 
proper spirit, having faith and holiness, she will be saved ; and others, that the woman 
shall be saved through, or by means of, bearing a child, viz., the Messiah. But all this 
is evidently not the obvious meaning of “ child-bearing,’’ referring to child-bearing in 
general, from or in which the woman is to be, in some way, saved. Let us keep in view 
that there is a *‘ restitution of all things’’ promised, and that this embraces a restoration 
to all forfeited blessings. If Eve had not fallen, the special curse entailed upon her sex 
would not have resulted ; maternity would not have been conditioned by the pain and 
suffering now, more or less, attached to it. In Gen. 3:16 it is stated, ‘‘ Unto the woman 
He said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception ; in sorrow thou shalt bring 
forth children.” No piety, no faith, charity, or holiness exempts from this doom ; the 

-most devoted and godly have fallen victims to the burden of love so tenderly awaited. _ 
To this curse the Apostle undoubtedly refers, but then, in view of the doctrine of the 
** restitution,’’ which he so ably presents in Rom. 8, etc. (and with which Timothy was 
familiar), he, with one of his rapid transitions of thought, adds, ‘‘ nevertheless,”’ i.e. not- 
withstanding this curse resulting from transgression, she—the woman—shall be saved 
from it in child-bearing. If there is a restitution of the race to Edenic condition, the 
woman shall not only be saved from dying, but from the ills now pertaining to it. The 
event now so anxiously awaited, often with dread and pain, and, alas, too often 
resulting in agony, death, and intensest grief, will then be one anticipated with — 
calm confidence, beaming hope and joy. Let no one feel that the condition an- 
nexed of ‘‘continuing in faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety,’’ is opposed | 
to such a view, for precisely such conditions are attached to some of the most splen- 


Prop. 119. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 147 


did of Millennial predictions, as e.g. Isa. 65 : 20; Zech. 14 : 16-19, ete. For, such a 
deliverance, we are positively assured, shall only, when the time has arrived, be awarded 
to those women who are pious, having faith, charity, and holiness. To the early Chris- 
tians, this language to Timothy was sufficiently explicit ; now the loss of faith in “‘ the 
blessed hope,’ and the results of its realization, darken it. (3) The prophetic spirit, 
the guidance of visions and dreams (Joel 2 : 28) shall characterize the general diffusion 
of the Spirit, thus indicating how old and young, male and female, shall be under the 
highest spiritual influences, and how varied the gifts and experiences of the coming age. 
Men now may ridicule the dreams and visions recorded in the Bible, but to reflecting 
minds they are of deep interest, evincing to us by earnests vouchsafed, how even with 
the unglorified the chasm between the visible and invisible, the material and spiritual, 
can thus be bridged by a special provision. (4) The supernatural punishment of Gentile 
families, as recorded in Zech. 14 : 16-19, shows that a Theocratic ordering has super- 
seded the Ch. dispensation. In the very nature of the case it implies that One is now at 
the head of rule, who has power over nature, and will direct and wield her in the interests 
of His government. (5) “Greybeard’’ (Graff), in his Lay Sermons, No. 38, “ The Arts 
and Sciences in the Millennium,’’ presents a pleasing picture of that age. Various 
writers refer to the increase of knowledge, etc. This may be said: (a) that under the 
rulership of Christ and the saints, the increased duration of mortal life, the removal of 
the curse, etc., the race can only advance, and that no limit can be assigned to the 
wonderful increase of knowledge ; and (b) that taking the exalted descriptions of the 
Millennial age, the whole, in view of abundance, happiness, etv., impresses one with the 
idea that the race is correspondingly elevated in progress in all directions. The knowl- 
edge, improvements, inventions, discoveries, etc., of former ages will be adapted to 
promote the glory of this coming one. The telegraph, steam, printing, telephone, a 
thousand other things, will be increased in efficiency ; other powers and appliances now 
lying dormant, or vainly sought after, will be brought into requisition, so that the 
people of all lands shall be in daily and friendly intercourse-_that transportation shall be 
speedy and safe—that labor shall be reduced, man being more required to superintend 
the labor that knowledge affords through the use and agency of natural powers than to 
apply his own strength—that the whole world will be bound together, made instantly ac- 
cessible, and realizing a community of interest. (6) The binding of Satan does not neces- 
sarily involve a total cessation of sin throughout the whole earth, for sin (Isa. 65 and . 
Zech. 14, etc.) will exist to some extent, which by various writers is explained as the 
result of natural depravity. As this binding is allied with the deceiving of nations and 
not of individuals, it would perhaps be more in accordance with the spirit of prediction 
to confine this binding to a preventing of Satan obtaining sway over nations or organized 
bodies (for after his release this again is accomplished), or receiving the dominion of the 
earth as in the great Gentile monarchies—thus restraining the power once exercised, so 
that no injury can be inflicted upon the Theocratic State and Church. The binding, 
therefore, is to be considered in relation to the dominion formerly accorded in government 
of nations, and the removal of such power from him. How much more we dare to press 
this binding is not clear to the writer ; and more is not really required to fill out the 
Millennial portraiture of blessedness, and at the same time allow—as intimated in some 
predictions—a continued existence of sin, at first in the Jewish nation, and to some 
extent continued among individuals in Gentile nations. The grand feature developed by 
this binding is simply this : that no Satanic influence is capable of raising up a serious 
conflict, or extended organization against the Messianic Kingdom, or endanger to any 
extent the safety, worship, happiness, etc., of believers, until in God’s good pleasure, to 
each man a final and enduring lesson of Divine judgment and power, liberty is again 
given to Satan to make the last trial. Satan himself cannot move in this matter until 
God permits.* (7) But we must not forget that of one people an exception will be made 


we IE ea EE 


* Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming, p. 2, ch. 7) strongly objects to ‘‘a total cessation of Satanic 
influence’ during the Mill. era, on the ground that the binding of Satan may—as various 
commentators have pointed out—only denote that he shall be utterly unable “* to form a 
public party against Christ,’”’ etc. We do not object to this view, in its bearing on the 
mortal race, and as indicative that Satan will not then, as now, have states, kingdoms, 
large bodies, etc., under his influence. For aught we know the extent of this binding 
may extend farther. However this may be, one thing is clearly taught by the Scriptures, 
that Brown’s view in connection is erroneous, viz., that this binding of Satan will be 
performed by the Church through existing instrumentalities. The simple fact that at 
the close of this dispensation the Church will be terribly persecuted, Antichrist vic- 


148 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM: [PRop. 119. 


(which, after the little season and erushing overthrow of the last confederation, will be 
ultimately true of all on earth), viz., of the Jewish nation. The expressions of univer- 
sality, “all shall be righteous,’’ all, from the least unto the greatest, shall know God, etc., 
refer to this nation. By a comparison of Scripture statement we tind that it will require 
some time to consummate (Isa. 65), but when accomplished Judah and Israe¥ united in 
one, shall always be faithful. They are represented as loyal to the very last, when 
others waver in their allegiance (Zech. 14 ; Rev. 20, etc.). The nearness of this nation 
to the King, its high and noble Theocratic position, its great blessedness, its past 
remembrances and history as a nation—al/ will bind it with unswerving devotion to the 
Theocracy. The predictions, therefore, assert the perpetuity of the nation in favor, 
holiness, etc., and that the holiness shall eventually include all.* (8) Something may be 
said respecting death in the Mill. age. A comparison of Scripture seems to teach the 
following : (a) A perfect exhibition of “ death being swallowed up in victory’’ (Isa. 25 ; 
8) will be manifested in the resurrected and glorified saints ; (b) some will die in the 
Mill. age (comp. Isa. 65 : 20; Jer. 31 : 29-30) ; (c) but these passages seem to make 
death a resultant of sinning—-as also in case of Gentiles, Zech. 14 : 18—for Jeremiah’s 
statement is positive, and so likewise is Isaiah in one phrase (Fausset, Com., Isa, 65 : 20, 
explains ‘‘ the sinner that dieth at a hundred years shall be deemed accursed,”’ i.e. ‘‘ his 
death at so early an age, which in those days the hundreth year will be regarded, just as 
if it were mere childhood, shall be deemed the effect of God’s special visitation in 
wrath’’) ; (d) an exception seems to be made by Isaiah (65 : 20) in the clause: ‘‘ for the 
child shall die a hundred years old’’ (or ‘‘ for the youth in it will die as one a hundred 
years old’’)—now if this clause is not to be united to the next one as explanatory of it, 
then we are assured that death is so limited in its power that there will be no dying in 
infancy, but life will be so protracted that whosoever dies at a hundred years of age will 
be regarded as a child or youth ; (e) in view of weeping, sorrow, the veil of mourning 
being removed from the nations, death will be stripped of his terrors ; (f) if we keep in 
view the fact, that the Millennial age is an advance—an immense one—in the direction of 
restoring the race to its former paradisiacal state, it is not unreasonable to anticipate, 
as numerous writers have asserted, that many, even multitudes, of the righteous will 
never experience death, being in old age, or at some period of life, suddenly trans- 
lated ; (g) the repeal of the curse in the practical working and efficiency of the 
Theocratic ordering, the accessibility to the tree of life and to the leaves destined 
for the healing of the nations, impresses the student with the idea that death it- 
self may be removed to a vast extent ; (h) but, however death may be limited in his 
power over man, the Scmiptures decidedly affirm that death itself shall not be utterly 
destroyed until after the Mill. age, and afler the little season has expired, Rev. 20:14. It 
follows, therefore, that this work of entirely abolishing death from the earth is a gradual 
work ; the glorious beginning being seen in the immortal saints, next in the wonderful 
deliverances of the Jewish nation, next in the astounding blessings bestowed upon the 
nations rendering allegiance, and lastly in the final outcome, when all wickedness (the 
entailer of death) 'is forevermore crushed. 


Obs. 4. Take all these particulars (others will hereafter be mentioned in 
detail), and see how they are identified with the Kingdom of God as it 


torious, and Satan successful in his endeavors, making a Divine intervention imperative, 
is amply sufficient to show that the Church instead of binding Satan is herself fearfully 
oppressed. 

te Pace (Ch. Sec. Coming, p. 306), seeking objections to our doctrine, says, that the 
phrase in relation to the new heavens and new earth ‘‘ in which dwelleth righteousness,” 
means ‘‘ an absolute, unmixed righteousness” over the whole earth, and consequently is 
inconsistent with our ideas concerning the Mill. era, which demand a more gradual 
work, and ultimately the rising up of Gog and Magog. But (1) in the ‘‘ New Heavens 
and New Earth ’’ denoting (see Props. on) the actual extent and sway of the Theocratic 
rule, we do show that righteousness dwells in the King, rulers, subjects, form of govern- 
ment, etc.; (2) that righteousness is visibly manifested as dwelling on the earth, and that 
ultimately in the final outcome is universal ; (3) that the rising of Gog and Magog has, 
owing to sudden and perpetual overthrow, no perceptible influence on the polity 
instituted ; (4) that God’s account of the New Heavens, etc., is to be received (e.g. Isa. 
65 : 17-25) in preference to man’s deductions ; (5) that to build a theory on an isolated 
phrase, torn from its ;connection, leads to contradiction, as e.g. in the account of the 
Church, some passages teaching righteousness, others a mixed condition, ete, 


PROP, 119.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 149 


shall exist in the future. Receiving the Divine utterances and placing 
them together, it is found that @ glorious Redemption is to be experienced 
at that time. Before this era is entered into, these blessings cannot be 
realized ; and therefore we find in the predictions relating to this present 
age or dispensation no such forfeited blessings are restored. This is seen 
in numerous instances. Thus e.g. the parables of the tares and net in- 
dicate it ; the prophecy of Jesus in Matt. 24, which gives an epitome of 
Jewish history to the ending of the times of the Gentiles, and to the 
Advent, has no such Millennium introduced ; in the reply of Paul to the 
Thessalonians respecting the nearness of the Advent of Jesus he gives, as 
a distinctive intervening mark, the spirit and continued progress of the 
Apostasy and Antichrist, but no Millennial era; the prophet Daniel de- 
lineates Gentile domination as existing down to the Coming of the Son of 
Man followed by Millennial dominion, etc., which was not verified at the 
Hirst Advent, seeing that the same domination continued after that Advent 
and still continues. So carefully does the Spirit corroborate our position, 
that in no case, chronologically or in any other way, is the least encowrage- 
ment given to anticipate the re-bestowal of forfeited blessings anterior 
to the ushering in of this Kingdom, and accompanying Millennial bliss, by 
the Advent of Jesus Christ. 


Obs. 5. The folly of making the Millennial era one that is past. The 
theory of Grotius, Prideaux, Vint, Bush, etc., which dates the beginning 
of this age from the overthrow of Paganism under Constantine (a.D. 
323) ; that of Hengstenberg and others, dating it from Charlemagne (A.D. 
800), that of Popish doctors ascribing its rise to the preaching or death of 
Christ, to the destruction of Jerusalem, etc. ; in brief, all theories that 
locate this period in the past do so by a palpable violation of the order 
laid down in Scripture, and of facts in history, which cannot by any fair 
interpretation be made to accord with a fulfilment of prediction.* ‘There- 
fore it happens, that the ablest writers in opposition to our views frankly 
concede that the Millennial era is still future. Thus e.g. Fairbairn (On 
Prophecy, p. 432) unhesitatingly places it in the future, and regards ‘* as 
‘utterly futile all the attempts that have been made to accommodate the 
terms of the description to any period in the past.’’ This is emphatically 
true, for during the past no such blessings as the Millennial descriptions 
portray have been realized ; persecution, trial, suffering, etc., have, more 
or less, characterized the Church’s history. Even if we confine ourselves 
to the statement in Rey. 20 : 1-7 (which is only a very small portion of 
the whole), the world has never yet witnessed such a binding of Satan, 
such a restrainment of his influences and power, such an exemption of 
nations from his deception, such a resurrection and reigning with Christ, 
such a resurrection of the rest of the dead, etc., as is therein described. 
Simple truth requires us to say, that any one who can ascribe to an era of 
time swarming with heresies, outrages against truth, superstitions the 
most vile, etc., the characteristics of predicted Millennial blessedness, what- 
ever his ability and learning, must certainly be fettered and prejudiced by 


* Vide Shimeall’s I Will Come Again, who examines in detail this theory of Grotius, 
etc., also Auberlen’s rebuke of Hengstenberg, Fairbairn On Proph., Lange’s Com., etc., 
aiso how R. Catholics understood it may be found, notably Mosheim’s Ch. His., vol. 2, 
p. 130 and note (which some ignorantly or designedly have charged to our account). 


150 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 119. 


some system which makes such a revolting transposition necessary. And 
the application of prophecy in this direction is sufficient evidence that the 
system of interpretation which fosters it 7s radically wrong. 


Obs. 6. The same is true of the theory which ascribes this Millennial 
period to the present dispensation. For it only requires a survey of the 
blessings connected with this era, and two things follow: (1) that they 
cannot possibly be realized in this dispensation by the use of present instru- 
mentalities, seeing that to produce them demands superadded power, etc. ; 
(2) that such Millennial happiness is inconsistent with the predicted state of 
the Church and of the world during the existence of this period down to 
the ending of it. How can we reconcile e.g. the mixed condition, state of 
suffering, war, etc., expressly affirmed to be characteristics of this dis- 
pensation to its very close, with the purity, freedom from evil, peace, etc., 
of the promised Millennium ? 


Obs. 7. This also teaches the absurdity of totally ignoring the subject, 
as if it were a species of exaggerated human prediction. It is true, that 
such an era, ‘‘a golden age,’’ has been desired by man in various ages. 
Writers quote Plato, Plutarch, Virgil, Seneca, Chinese ancient books, Per- 
sian Magi, Mexicans, etc., even including rude and uncultivated nations, 
Indians and barbarians, who either locate such an era in the past or in the 
future, and from this argue that it is a sentiment common to man, and 
that the Bible falls into the same general current of uninspired desire. 
But they forget the great and unmeasurable difference between these 
heathen utterances and that of the Word of God. The former are dis- 
connected, incoherent, individual expressions, often obscure, etc., while 
the latter forms part of a regular system, maintains a consistent and 
regular connection in it, is necessary to the Divine Plan of Redemption, and 
is given in an unbroken prediction from the earliest to the latest proph- 
ets. The Bible would be incomplete without it. For, beginning with the © 
fall of man and revealing the manner of man’s recovery from the results 
of such a fall, it ends appropriately with a restoration of the forfeited 
blessings. Besides this, the truthfulness of its Millennial predictions is 
abundantly verified by ten thousand incidentals, which have been, and are, 
experienced in the unfolding of the Divine Purpose tending toward the 
ultimate fulfilment. Thus e.g. the history and present condition of the 
Jewish nation ; the times of the Gentiles; the rise, progress, etc., of 
other nations, as Persian, Grecian, Roman, Turkish, etc. ; the calling of 
the Gentiles ; the Christian Church in its conflicts; the personal ex- 
perience of believers, etc.—all these, and more, are so many corroborating 
evidences and testimonies that distinguish the Bible Millennium from all 
others, seeing that the same prophets also have predicted all these. God 
has not left Himself without witness ; and it is only by persistently 
closing our eyes to existing facts, prophesied thousands of years ago, that 
we can escape God’s manifested interest in sustaining our faith. ‘To deny 
all this requires about as much assurance and love of singularity as it did 
in the philosophers who, against their senses and laws of being, denied the 
existence of an external world. | 


Obs. 8. Now let the reader consider: 1. What would this earth have 
become if Adam had not fallen? The answer, as given by Scripture and 


PROP. 119. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 151 


repeated in various theological systems, is this: it would have had no 
curse entailed, bringing in its train unfruitfulness, evils, sorrow, and death. 
It would have had the world under a Theocratic ordering, by which man 
would have been elevated and blessed, having direct nearness to his benefi- 
cent Ruler, etc. 2. Now look at the Millennial blessings enumerated, to 
be realized here on earth during the Messianic reign in the restored The- 
ocratic Kingdom, and is there a single blessing that we can conceive of as 
intended for man unfallen, and which was forfeited by sin, that is not 
mentioned ¢o be then realized? If the Millennium embraces ‘‘ Redemp- 
tion,’’ ‘‘ Salvation,’’ and the Messiah is One that can perform His work 
perfectly, this is precisely the condition that we ought reasonably to 
anticipate. The very fact that the Millennium itself contains such in- 
estimable blessings, honor, and glory, such a revelation of Divine majesty 
and goodness, such an ample deliverance from all evil and even death, 
such a restoration to God’s favor and nearness in Theocratic ordering, is 
sufficient evidence that our doctrinal position is impregnable. The unity 
of the Word, running from the fall to the Sec. Advent, demands, prompted 
by covenants and promise, impelled by the plain grammatical and God- 
given sense, this belief, so dear to the hearts of the martyrs of the early 
Church. 


152 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 120. 


Propostrion 120. This Kingdom with its Millennial blessings 
can only be introduced through the power of God im Christ 
Jesus. 


This is evinced by the Propositions preceding ; for the blessings 
are of such a nature that to produce them requires swpernatural 
aid. Hence the introduction of this Kingdom with its attend- 
ant felicity, etc., is directly ascribed by the sacred writers to God 
or to His Son, Jesus Christ. 

The Millennial predictions are descriptive of the results flowing from the Messiah and 
His Kingdom. The two are united, and the disciples had therefore a pertinent question 
in Acts 1 : 6, for it evinces that Jesus must first restore the Kingdom before the realiza- 
tion of Covenant and prophecy. Jesus, as we have shown, by His wonderful miracles, 
His ‘‘ works’ and “‘ signs,” evidenced His ability to verify Covenant and prophecy. No 
one of our opponents has yet ventured to show how present instrumentalities can intro- 
duce e.g. the realization of Isa., chs. 65, 66, 6U, etc. 


Obs. 1. That Christ is the Introducer of the Millennial era is so abun- 
dantly asserted by the Prophets that a large number of writers, opposed to 
our view, still admit that Christ must come at this period spiritually in 
extraordinary power. Later writers finding the older spiritualistic opinions 
untenable, now (as e.g. Fairbairn, On Proph., pp. 469-471) frankly 
declare that the glory, etc., is so great and universal that extraordinary 
adjuncts and manifestations and gifts must be bestowed to affect it, thus 
confessing that the present means and instrumentalities are ineffective to 
produce it; and acknowledging that, by such additions, a dispensation, 
to all intent and purpose, in some respects different from the present one 
will be inaugurated. ‘This is done too after spiritualizing the resurrection 
and many other blessings; how then must the matter be regarded if we 
allow a literal resurrection, reign, etc.—in brief, the blessings enumerated, 
to ensue at this time? It is utterly impossible to ascribe their reception to 
any other power than the direct intervention of King Jesus. It is a matter 
of surprise that one class of our opponents, such as Prof. Stuart, do not 
see that the confession that Rev. 20 : 1-7 teaches a literal resurrection, in 
the very nature of the case demands, in order to effect it, the personal 
Coming of Christ, or, at least, His direct intervention. Indeed, there is 
scarcely a blessing described but such is the amplitude of it, that we know 
from other Scripture that it cannot be realized wntil the Advent of. Jesus. 
Thus to illustrate: take the order, peace, subjection of nations portrayed, 
and it is found that no such order, peace, etc., is to be found on earth 
until the Coming of Christ, for even preceding it, and at the Advent, 
nations shall be arrayed against the truth. In the ** Prize Peace Essays 
and Congress of Nations,’’? Micah 4 : 3, is quoted and the assertion made 
that ‘‘ the Gospel of peace’’ will accomplish the removal of war, restore 
peace, etc. But that 1s opposed to the spirit of the same chapter, for in 


7 


Prop. 120. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 153 


the verse quoted we find that instead of the Gospel affecting this result it is 
done in the following manner: “* He shall judge among many people, and 
rebuke strong nations afar off,”’ and this when (y. 7) ‘‘ the Lord shall reign 
in Mt. Zion’’—when the Jews (v. 6) are restored—when. the nations that 
are to be judged are gathered (v. 11) against Zion—and when “many 
people (v. 13) are to be beaten in pieces.’’ Against such testimony in the 
context, which becomes overwhelming when compared with parallel pas- 
sages, if is in vain to protest ; it must be reverently received as of God’s 
ordering. Hence, although materially differing in our view from Maurice, 
yet we can cordially accept of the title which he gives to one of his ser- 
mons: “‘ Christ, not Christianity, the deliverance of mankind.’’ How 
can the Covenant with David be possibly realized without David’s Son 
personally comes to fulfil it? How can the Kingdom be manifested Jefore 
- the Coming of the King and the exertion of His power and will? How 
can the associated rulers with Him exercise the honorable prerogative of 
reigning with Him wnless they are raised from the dead according to 
promise? In brief, all depends on that Second Advent and its resultant 
accompaniments. 


The student will observe that one of the latest writers against our doctrine, Dr. 
Brown (Christ's Sec. Coming), makes many concessions in our favor (as e.g. the impor- 
tance of Sec. Advent, duty of looking for it, etc.) that he is forced by his own position 
(p. 27-29) to a kind of ignoring of the Millennium (saying: ‘‘ I attach no importance to 
the precise period of a thousand years,” etc.), constituting its beginning and ending 
obscure, uncertain, and unascertainable—“ all being outwardly unchanged.” It is a matter 
of astonishment that any one can be forced by the pressure of a theory into so untenable 
an attitude, seeing that—in the light of a thousand predictions (Isa. chs. 65, 66 ; Rev. 
20 : 1-4, etc.) the introduction of specific blessings, marvellous changes, glorious Re- 
demption, etc.—the Millennial era is presented to us as one that is so recognizable by the 
stupendous events connected with it (as e.g. the destruction of enemies, the exaltation of 
the saints, etc.) that all men shall be compelled to acknowledge the same to the praise and 
glory of God and His Christ. A doctrine that must be sustained by dwarfing and 
obscuring the Millennial predictions is certainly defective and unreliable. And then when 
thus lessened in preciousness, he seeks to have the Millennial predictions verified by 
existing means and agencies, introducing his favorite leaven and mustard-seed theory 
(without attempting to reconcile these with the parables of the tares and drag net, etc.) 
to prove that ‘‘not a new element is added.” Dr. Schmucker (Pop. Theol., p. 343-361) 
thinks the Word of God, that is, the Gospel and its preaching, with prayer, revivals, 
and missions, will perform all this, but how purely moral agencies can accomplish a work 
introducing the Millennial blessings, he utterly fails to inform us. So Wild (The Lost Ten 
Tribes, p. 153) declares in reference to Acts 3 : 21 (comp. Prop. 144) that the restoration 
occurs first and then Jesus comes, thus violating the entire analogy of Scripture on the 
subject. He says: ‘‘ If things are not now restored or reconciled, or in order, why, then, 
Christ cannot come. He will not come to put them in order; this He has left for and 
with the Church to do, and has promised to be with His Church to the end.’’ Alas! if 
our hopes depend on the Church, that itself shall be terribly persecuted and depressed. 


Obs. 2. The multitude of writers, who so persistently proclaim that the 
Kingdom and Millennial blessedness shall be introduced by present existing 
instrumentalities, are in direct opposition to Scripture. This theory will 
receive attention in another place (Prop. 175), and requires no special 
refutation here, seeing that our entire argument, as well as detached por- 
tions of it, refute its pretentious claims. It is simply amazing how pious, 
devoted, and able men have fallen under the influence of a theory, which 
causes even a very recent writer, Talmage (quoted by the Wittenberger of 
Noy., 1873), to say : ‘‘ The way to the Millennium is through the fit and 
full education, of woman. Social, political, and religious progress 1s 


154 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 120. 


conditioned upon her advancement,”’ etc. This may be regarded as an 
extreme opinion, but the truth is, that any view that ascribes the realiza- 
tion of those precious predictions to any other power than that delineated 
so faithfully and minutely by the Prophets, is extreme and equally repul- 
sive to the truth. 


Vaticanism has its dream of universal sovereignty and its Millennial glory (although 
wherever its principles were tested, Millennial blessedness was never even initiated) ; 
education, non-sectarian or compulsory, has been advocated as the grand agent of the 
future Millennium (although the kingdoms in Europe, and the States here, which have 
experimented in that direction have ameliorated no evils) ; a hundred favorite schemes 
by their various enthusiastic advocates are presented as the unfailing instrumentality 
by which Millennial happiness is to be secured (although not one has succeeded in lessen- 
ing the sorrow-abiding hold of the curse one particle) ; even Christian philanthropy (as 
e.g. The Christian Philanthropist, or Harbinger of the Millennium, by Wm. Cogswell), 
noble in its efforts to lessen the griefs, etc., of suffering humanity, is urged as the all- 
powerful, efficient agent (although charity in its highest efforts has never yet succeeded 
in loosening a single bond"that fetters poor humanity). Unbelief comes and tells us (so 
e.g. Fiske in Outlines of Cosmetic Philosophy) ‘‘ that the ultimate salvation of mankind is 
to be wrought out solely by that obedience to the religious instinct which urges the in- 
dividual, irrespective of utilitarian considerations, to live in conformity with nature’s 
requirements” (although the curse, entailed by sin, is so firmly fixed by the laws of nature 
that the most pious as well as the most abandoned fall in consecutive generations under 
its power, and unbelief teaches that these laws are forever unchangeable). Glasgow (Com., 
Rev. p. 499) says, in advocacy of his spiritualistic view: “It is not possible by any 
rational mode of interpretation to evade the conclusion that the Millennial reign of Christ 
is the Gospel age.” Now, if he, or any other man, can point out how present means 
and agencies are to introduce the Salvation, the blessings, of the Millennial age as pre- 
dicted, then he has some foundation for his ‘‘ rational mode of interpretation.” If the 
Gospel in the past, if the most eminent piety and devotion, has not removed the ills 
incident to life, how will it do this in the future. 


Obs. 3. It is saddening to find how far this denial of the necessity 
of Christ’s Second Coming for purposes of Salvation is carried in our 
Theological literature. Men who would shrink from any impeachment of 
orthodoxy, or denial of truth, array themselves against Covenant promise 
under the misguiding influence of supposed developed truth. Thus to 
illustrate : In the excellent Quarterly Review for Jan., 1874, in a one-sided 
Art., which totally ignores the expressed views of the confessors, the follow- 
ing bold assertion is made: ‘‘ Christ’s power to bless and save His people 
and protect them against the devil and sin 7s not in His Coming again on 
earth, but in His session at the right hand of God and His power there in 
their behalf,’’ etc. How such language can be employed in the face of 
scriptural authority, is a matter of surprise. The reader can readily test 
the trustworthiness of the declaration by referring to these facts: (1) that 
His Coming is for Salvation, to complete Redemption, Heb. 9 : 28; Luke 
21 : 27, 28; Rom. 8 : 19-23; Eph. 4 : 30, etce.; (2) fo raise the dead, 1 
Thess. 4 : 14, 16, etc. ; (3) to change the living, 1 Cor. 15 : 42-44, 51-54, 
etc. ; (4) to invest with dominion (Prop. 154) ; (5) to remove the wicked, 
His enemies, 2 Thess. 2 : 8-11, etc. ; (6) to deliver the Jewish nation 
(Prop. 111, etc.); (7) to relieve creation, Rom. 8 : 19-21, etc.; (8) in brief, to 
introduce the numerous blessings which our argument evolves. It is cer- 
tainly’ sufficient, in order to prevent our accepting such contradictory 
utterances, to know that He’comes for Salvation ; and that that Coming is 
represented to be the most efficacious in removing sin and overcoming 
Satan. 


Prop. 120. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 155 


It is sufficient to append an additional illustration : Dr. Schmucker (Pop. Theol. Dp. 
348, etc.) indorses the popular view that the Millennium is to be introduced by the cone 
version of the world through present existing means (which he says ‘are amply suffi- 
cient’), and enters into a calculation how soon this can be accomplished. (This view is 
amply met and refuted under Prop. 175.) But in this discussion he overlooks two 
things : (1) that the Bible delineation of this dispensation down to the Sec. Advent, in 
continued wickedness, war, suffering, trial, persecution, etc., forbids such a calculation 
to be recognized ; and (2) that he only takes one feature of the Millennial era, viz., the 
worship of God and obedience rendered to Him, leaving out of the account other features 
embraced in the same period that mere moral agencies can never remove. This then is 
taking a one-sided view of the subject ; and yet this method is, unreflectingly, followed by 
a multitude of ablemen. The father of Dr. Schmucker (Rev. Dr. J. G. Schmucker), in 
his Exp. of Rev., is far more scriptural when he teaches, as preparatory to its introduc- 
tion, the direct supernatural intervention of God in and through Jesus Christ. To take 
e.g. Isa., chs. 60-66, and apply them to the Church in its present agencies and use of 
means, is an effort that can only succeed by grossly spiritualizing (i.e. adding another 
sense to the one given in the text) the same, or else to regard the predictions as Oriental 
exuberance and exaggeration, which require considerable toning down to meet favor 
with modern ideas. 


Obs. 4. On the other hand, it is refreshing to see even some of our most 
unrelenting opponents acknowledge the force of Scripture representation 
to the extent that they also make the Sec. Advent the most desirable 
object of hope, ascribing to it, as the Spirit does, divine purposes of Salva- 
tion. Thus e.g. Brown (Christ’s Sec. Com., chs. 1 and 2) frankly admits 
that Christ’s Sec. Coming is “‘ the blessed hope’’ of the Church—that it is 
‘* the polar star’’ of faith—strenuously opposing the view so prevalent that 
Christ comes at death, by showing, (1) that the death of the believer is 
grievous ; (2) that the salvation without Sec. Advent is incomplete ; (3) 
and that we otherwise dislocate Scripture, etc. Thus also let the reader 
refer to Barnes (Com., Phil. 3 : 20), and he will find this Coming again 
eulogized as ‘‘a glorious truth,’’ necessary unto salvation, ‘‘ identified 
with all our hopes,’’ exerting blessed influences as in the early Church, ete. 
And, what is even hostile to their own system, seeing that they put off this 
Advent to the distant future, to a period after the Millennium, they 
exhort believers to look for it, pray for it, etc. In looking over com- 
mentaries, many of them express, under passages relating to the Advent, 
the duty of regarding the amelioration of the world, etc., as dependent on 
Christ’s Coming, and not on earthly systems, existing means, etc., and 
yet when turning to Scripture portraying the restitution of forfeited 
blessings not a word is said concerning Christ’s Coming to perform the 
work, but much is stated respecting the Church’s power to accomplish the 
same. If it were a pleasant task, hundreds of contradictions, some the 
most flagrant, could be produced. Surely a system of interpretation that 
so freely fosters the same must be unreliable. 


Obs. 5. It is objected by unbelievers that the notion that some great 
Saviour is to come to restore all things, is found in other religions beside 
the Christian. 'Thus e.g. Clarke (Zen Religions, p. 204, Alger’s Doc. of 
Fut. Life, Kurtz, Sac. His., p. 273, etc.) shows that in the system of 
Zoroaster mention is made of a future Restorer or Saviour, who is expected . 
to come at the end of the age, restore the dead by a resurrection, and 
introduce a Kingdom of untroubled happiness, etc. It is of little con- 
sequence how this idea was suggested and introduced (some contending 
that it sprung from original communications made by God, others that 1t 


156 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 120. 


originated with man himself, etc.), for it evidences, what was observed 
previously, that man feels the utter inability of existing causes to produce 
such a restitution, and therefore, owing to the inadequacy of present means 
and instrumentalities, falls back upon the supernatural. This feeling, as 
we have seen, is general, and naturally arises from reflection, and a desire 
to secure deliverance. 


The natural man feels the sad pressure of the curse and looks around for redemp- 
tion, and as he cannot have hope in nature, he grasps after the supernatural. Figuer 
(The To-morrow of Death, p. 13) declares that “ the physical conditions of earthly life are 
truly detestable,” and pronounces “ the moral conditions’ the same, owing to the 
existence of disease, suffering, death, grief, guilt, etc., and seeks refuge in Gnostic ideas 
modernized. Harriet Martineau (Art. ‘‘ Realism in Unbelief,’’ Littell’s Liv. Age, May 
5th, 1877), who anticipated personal annihilation, and who believed that the Cause of 
the Universe was ‘‘ wholly out of the sphere of human attributes,” yet still predicted 
that ‘* the special destination of my race is infinitely nobler than the highest proposed 
under a scheme of divine government—’’ but how this prophecy was to be realized under 
the alleged unchangeable laws of nature she fails to tell us ; or, how it could possibly be 
superior to the biblical conception, with the Supernatural controlling natural law and 
making it beneficent, she leaves untold. (Indeed, she is often contradictory, for in her 
Autobiography (Littell, May 26th, 1877, p. 471) she confesses to being impelled by pass- 
ing impulses to find consolation (see her Life in the Sick-room) in revealed religion, 
giving the following testimony, so utterly antagonistic to her many utterances: ‘‘ Noth- 
ing but experience can convey a conception of the intense reality in which God appears 
as Supreme, Christ, and His Gospel divine, and holiness the one aim and chief good, 
when our frame is refusing its offices, and we can lay hold on no immediate outward 
solace and support.’’) The truth is, that there are times when all men feel the necessity 
of Divine interposition in behalf of the race. When Goethe died exclaiming ‘‘ Light! 
more light !’ he wanted the comfort and hope that the Divine Purpose relating to the 
destiny of the race alone imparts. 


Obs. 6. The most intelligent and profound thinkers of every age declare, 
that the removal of the self-evident curse (explain its introduction as they 
may) entailed upon the earth and its inhabitants, demands higher power 
and greater manifestations of Deity than now are exhibited. It is ad- 
mitted that physical science, however it may in some instances mitigate, 
cannot remove the evils ; mental agencies cannot affect it, for knowledge 
itself may give new weapons into the hands of evil ; moral agencies cannot 
do it, the Church cannot do it, since the most moral and pious fall beneath 
the curse, experiencing disease, sorrow, death, the grave, and corruption. 
This Kingdom—this Millennial prediction—embraces the removal of the 
curse. This is fully proven by the descriptions of the same. The ques- 
tion, by what agencies its removal is accomplished, is also satisfactorily 
answered. The scope of the Word asserts, that man is under the curse 
through his fallen condition, and that the evils arising therefrom are the 
work of Satan. The fact that the evils do exist is painfully evident on all 
sides ; the manner of introduction, whatever may be said pro and con, is 
also sadly corroborated by the tendency to sin in man. We are only 
concerned with present facts, and to show how they will be changed for 
desired and glorious realities. The Bible points to One alone who is to 
produce this change, viz., to ‘‘ the Christ’? who is revealed expressly ‘‘ to 
destroy the works of the devil.’’ 'The power over evil which He exhibited in 
His life, death, resurrection, and ascension affords the assurance, if we will 
only receive it, that His ability is commensurate, yea, infinitely superior to 
this removal of Satan’s work. ‘Those ‘‘ works of the devil’’ have not yet 
been destroyed ; they exist In vast proportions over the whole earth ; and 


PRop. 120.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. Tog, 


so universal and far-reaching are they that not one escapes from feeling 
their fatal effects. Creation continues to groan and travail in pain ; man, 
even the most devoted, continues to reap the bitter fruits of the fall, and 
thus we are told it will go on wntil the time appointed by God, when He 
shall send this Son of His, and through Him ‘‘ destroy the works of the 
devil.’”’ When the King comes to whom all power is committed in virtue 
of His Theocratical relationship, sustained by His covenanted descent, 
divine nature, sacrificial death, etc., ¢hen primarily through Him, and 
subordinately through His associates (deriving their power from Him), 
this most blessed removal of the curse will at last be experienced. Super- 
natural intervention, divine outpourings of judgments, the introduction 
of an overwhelming mass of righteousness in glorified humanity, the 
erection of a magnificent Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom supported by this 
majestic David’s Son with a corporate body of immortal, intelligent, holy 
rulers endued with angelic power, etc.—these things, and these alone, can 
bring about, as inspiration testifies, the long-hoped-for deliverance. If we 
were to bring together the absurd language used by many in reference to 
the curse and its removal, it would be deemed a caricature of the sacred 
promise. Indeed, so little regard is paid to the tenor of Scripture by 
some, that the old monkish notion is reiterated, that the removal of the 
curse 1s confined to the third heaven, thus overlooking the plain impli- 
cation that the third heaven itself must then also have fallen under the 
curse, and thus making Redemption, so far as the earth, race, Kingdom, 
etc., is concerned, incomplete. ‘The ‘‘ no more curse,’’ as all inspired men 
unitedly agree, refers to this earth, and to man upon it ; and hence the 
singular beauty and consistency of the Bible beginning with the curse and 
forfeited blessings and ending with happy restitution. 

Smith (Key to Rev., p. 374) gives the key-note of many objections, when, in opposing 
the personal reign of Jesus, he says : ‘* His reign here must be only spiritual. The days 
of miracles are past ; the Bible is filled ; and they are not needed ; and Christ can reign 
as effectually without miracles as with them,’’ etc. But how then the Bible predictions are 
to be realized, which, as enumerated, demand the introduction of agencies far beyond 
any now exerted, is a question that he leaves untouched, only taking so much of prophecy 
to dispose of as he can conveniently crowd into a spiritual or providential reign. Take 
another class represented by Reclus (The Ocean) and he makes “‘ the Paradise on earth 
which the mind’s eye of the seeker already seems to contemplate in the distant future”’ 
to be ‘‘a glorified earth” produced by man’s own researches, efforts, knowledge ; but 
while jumping to so. pleasing a conclusion he fails to tell us how these can stay the 
cyclone, repress the earthquake, or repeal any of the laws of nature now so oppressive. 
This is seen by some of our opponents, as e.g. Goldwin Smith (Atlantic Monthly, Feb., 
1880) refers to Herbert Spencer looking for a Millennium in the ‘‘ ideally moral man in 
whom the moving equilibrium is perfect,’’ and then points out (Art. Pessimism”) that 
nature, with its attendant evils, will necessarily prevent perfect happiness, etc. Take 
Victor Hugo’s Les Miserables and see how man’s doom under nature’s laws is delineated, 
the hopes expressed of ultimate deliverance by the diffusion of ‘“‘ light,’’ “ elevation,”’ 
‘* knowledge,’’ just as if man can be his own deliverer, while the Deliverer provided by a 
merciful God is studiously ignored. 


Obs. 7. The Bible attributes the curse, or introduction of evil, to the 
fall of the first Adam, and the removal of it to the second Adam, that 1s 
‘‘ the Christ.”’ To this, as adverted to before, some object on cosmological 
and geological grounds, viz., that facts seem to establish the truth that | 
death and natural evil existed, taking the biblical chronology, long before 
the fall of Adam. This would of course conflict with the view of Basil, 
Luther, and many of the Fathers, that the poison of the serpent, the 


158 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 120. 


thorn of the rose, the disease and death of man and animals, etc., were 
added to poisonless, thornless, diseaseless objects, as a direct result of the 
curse—in brief, that all evil resulted from thence, the calamitous effect of 
the fall. Dr. Bushnell (as in ‘t Nature and the Supernatural,’’ ch. 6, 7) 
and others advocate ‘‘ anticipative consequences,’’ i.e. that the introduc- 
tion of evil anticipated the results which actually transpired. Others 
(Meth. Quart. Review., Ap., 1862, Art. 6, Dr. Clarke, Gen. 1 : 24) that 
it resulted from divine caprice, or a desire ‘‘ merely to show what he 
could do,’? making it inexplicable. Others again, as Keerl (Origen at 
first), Boehmen, etc., that the evil originated not from the fall of Adam, 
but from the fall of Satan, which may have occurred long before. Other 
theories, modifications of the preceding, are advanced—all evincing, how- 
ever, that it is a deep and mysterious subject? But is it requisite to adopt 
any theory, seeing that the objection is forcible only against theological 
theories which have really 2o basis in Scripture? For, if we come to the 
Bible unhampered by theories respecting the fall, we find that, being only 
a Book designed for fallen man, and to indicate his redemption, it com- 
mences with man and incidentally introduces a sufficiency to show what. 
relation he sustained to creation in point of time, and what was his 
original condition. The record itself does not say that no evil previously 
existed in the earth, but positively asserts that evil did exist in Satan ; and 
it was by this evil already present, and which came in contact with man, 
that the Fall was induced. Death itself was in existence, seeing that it is 
implied by the bestowal of the tree of life in Eden by which immortality 
could be obtained. By the creation of Adam and Eve and the withdrawal 
of them in a separate, distinctive place (i.e. the Garden of Eden, thus 
indicative that the rest of the earth was as yet wnprepared for their re- 
ception), God was designing a provision for the emancipation of the 
earth under the holy dominion of man, i.e. to subjugate the evil already 
existing and to triumph over Satan. But the unfilial conduct of our first 
parents made the gracious purpose of God, without preliminary training, 
a dangerous procedure, so that man was driven from the tree of life. 
Being mortal, he fell under the penalty of a law of death ¢hen in existence, 
and which he might have avoided by obedience ; and when the Bible says 
that death came by man and passed upon all men, it simply refers us to 
the plain fact that immortality, in the tree of life, was tendered to man, 
and he rendering himself waft for its reception, fell under the power of 
death, and with him, of course, all his descendants. The Bible and 
science here accord, for Eden was not the whole earth, but only a limited 
space, specially fitted for man; for evil was here present before man 
came; the simple withdrawal of the tree of life exhibited the already 
existing laws of mortality ; the curse itself was (1) a removal from an Eden 
state, (2) the sad experience and confirmation of evil into which man was 
driven outside of Eden. Here is no conflict. Besides this, the Bible 
language is so guarded, that it is also correct to insist as it ‘does, that 
through the fall of Adam the race was placed under the curse, inasmuch 
as Adam entailed his fallen condition upon all his offspring ; for, as 
intimated, immortality being withdrawn from fallen man, as too dangerous 
and exalted to be allowed, Adam and his descendants must obtain it now 
in some other way, viz., through the power of a Redeemer, while they all 
suffer the loss of Eden. ‘The Word is consistent in its utterances, but just 
so soon as we press them, as Basil, etc., did, or seek for apologies, as 


PRop. 120. ] THE THEOORATIO KINGDOM. 159 


Clarke, Bushnell, and others do, we not only depreciate the Bible account, 
but call into question its accuracy. It needs no apology from us, dealing 
as it does with stubborn facts, patent to all, viz., that we are fallen into 
the embraces of evil, that we have no Eden state here, etc. If the Bible 
had asserted that all the earth was an Eden, and that no evil and death 
had any previous existence, then science might find some leverage for its 
objection, but depending on opinions of men engrafted on the Word, it 
becomes futile and very unscientific. 


Comp. e.g. Delitzsch’s Sys. of Bib. Psyc., sec. 1, etc. If the deductions of science in 
reference to the previous existence of death are to be received, there certainly is no 
conflict to be found with the biblical statement. The only inference to the contrary 
appears to some in the phrase, ‘‘ God saw it was good,” but this (Bush’s Notes, Lange’s 
Com., etc.) may have for its fundamental application the notion that God saw that it— 
the creation—answered fully the purpose designed—that in such and such a creation 
He made the provision intended. 


Obs. 8. This leads us to consider that a restoration to an Eden state 
involves the reproduction of an Eden immensely greater than the original. 
That we find was limited—abundantly large for the trial through which 
man passed. But when we consider that this Eden restored must be of a 
sufficient capacity to hold not merely the first parents, but that numerous 
progeny who have laid hold on life through a divine faith, etc., it will be 
seen at once that the Millennial descriptions do not exceed what is required, 
when they represent the whole earth as finally embraced in such a state, 
And not only so, but in the new creative energy manifested at this period, 
there are intimations which seem to point to an enlargement of the earth 
itself. In this reproduction we have no specific detail, for these are wisely 
omitted, because (1) if given they wouid lead men to object to the Word on 
the ground of impossibilities, which is even now done with the general 
affirmations of renewal ; (2) with our present knowledge and the state of 
science we could not comprehend the changes and altered conditions. The 
Word is not given to extravagances of expression, such as we find in the 
conjectures of men (astronomers, philosophers, etc.) concerning the sun, 
planets, and universe, which could be seized upon as purely hypothetical, 
but this restitution is based on a regular divine Plan of Redemption ; 1s 
presented in guarded general terms, and ascribed to a Being in whom we 
know that the power to accomplish it is to be found. ‘Therefore, we rest 
satisfied that the Eden will be fully commensurate to the number who shall 
be entitled to admission to it. 


Obs. 9. This Kingdom designed to carry out and display the Redemp- 
tive process in its realization will exhibit in the highest degree the love of 
God through re-creative power and activity. No one doubts but that such 
love was strongly shown in creation, in the Incarnation, in Providential 
movements, etc., but all these, if we are to credit the Prophets, are only 
forerunners of a higher manifestation of His goodness when the consum- 
mation arrives. God revealed directly through humanity as the Theocratic 
God, acts of restoration and renewal, the complete union of Church and 
State, the subordination of the human to the divine Will, the rule of 
righteousness and righteous submission harmoniously blended, the abroga- 
tion of all divergence between religion and science, the world and heaven, 
the heart and God, life and holiness—all this calls forth exhibitions of love 


160 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | [PRop. 120. 


in Father, Son, and Spirit, to which all previously given ones are only 
earnests of the ultimate feast. | 

Obs. 10. May we not again remind the reader, how logically consistent 
the early Church was to attribute to Christ at His Sec. Advent this work 
of restoring all things through the power of His rule and Kingdom? In 
addition to the numerous allusions already made to their belief on the 
subject, the candid admission of Neander (His. Ch. Church, vol. 1, p. 
182), that Paul looked for the Advent of Christ, and that it was to be 
regarded by believers as ‘‘ fitted to be, not an object of dread, but of joyful, 
longing hope,’’ because neither Paul nor the other Apostles believed in a 
conversion of the world, but rather in its growing worse until the personal 
Advent of Christ brought deliverance. ‘This very posture and belief our 
argument demands, and hence these concessions of such historians form 
an important corroborating element in the chain of evidence which the 
student should not overlook. 


Prop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 161 


Proposition 121. This Kingdom, of necessity, requires a Pre- 
Millennial Personal Advent of Jesus Christ. 


The covenant promises, the Millennial descriptions which predict 
the fulfilment of these promises, the entire tenor and analogy of 
Scripture demand such an Advent. To establish the Theocratic- 
Davidic Kingdom as given by the prophets requires such a personal 
Coming ; and as inspiration indicates the restoration of the Davidic 
throne in that period and David’s seed occupying that throne and 
Kingdom of David’s, it also invariably speaks of the return and 
presence of David’s Son. The proof is cumulative and over- 
whelming, and in the aggregate establishes the remarkable unity 
of the Word, the consistency of Jewish expectation, apostolic 
preaching, and early Church doctrine. 

The Covenant imperatively demands a personal coming, for it requires David’s Son to 
come, the Seed in His proper person, to inherit the Theocratic throne and Kingdom and 
land. Hence it cannot be spiritualized ; and therefore it is that the promises and pre- 
dictions are so framed as to sustain this view of a personal coming. It is likewise 
noticeable that eminent writers, firmly advocating a personal Pre-Mill. Advent, weaken 
their reasoning by overlooking two things, (1) the oath-bound Covenant with David which, 
if fulfilled, makes such a coming a@ necessity; and (2) the nature of the Kingdom, viz. 
Theocratic-Davidic, which again, if realized, requires such a personal Advent. This 
subject must, in order to do it justice, be considered in its strictly historical, doctrinal, 
and logical connection, for a restored Theocracy without the personal presence of David's 
Son by whom it is restored is an impossibility. 


Obs. 1. Before presenting our arguments in favor of a Pre-Millennial Ad- 
‘vent, it is best to notice a few particulars. And first, seeing that the Cove- 
nant, promises and prophecies in their literal import do teach a literal 
personal Advent, why is it, if the same is only to be understood spiritually 
or providentially, that so many of our opponents (as Neander, Bush, 
Billroth, Jowett, etc.) admit that the Apostles—inspired men to be guided 
into all truth—themselves held to such a literal construction? How comes 
it, that ¢nstead of looking for a Millennium to precede the Advent as men 
now confidently teach, these inspired men, having the same prophets, and 
it being part of their mission to interpret and explain these prophets, 
tanght the Advent without an intervening Millennium? Why do they 
employ the explicit language, the strongest possible expressions, confirma- 
tory of a literal personal Coming, if something else is denoted? If we 
reject their teaching, and the results of the same as manifested in the 
Churches established by them, we degrade them to the position of un- 
inspired, and hence unreliable, guides; and infidelity in its inferences 
drawn from this point may well laugh with scorn at the foolish apologies 
offered by learned men in extenuation of such an unapostolic posture then 
so fruitful in error’and deception. Secondly, if the Apostles were to lead 


d 


162 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


their hearers to the truth as given by holy men of old, and if the varied 
interpretations long afterward bestowed upon the predictions of this 
Advent are correct, why is it that we do not find the language now so 
prevalent on the subject in the epistles? Why e.g. do we not find the 
interpretations of ‘‘a spiritual Coming,’’ ‘*a providential Coming,” “‘a 
Coming with the Roman army,’’ ‘‘a Coming in death,’’ etc.? ‘The fact 
is, thut not one of the phrases now so current in theological literature on 
this point is to be found in the Bible. ‘The adsence of them, to say the 
least, indicates their human origin. Thirdly, the words themselves used 
by the apostles to designate the Second Advent (Parousia and Epiphaneia) 
are conceded by all critics to be, owing to their primary meaning and 
usage, eminently calculated to teach a literal, personal Advent. ‘I'he very 
selection of such words ought to have weight with the student in such a 
discussion.* Fourthly, the hope as expressed by pious Jews, was in the 
personal Advent of the Messiah. After the rejection and death of Jesus 
by the nation, the Apostles transfer this hope to the Second Advent, and 
in doing this adopt the very phraseology employed by the pious Jews, thus 
unmistakably exhibiting faith in the ultimate realization of the hope in a 
personal Sec. Advent. ‘‘ He that Cometh,’’ or ‘‘ the Coming One,’’ ‘‘ the 
One waited for,’’ ‘‘ the expected One’’ (taken e.g. from Ps. 118 : 26, so 
Olshausen ; or Ps. 40:8, 80, Lange; or Mal. 38:1, so Hengstenberg, 
etc.), is transferred to the still future Advent with the idea attached that 
then will the Covenant promises be verified. The proof is found in the 
acknowledged fact that all their hearers, so far as we have any record, were 
impressed with this belief. It is also seen in constantly holding up the 
Sec. Coming as *‘ the blessed hope,’’ etc., in exhorting to patient waiting, 
earnest expectation, eager looking, ardent love for the appearing of ‘the 
Chief Shepherd,’’ just as the godly Jews previously waited, longed, and 
looked for the ‘** Shepherd’’ described by the Prophets. 

These preliminary points are important to the careful student, and he will observe 
(1) how the Jews understood this phraseology ; (2) how Jesus employed it without ex- 
planation as something well understood ; (3) how the disciples comprehended it in its 
Jewish aspect ; (4) how the Apostles continue to employ it without substituting another 
meaning ; (5) how the churches established by the Apostles and their immediate succes- 
sors perpetuate it ; (6) how our opponents concede that this meaning was originally 
entertained ; (7) how, in many places (as e.g. 2 Thess. 2 : 8, ete.), the concession is made 
that it still retains such a meaning. Our argument is fortified, step by step, by every- 
thing requisite to sustain a strictly historical and logical connection. Hence, it is only 
an unacquaintance with our doctrine that can cause some to assert that the Apoc. alone 
contains ‘** the sole scriptural authority on which Millenarian doctrine rests.”’ 


Obs, 2. Attention is again called to the early Church doctrine, in view of 
the importance of this subject. If a fundamental mistake was made in 
the teaching of so significant and consequential a doctrine as that pertain- 
ing to the Pre-Millennial personal Advent of Jesus, then we may well pause 
and ask, whether similar errors were not committed in the reception of 


* See Parkhurst and lexicons generally. Brookes, Hl. Proph. Interp., ch. 5, gives a list, 
etc. Comp. Olshausen, Com., vol. 2, p. 228-9, Newton’s Lectures, p. 209, Taylor’s Voice of 
the Church, Judge Jones’s Notes, and the works of Bickersteth, Seiss, ete. Dr. Tyng (Pre- 
Mill. Essays, p. 22) has some good remarks on “ the nouns substantive used to signify 
the Advent,” ‘* the pronouns and adverbs, which control and qualify the various promises 


of our Lord’s appearing,’’ and ‘‘ the offices and actions which are connected with His 
Coming.” 


PRop. 121. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 163 


other doctrines. The denial of the early Church belief on so weighty a 
point involves their entire faith in obscurity and credulity. But our 
argument produces no such dilemma, but accepts of their faith in this 
matter as legitimate, consistent, and indispenseble to the truth. Indeed, 
if it were missing in the early history of the Church, then a powerful 
objection would arise against our view, but existing as it does, it becomes, 
on the other hand, evidence in our favor. It is gratifying to us that so 
many passages relied on to prove a Pre-Mill. Advent were thus quoted by 
the immediate followers of the Apostles and their disciples. As previously 
shown, all the Apostolic Fathers, and all the earliest Christian Fathers, 
taught our doctrine (see Prop. 73-78). The very persons who had access 
to the Apostles ; who received their instruction, public and private ; who 
were deeply interested in the Advent, and made it a prominent feature in 
their system of faith ; who were intimately acquainted with the language 
in which the doctrine was promulgated, etc.—these were the men who 
adopted and taught it.1_ Kven after a spiritualizing theory was broached, 
yet such was the force of the passages which speak of the personal Coming’ 
of Jesus, that even Origen, Jerome, and others, were wnadble to rid them- 
selves entirely of them, but admitted—as their works evidence—however 
contradictory to their own system that a personal Coming was intended, 
as e.g. 2 Thess. 2, etc. And what is remarkable to the student, both 
Millenarians and their opposers located the personal Advent about the 
same time. Tor, as scholars have noticed, the ancients universally (or 
nearly so) understood the Advent to follow the closing of 6000 years. And 
following (Bush, etc.) the Septuagint Chronology, they supposed the 
Advent near, owing to its lengthening the world’s duration beyond that 
of the Hebrew. Miullenarians held the 1000 years, the Sabbatism, as future, 
and located the personal Advent at its commencement. ‘The others iden- 
tifying the 1000 years as in some way connected with this dispensation and 
included in the 6000 years, looked for the Personal Advent at its close, 
preparative to the eternal Sabbath. Hence in reference to many of the 
passages relating to the Advent there was but little difference of inter- 
pretation, saving in the one point of Pre-Millennial. It required many 
centuries before men could arise and destructively interpret away the 
plainest statements of Scripture. And it was after the comparative 
modern Whitbyan theory of a Millennium still future, to be introduced 
through the Gospel and Church, that the most unwarranted liberties were 
taken with the sacred text in order to accommodate it to such a theory. 
However painful this may be to contemplate, the student of prophecy is 
not surprised at its existence ; for in that Word he finds that as the period 
arrives for the Advent, wnbelief in it shall characterize the Church and 
world. Hence, he expects its Pre-Mill. nature to be opposed and rejected ; 
the passages which teach it to be glossed over with other meanings ; the 
objects intended by it to be denied; the early Church doctrine to be 
derided as suited for children, and a soporific, worldly-wise interpretation to 
become generally prevalent. Indeed, to place the Church and world in 
the posture assigned to it just previous to the Advent, requires a display 
of learning, theology, philosophy, spiritual improvement, etc., in order 
to beat down the warnings of the Word and of a long line of faithful 
witnesses to the truth. Therefore, the simple fact that so much hostility 
is manifested against what was once the orthodox faith of the Church, 
regarded in the light of the predicted faithlessness of the Church on this 


164 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


point, ought to excite suspicion that something is wrong in the popular 
view. The best of men, innocently and with the purest of motives, desirous 
even to promote what they regard as truth, are engaged in this work of 
changing and corrupting the divine testimony. ‘Their piety, usefulness, 
ability, etc., enlarge the power to mislead in this direction, and materially 
aids in forming that ‘‘ snare’ and ‘‘ net’’ in which Jo/h Church and world 
will be entangled at the Advent. Love for such brethren, and a desire to 
be faithful to the testimony of the Spirit in the Word, cause us to use 
such plainness of speech, even if it should result (God forbid) in giving 
offence to some.” ; 


1 History informs us that in the terrible outbreak of Bar-Cocheba (under the pretence 
of being the Messiah) against the Romans, no Christians were deluded by him. Why 
could he not beguile those early believers, although they suffered, in consequence, a 
fearful persecution under him? The student will, in answering this question, bear in 
mind how intensely Millenarian Jewish believers were at this very time. The reason is 
apparent, viz., that neither the manner nor accompaniments of Bar-Cocheba’s Advent 
corresponded with the Scripture statements. Thus e.g. a Coming indicated by a resur- 
rection and translation—a Coming with supernatural power—was lacking.  , 

2 The reasoning given by us drives some of our opponents to a singular position. Thus 
e.g. Dr. Alger (Crit. His. Doc. Fut. Life, p. 39) declares that he fully believes—as the 
evidence is abundant—that the Evangelists and early Christians understood Christ to 
teach a literal personal Advent, but he doubts whether Christ really meant this to be 
taught. The reasons assigned for this attitude (which virtually makes Jesus the author 
of error in those selected to proclaim the truth) are the following : (1) because nothing is 
said of the resurrection in connection. Butthisis a gross oversight, seeing that a resur- 
rection anda Sec. Advent are inseparable. Sometimes one or the other is mentioned 
alone, because the one implied the other, for, as is well known, the hearers of Jesus 
invariably linked the one with the other. Simple justice requires a comparison of pas- 
sages, when the connection fully appears. (2) The figures employed are such as the 
prophets used to designate ‘‘ great and signal events on earth.” But this is to ignore 
the express requirements of the Covenant which imperatively demand such a personal 
Advent for fulfilment ; this overlooks that much of the language employed cannot be 
figurative, seeing that it affirms directly the Advent of David’s Son as ‘‘ Son of man ;” 
this forgets that the Sec. Advent is not dependent upon the interpretation of this or that 
passage, but follows as a legitimate outgrowth of a Theocratic plan. (3) Because Christ 
‘* fixed the date of the events He referred to within that generation.’’ But this is limit- 
ing the meaning of the word, and it is setting aside a vast array of scriptural testimony 
on the strength of a misconception of one passage. This is the slight foundation upon 
which a wonderful array of spiritualizing 1s then erected. Alas! 


Obs. 3. A mere mention of some of the opinions entertained will be 
, sufficient. Thus e.g. Westminster Review for Oct., 1873, in an Art. calls 
this Sec. Advent of Christ an ‘‘ exploded superstition.’? Renan (Life of 
Jesus, p. 107) says: *‘ The material conception of the divine Advent was 
only a cloud, a passing error which death consigned to oblivion.’’ Such 
statements could be multiplied, together with those which urge such a 
doctrine, as taught by the Apostles, to be subversive of the inspiration of 
the Word. Besides these, the reader must have noticed that in leading 
reviews, etc., articles are constantly appearing which assert that everything 
of importance refers to the present time with which we alone are con- 
cerned ; the whole tenor and spirit of which is hostile to faith and hope 
In a coming personal Redeemer. Now and then, these are accompanied 
by remarks designed to be witticisms, making sport of our hope, and 
endeavoring to cover it with ridicule, just as if a Pre-Mill. Advent were 
some fair target for scorn and burlesque. If this were always done by 
infidels, it would be something to be expected in view of their principles 
(although some of them have treated our faith more fairly and courteously 


Prop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 165 


than many believers), but it happens that believers, for the moment for- 
getting the preciousness of that Coming and the gracious designs con- 
nected with it, indulge in such witticisms, etc., thus placing themselves in 
the posture delineated, Matt. 24 : 48, which, Lange (Com. loci) aptly ex- 
presses, 1s indicative of *‘ an internal mocking frivolity.’’ The claim that 
Noble, Barrett, and others make, viz., that through E. Swedenborg there 
has been ‘*‘ the revelation of the spiritual sense of the Word through the 
obscurity or cloud of the letter, which is the predicted and glorious 
appearing of the Son of Man upon the clouds of heaven’’—is little short of 
blasphemous, because it applies to mortal man, or to the work that he 
performs, terms that belong pre-eminently and exclusively to Jesus Christ. 
And to take that ‘* appearing’’ which belongs peculiarly and distinctively 
to the Saviour, and which pertains to His glory, and to apply this to 
erring man is the highest presumption.* The opposite extreme is found in 
Colani (quoted by Van Oosterzee), who is so hostile to the idea of Christ’s 
personal return that he would expunge all expressions relating to it as 
spurious. Between these extremes, a variety of arbitrary interpretations 
exist. Thus e.g. Fowle (Contemp. Review, May, 1872, p. 729) makes the 
Coming of the Son of Man in the clouds of heaven and the gathering of the 
elect ‘‘ metaphorical language, descriptive of the growth of the Church.”’ 
This is regarded as a decided improvement on that interpretation which 
makes the Advent of Christ “‘ the Advent of the Roman army,”’’ etc. To 
get rid of a Sec. personal Advent, Nisbett (Coming of the Messiah) con- 
fines the description of Christ’s Coming and the destruction of His 
enemies to His first Coming. The apostasy in 2 Thess. 2 is conveniently 
confined to the rebellions of the Jews. These specimens will suffice to 
show the variations caused by a departure from the grammatical sense ; but 
we turn to others advocated by earnest and able men equally untenable.’ 
Prest. Edwards (His. of fedemp., p. 269) has four Comings or Advents, 
viz., His First extending to destruction of Jerusalem, and the proof alleged 
is Matt. 16 : 28 (which we will examine under Prop. 150, relating to the 
transfiguration) ; the Second, ‘‘in Constantine’s time, in the destruction 
of the heathen Roman Empire, and the proof is Rev. 6 : 13-17; the third 
‘is at the destruction of Antichrist, and the proof is Dan. 7; the fourth’ 
is at the last judgment. Other writers, not satisfied with such a perver- 
sion, have these Comings extended into many more by the aid of the 
phrases ‘‘ providential,’’ ‘* spiritual,’’ “‘ figurative,”’ etc., so that there 1s 
scarcely a notable event in Church history, or in a man’s life, but what 
this ‘‘ Coming’’ is enlisted as accessory, etc. ‘The spiritual interpretation 
brings forth an abundant crop in this field of investigation. Turning 
away from those who are so fanciful in interpretation, let us briefly present 
those who are more sober and systematic in their efforts. Barnes, Fair- 
bairn, Brown, and others take the passages which we refer to a Pre-Mill. 
Advent, and ascribe to them a spiritual or providential Coming. Admit- 
ting that God is always in Providence, that He is ever spiritually present 
with His people (comp. Lange, Com., p. 564), our answer to their mode of 
dealing with these predictions follows.* 

. 1 Noble (An Appeal, etc.) admits that in-the literal sense a personal Advent is denoted, 
and, therefore, that ‘‘ the Apostles would naturally expect, as all other Christians did, 
that those prophetic announcements were to be literally fulfilled.” But this, the plain 
grammatical, sense is to be discarded for a symbolic engrafted one given by Swedenborg, 


which makes the Advent of a person (comp. Acts 1 : 10, 11, etc.) to be “ the restoration 
of the true knowledge of divine subjects.” Well may we ask, aside from other consicera- 


166 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 121. 


tions, would God give a sense, with which man is conversant, and which is connected 
with the common usage of language, knowing that for centuries it must inevitably lead 
Apostles and’ their successors into error? Can we believe that Apostles, inspired, and 
whose utterances were to be truth, knew less on this subject than Swedenborg? Is it 
possible to credit the claim of one who through an Origenistic interpretation utterly 
ignores or spiritualizes the grammatical sense of Covenant, prediction, and promise, and 
finds under each and every one a hidden mystical sense, which, if true, makes the 
ancient believers to have trusted in mere phantoms of their own raising? This Sweden- 
borgian claim is readily tested, by simply asking whether the things connected by the 
Spirit to this Advent have been verified? Thus e.g. have the Jews been in dire extremity 
and has a deliverance in their behalf been vouchsafed, etc., etc.? To guard us against 
just such perversions, the Scriptures employ language (as e.g. “‘ The Lord Himself shall 
descend” not something else ; ‘* His feet shall stand in that day upon the Mt. of Olives” —not 
Swedenborg’s spiritual sense) which cannot be spiritualized without the grossest absurd- 
ity. Swedenborg himself (The True Chr. Religion, ch. 14; Apoc., vol. 1, p. 24, etc.) 
says that “ Coming of our Lord is effected by the instrumentality of a man” (i.e. himself) 
** before whom He has manifested Himself in person, and whom He has filled with His 
spirit to teach from Him the doctrine of the New Church by means of the Word.”’ Even 
Matt. 26 : 64, and similar Scriptures (see An Address to the Clergy) are blasphemously 
applied to Swedenborg’s revelations. Noble (Appeal) claims that a literal, personal 
Coming of the Lord in the clouds is an impossibility. This may be done by one who will 
deny a literal ascension in a cloud, but not by a believer in Acts, and books that they 
reject. 

? To show how ample the field, we refer to a few others: a class of interpreters such 
as Lowth, Hall, etc., closely pressed by the passages relating to the Advent and yet 
unwilling to concede a personal one and unable to allegorize them totally away, make a 
sort of compromise by holding to a peculiar supernatural interposition, a lustrous 
appearance something like, if not, the Schekinah, in and through which Christ is to be 
manifested. Then we have a large class who hail almost everything, such as ‘‘ deliver- 
ance from slavery,” ‘‘ increased intelligence,’’ ‘‘ enlarged virtue,’ ‘‘ the spread of 
science,”’ etc., as ‘* the Coming of the Lord.” We give a specimen of the latter: in 
Harper's Mag., Novy., 1865, p. 722, ‘‘ For who associates in his thought those two words, 
Science and America, and does not see uprising from the heart of Time a national destiny 
so absolutely glorious as to bring him, if a patriot worthy of the name, humbly to his 
knees, convinced that he has seen in vision the Great Day of the ‘Coming of the Lord.’” 
We doubt very much, patriot as the writer was, whether the vision brought him 
““humbly to his knees.” Such painful evidences of a frittering away of a glorious 
truth could be multiplied, taken too from otherwise able and learned men. ‘Taylor, in 
Old Theology, etc., rejects even a figurative application, and speaks of the utter folly of 
believing in a future personal Coming ; Desprez, in ‘‘ St. John,’’ advises us to discard 
all the Scriptures relating to it as interpolations ; Schenkel (Sketch of Char. of Christ) 
explains Christ’s coming again “‘ in the glory of the Father with the holy angels’’ (Mark 
8 : 38, etc.) to be ‘‘ figuratively of the Master’s spiritual reappearance ;”’ Evans (Art. 
Shakers, Appleton’s Cyclop.) says : ‘‘ the Second appearing of the Christ ‘ without sin 
unto salvation’ they believe to have taken place through Mother Lee, in 1770 ;’ Pickett’s 
Eclectic Church refuses to believe in a Sec. Advent; in brief, multitudes refer it (as 
Smith, in Key of Rev.) to a coming at death, at the destruction of Jerusalem, at the over- 
throw of Paganism, at the French Revolution, at, or in, anything that seems to suit a 
mystical coming ;” and even spiritualists claim it under an alleged “ materialization,’’ as 
by Lucie E. Lewis in her work called ‘* The Second Advent of Christ, or His Recent Material- 
ization.”’ 

* The same mode of reasoning which puts aside a Pre-Mill. Advent will, if consistently 
and logically applied, also invalidate the First Advent (seeing that in the Old Test. they, 
i.e. First and Second Advents, are spoken of in the same manner). At least, it will 
cause persons to deny and ignore a personal Sec. Advent. The proof of this last feature 


is found in the fact that entire bodies of professing Christians (as Swedenborgians, * 


Unitarians, Universalists, Shakers, etc.) only claim a spiritnal Advent. Many, also, who 
confess to a personal Sec. Advent but locate it after the Millennial era, forget that the 
identical phraseology and reasons which urge them to such a view are precisely those 
that we urge in favor of our own. This will be fully seen as we proceed. 


Obs. 4. The attempt to make out a spiritual or providential Coming from 
the occurrences in the Old Test., such as the destruction of Sodom, the 


Oe! SOO 


PRop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 167 


deliverance of Israel from the host of Pharaoh, etc., fails for the simple 
reason that this Coming is asserted in reference to the humanity of 
Christ, pertains to David’s Son. He comes not as the invisible God, who 
may be present unseen and unknown, but as Man, the Son of Man, the 
Man ordained, and one too, as will be shown hereafter, to be seen and 
recognized.’ While fully indorsing a divine sovereignty (Props. 79 and 80), 
a constant pervading superintending presence, which we might see if our 
eyes were opened like the servant’s of Elisha, or like Stephen’s or Saul’s, 
yet this 1s very diverse from a Coming or presence of ‘‘ the Son of Man.’’ 
Our opponents, when not directly arguing against us, frankly concede this 
point to us in their explanations of the phrase ‘‘ Son of Man.’? Thus e.g, 
Dr. Neander (Life of Christ, pp. 99, 100) says respecting this phrase : 
** We conclude that as Christ used the one (viz., Son of Man) ¢o designate 
His human personality, so He employed the other to point out His 
divine.”’ Now admit that it refers to ‘‘ human personality,’’ why should 
the meaning thus given be changed for the divine or spiritual, when the 
phrase is employed in reference to a Pre-Mill. Advent? Where, we ask, is 
the consistency of altering this explanation of the term, when all of them 
confess that in some passages (as e.g. Matt. 16 : 27) it undoubtedly refers 
to His personal future Advent? If such an arbitrary change is to be 
made, what uniformity and consonance is there in Scriptural exposition ?? 


1 Kurtz (Sac. His., p. 277), after referring the phrase “Son of God’’ to the divine, 
adds : “On the other hand, the name‘Son of man’ designates Him as the true and 
archetypal man,” etc. So Knapp (Ch. Theol., sec. 98, 2) says: ‘‘ it clearly denotes the 
true humanity of .Christ.’”” Hundreds of testimonials to the same effect could be readily 
accumulated, but are unnecessary (comp. Prop. 81). Dr. Nast’s remark (Art. in West. Ch. 
Advocate, Aug. 6th, 1879) is eminently true ; ‘‘ We must hold fast to this, that the phrase 
‘the Son of man cometh’ has the definite signification of a‘ Coming in person’ (Parousia), 
concerning which Bh. Merrill (an opponent) says, ‘ If Christ does not come in person as 
the Son of man, He does not come at all.’ Twenty-nine times the Saviour applies His 
Davidic title, ‘Son of man,’ as ‘ coming,’ ‘ come,’ ‘ came,’ to His personal visible appear- 
ing on earth, either at the First or Second Advent.” Hoffman (Prophecy and Fulfilment 
of the Old and New Tests.) holds the singular view that “the Son of man” in Rev. 14 : 14 
is not the Christ, basing his opinion solely on receiving an order from the angel and 
obeying it. But Hoffman forgets that in the reception of this Kingdom and in the 
' ordering of the times and seasons, this Son of man, Dayid’s Son, is subordinate to the 
Father (comp. Props. 83 and 159); and that such a view introduces an irreconcilable 
antagonism with other passages, e.g. Matt. 13 : 41. 

2 It is to be regretted, therefore, that theologians of great ability, who cordially con- 
cede the personal Pre-Mill. Advent, weaken the argument in favor of the same by allow- 
ing a variety of comings of Christ. Thus e.g. Oosterzee (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, sec. 146, etc.) 
firmly presents the Pre-Mill personal Advent. He correctly informs us that ‘‘ In the 
New Test. this prospect is distinctly presented on almost every page ; and in Ch. Dog- 
maties it forms nothing less than the corner stone of the eschatological structure,” but 
vitiates this statement by having quite a number of comings introducing the philo- 
sophical or mystical gloss ‘‘ that every coming contains in itself, as it were, the germ of a 
new and yet more glorious coming.” The excellent commentaries of Lange, Olshausen, 
etc., are disfigured by such statements, which are inconsistent with the fact that the 
spiritual supervision of Jesus over the Church, the acts of providence, the death of 
believers, etc., are nowhere called the Coming of the Lord Jesus, or of the Christ. This 
will be clearly shown. (Oosterzee, however, p. 581, remarks : “ All the Apostolic exhorta- 
tions and consolations are so closely connected with the prospect of the personal return of 
the Lord that whoever contradicts this last, thereby takes away the roof and cornice from 
the structure of the apostolic theology.’’ ‘‘ Of the life of watchfulness, patience, and 
heavenly mindedness, it is the soul and power—Luke 12 : 35-48—and _ history makes 
abundantly manifest, that when this prospect has temporarily receded from the Christian 
consciousness, the spiritual life also has declined,” etc.) Such illustrations can be 
multiplied, and they do harm in that they lead opponents to shelter themselves 


168 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 121. 


behind this variety of comings conveniently arranged for them. Hence our opposers 
admit that there is a Pre-Mill. Coming of the Lord, but owing to the latitude which such 
an interpretation provides for them, they tell us that it denotes divine judgments, or 
providential movements, or the agency of the Spirit, or supernatural intervention, or the 
approach of death (in the revival of the martyr spirit), or the increased light, etc., that is 
vouchsafed to believers (for they themselves differ widely in exactly defining this 
Coming, thus indirectly evidencing the weakness of their theory). It is a sad fact, 
abundantly corroborated by acknowledgments of ministers (e.g. a painful evidence, 
Proph. Times, vol. 12, p. 19) that this idea of spiritual and providential comings has led 
men to deny any personal coming in the future, making coming ‘‘ an every-day affair,’’ 
and saying : ‘‘that such arguing and preaching’ (viz., relating to a personal Advent) 
‘* will not take with the people.”’ 


Obs. 5. Our opposers (as Barnes, Fairbairn, Edwards, etc.) contend that 
the symbolical representation of the latter part of Rev. 20 denotes the 
personal, visible presence of Christ. But how can they make it such, when 
they deny the same to the Advent of Rev. 19? The principle on which 
the two visions is constructed 7s identical: agents represent agents, acts 
represent acts, conditions and events represent conditions and events. 
Now if in the one vision the agents represent personal agents, how comes 
it that in the other they do not? Is there not abundant ground for 
suspicion that such an interpretation is adapted to a preconceived theory ? 
This very indication of weakness is seized by rationalistic writers and 
drawn out to its legitimate end, viz., taking the interpretation given by 
our opponents to Rey. 19, they apply the same to Rev. 20, and deny doth 
the personal Coming and literal resurrection. And from this there is no 
appeal to the application of grammatical rules, seeing that the additional 
sense foisted on the symbols is something wnknown to the rules of 
language. It is singular, taking the views arrayed against us, that in the 
descriptions of this Pre-Mill. Advent everything is conceded visible and 
literally present excepting Christ Himself. Thus in Rev. 19, alluded to, 
the beast, false prophet, etc., represent real personal agents—everything is 
visible and recognizable—but the Coming and agency of Christ seen by the 
inspired writer as real, personal, and visible, as that of the beast, prophet, 
nations, etc., is to be discarded as invisible, and is stripped of its recog- 
nizable personality. By what rule of interpretation is this done? If such 
a rule were penned down and consistently applied, would it not make all 
the agents, acts, etc., invisible also? Take e.g. Dan. 7; and the four 
beasts, horns, destruction, even the saints, Kingdom, dominion, all in fact, 
saving the Advent of ‘‘ the Son of Man,”’’ is to be received as representing 
visible personal agents, etc., here on the earth. Why make this one 
exception, simply on the authority of uninspired man, and against the 
direct testimony of the whole early Church? If it be admitted that the 
Advent in Dan. 7 alludes to His personal First Advent, then it only 
confirms our argument under Prop. 104, where we conclusively show that 
it only occurs after the divided form of the Roman Empire, and the rise 
and progress of the little horn, ete. The truth is, that a denial of the 
Pre-Mill. Advent involves an arbitrary handling of prophecy. It is a 
matter of regret that distinguished theologians fall into this illogical and 
unfounded method of dealing with predictions relating to this Coming. 
Thus e.g. Kurtz (Sac. His., sec. 198) says: ‘‘ Every interposition of the 
Omnipotent Ruler and Judge of the world who sits on the right hand of 
Omnipotence, every progressive movement of His Kingdom, every victory 
which He gains over His enemies, and every judgment which overtakes 


EROP. 121. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 169 


them, 2s a Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.’’ The only proof assigned for 
so sweeping a declaration and such a wide departure from primitive doctrine 
is 1 Cor. 1 : 7 and 2 Pet. 1 : 16, which passages, as the reader can see for 
himself, refer ¢o a literal, personal Coming ; the one to His future revelation, 
the other to His First Advent and manifestation in the transfiguration. 

It is simply a perversion of Scripture to say as Martensen (Ch. Dog., p. 323), that 
*“ the Sec. Advent includes His continual and progressive Coming to establish His King- 
dom”’ (i.e. the Church) ‘‘in the world, and His Coming to the faithful for their salvation, 
and to the world for judgment.’” This makes the Sec. Advent a continuous coming and 
not @ specific object of hope located in the future at a definite time, etc. The simple truth 
is this : all those who thus spiritualize those allusions to the Sec. Advent, do it in violence 
to the Divine Record, and contradict themselves in quoting Scripture on the subject. 
Thus e.g. Steele (Hssuy on Christ's Kingdom, Bib. Sacra., Nov., 1849) makes the Coming of 
the Son of man “ fulfilled when Christ ascended in the clouds of heaven and sat down on 
the right hand of the majesty, on high.’’ But this the Scriptures—Jesus Himself—call a 
departure, a leaving, and not a Coming. Besides this, the events inseparably connected 
with the Sec. Advent did not follow such an ascension and exaltation, showing that a 
relurn, as predicted, is meant, and not a leaving. Again: Rev. Robison (Sermon at 
Springfield, O., Nov., 1878), in opposing Millenarianism, advocated spiritual and provi- 
dential comings indefinitely ; and then specified as prominent four Comings: (1) At 
destruction of Jerusalem, denoted by the “ Kingdom at hand’’—proof, Dan. 7 : 13 ; Heb. 
12 : 25, etc. ; (2) at death—proof, 1 Cor. 1 : 9, and Phil. 1 : 6, 10 ; (8) spiritually to de- 
stroy man of sin—proof, 2 Thess. 2 : 8, 10 ; (4) literal, 2 Thess. 1 : 7, 8, 9; 2 Pet. 3 : 10, 
12. Now, compare these proof texts with any spiritualistic commentator of his own 
party, and see the antagonistic interpretation. 


Obs. 6. If we were to adopt this principle of spirituahzing the Coming 
and the language employed in its usage, then, if consistently apphed to the 
whole Bible, it would ignore the literal, personal First Advent. ‘This is no 
caricature, but sober argument. Suppose our opponents are correct in 
their interpretation ; let us then transplant ourselves to a period before the 
First Advent and apply their system to prophocies relating to that Advent 
and see the result. Let us, taking such an imaginative position, select 
e.g. Isa. 40 : 3, ‘‘ the voice of him that crieth in the wilderness,’’ etc., and 
according to the system just adopted, this would denote that divine truth 
would be heard in the earth even in the most abandoned parts of it, etc. 
‘Or, select e.g. Isa. 53, and we would have a representation of truth, its 
treatment, rejection, and final triumph. But what are the facts as evi- 
denced by fulfilment? Have we not a literal voice, literal wilderness, 
literal address to Jews, a literal Coming, humiliation, sufferings, and death 
of Jesus Christ, etc.P? According to the system of our opponents no such 
literal, personal fulfilment was intended, for if the predictions relating to 
‘the Sec. Advent, which are far clearer, distinctive, and decisive than those 
referring to the First, are to be understood as portraying a spiritual or 
providential Coming, then surely, if this measurer of prophecy is applied 
to the less distinct ones of the First Advent, they too only mean a spiritual 
or providential Coming. If the rule of interpretation holds good now, it 
ought to cover all time ; for we know of no rules that were applicable to 
one age and not to another. If it be answered, that fulfilment shows that 
such and such language must be literally understood, then our reply 1s 
ready : the fulfilment is evidence that the spiritualistic interpretation on 
this point is utterly untrustworthy, while it gives decisive proof of the 
consistency of that adopted by the early Church. | 


Writers adopting, in view of a non-fulfilment at the First Advent of prediction, a 
typical or spiritual Messianic interpretation, thus endeavor to mould the Scriptures to 


170 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


their respective theories. Thus e.g. Browne, in The Book of Psalms, makes in this spirit 
the declaration : ‘‘ nowhere in the Psalms are the redemption of the world and Israel’s 
final glory bound up with the Coming of the Messiah.’’ The numerous Psalms quoted 
in our argument, used by Jews and the Primitive Church, abundantly refule this position. 
Such Psalms as the 89th, 132d, and others, portraying the Coming and glorious reign of 
the Messiah, area mply sufficient to show that these predictions are not merely typical, 
and hence convertible into something else, seeing that the attributes ascribed to this 
Messiah, the immortality, ever-enduring reign, blessedness, etc., are loo specific to be 
thus evaded. Those who are so fond of attributing this typical] character to David will 
pardon us if we refuse our credence to the belief that David would be so inconsistent 
and incongruous as to elevate himself into a Messianic type. 


Obs. 7. Having briefly glanced at the inconsistency of our opposers, in 
interpreting the Pre-Mill. Advent predictions, the reader may be confirmed 
in our statements, if his attention is more particularly directed to the 
glaring contradictions that it produces. A few examples will suffice 
by way of illustration: (1) Barnes (Com.) and others freely con- 
tend that the Coming in 2 Thess. 2 is a literal, personal one, and 
which results in the destruction of the Antichrist. They acknowledge 
that this antichristian power is in this dispensation, exists some time 
before the Advent, and that previous to his removal there can be no 
Millennial blessedness, etc. And yet when the same power is stated to be 
removed and destroyed by the Advent of the same Jesus previous to the 
ushering in of Mill. happiness, as e.g. Dan. 7 and Rev. 19, they refuse to 
accept of this ¢dentification of the period, and thus have in one place a 
personal, and then zn other places a spiritual Advent to destroy the last 
great enemy of the truth.’ (2) Again, many commentators on various 
passages declare that a personal Advent is prerequisite to the resurrection 
of the saints according to the promises given. ‘They admit that Rev. 
11 : 18 teaches a literal resurrection under the last trumpet, but refuse to 
bring in the personal Coming of Jesus at that period as necessary to secure 
it, although laid down as something znseparably connected with a resurrec- 
tion of the dead. (3) Many writers commenting on certain Scriptures 
relating to the watching, looking, longing, and waiting for the Advent, 
as e.g. Matt. 25:13; 1 Thess. 5: 6, etc., inform us that it is (Barnes) ‘‘ an 
event which is certarnly to occur and which may occur at any moment,” 
and, therefore, we should be prepared for it, etc. ; and yet when they 
come to where the order is given and a Pre-Mill. Advent indicated (which 
alone meets their admissions of suddenness, unexpectedness, its occurrence 
at almost any time, etc.), then we are told that it cannot and will not take 
place wntil the Millennial era has first transpired. They feel themselves 
qualified to definitely locate the Advent to a period at least ten centuries 
in the future, thus making it a matter of mere folly, to look, etc., for the 
Sec. Coming before the expiration of the allotted time. (4) A large 
number of authors when interpreting passages relating to death, as 
1 Cor. 15 : 54, 55, ete., correctly represent death as an enemy that will 
finally be conquered, etc. ; they have much to say about death being the 
result of sin, etc. ; but they forget in their eagerness to interpret Scripture 
as against us what they said concerning death, and actually declare that 
Christ comes in and through death. 'The blessed Saviour is transformed 
into our enemy! We glory in the fact that we can be strengthened and 
supported by Jesus in meeting this enemy; we rejoice that our Saviour 
has the power finally to overcome and destroy this foe, but we utterly deny 
that Jesus comes to us in the shape of this enemy. What! Jesus coming 


PROP? 1. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 171 


in death, when death even came to Him and obtained a brief triumph ! 
‘This remnant of Popish theology, originated by a perversion of plain Bible 
statements, is, alas ! deeply rooted in the minds of many. It would seem 
that a little reflection over the existence of death from the expulsion from 
Eden and the fearful result, even corruption, following it, ought to lead 
men of judgment ¢o discard so foolish and unscriptural a doctrine which 
serves with many to obscure a Pre-Mill. Advent. Even the naive remark 
of Sir Thomas Browne (Relig. Medici,) is sufficient answer to its use: ‘I 
am not so much afraid of death as ashamed thereof ; ’tis the very disgrace 
and ignominy of our natures, that in a moment can so disfigure us, that 
our nearest friends, wife and children, stand afraid, and start at us,’’ ete. 
Christ does not come in this way; He is our deliverer from such a dis- 
graceful state, and He will yet save us from this enemy, who holds in his 
prison house His brethren.? (5) Again, many explain the parable of the 
tares and wheat to indicate a mixed condition of the Church, and that the 
harvest is at the end of the age, but in the delineations of Mill. descrip- 
tions this mixed condition insisted on in one place is forgotten and removed ; 
and to avoid making a Pre-Mill. Advent, the personal Advent, admitted 
in connection with the harvest in the parable, is denied to the harvests of 
Revelation and Joel.’ (6) Again, multitudes give us the most eulogistic 
and congratulatory expositions of the marriage announced in Rev. 19 : 7, 
9, and on the phrase ‘‘ the marriage of the Lamb is come’’ positively assert 
(the truth) that the marriage is then (at that period) consummated (so 
Barnes, etc.), and yet seeing that this involves a Pre-Mill. Advent of the 
bridegroom, they gravely inform us (as Fairbairn, etc.) that this very 
marriage of the Lamb is postponed until after the thousand years are 
expired, although announced previously, etc.* (7) Thus might be adduced 
admissions made respecting ‘‘ restitution,’’ ‘‘ regeneration,’’ ‘‘ world to 
come,’’ etc., and then can be shown how these again are contradicted 
when we come to the ‘“ restitution,’’ etc., of the Mill. era, on the sole 
ground fo avoid a Pre-Mill. Advent. ‘The illustrations given are ample 
enough to indicate, that with all the boasted enlightenment adove that of 
the early Church, the early Christians, alleged ‘‘ babes’’ in knowledge, were 
incapable of perpetrating such opposite and contradictory expositions of 
Scripture. Their system of belief had, at least, unity of utterance and 
design.° 

1 McKnight, in S. 4, prefixed to Exp. of 2 Thess., gives a one-sided and inferential 
representation of the passages relating to the Sec. Advent, which is completely set aside 
by the important concessions that 2 Thess. 2 :8 calls for ‘‘a visible and extraordinary 
interposition of the power of Christ.’ His objections are fully met by us and, there- 
fore, need no repeating. Dr. Hodge (Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 794) admits the following pas- 
sages to be predictions of a personal Advent, viz., Matt. 26 : 64 ; 24 : 30; Luke 21:27 ; 
2 Thess.1:7, and 2:1. This gives us all the leverage that is required to prove his 
own Post-Mill. Advent theory incorrect, seeing how these very passages are associated 
with a Pre-Mill. Advent, as will be fully shown. If Jesus confirmed the Abrahamic 
Covenant, not by a spiritual coming and a spiritual shedding of blood, but by a literal 
coming and shedding of blood, so to realize the promises of the same Covenant, He again 
comes, not spiritually, but literally, in order e.g. that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob may 
inherit (Prop. 49). AP cece tote? : 

» Asa multitude of writers make death a coming of Christ, as this view is extensively 
preached and held forth on funeral occasions, some additional remarks are in place. At 
present thousands employ language just as if death entered not “ by sin” (i.e. was en- 
tailed, perpetuated), but was really one of the blessings designed for us by the Father 


through Christ. That which the Bible calls an “ enemy,’’ they designate a friend. They 
totally overlook the fact that “the triumph” over death, the Word unites with the resur- 


172 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 121. 


rection ; and that, however the believer is sustained to meet death, yet he is brought 
under subjection to death so that the prison house of the grave with its incident corrup- 
tion, is his doom. Jesus died, and the enemy triumphed ; Jesus rose from the dead, and 
He triumphed over His enemy ; so believers die and like Jesus they can meet death with 
faith and hope that remove his terrors, but, like Jesus, they only triumph over death (so 
e.g. Paul, 1 Cor. 15) through the power of the resurrection. Some of our opponents on 
this point manifest an inconsistency that is remarkable. Thus e.g. Barnes’s Notes on 
Heb. 5 : 7 (notice also his Remark 4 at close of ch.) at length shows that Jesus dreaded 
death as an enemy but was sustained, and infers from it that a believer also may dread 
death as an enemy, and be supported. And yet, Noles on Matt. 25 : 13, he makes this 
very enemy, thus dreaded, the Coming of the blessed Saviour! Many unthinkingly 
receive this Popish doctrine, which is illustrated : by the skeleton clock ‘‘ in the hall or 
vestibule of the convent of La Trappe ; a human skeleton is placed at the side of the 
dial, pointing to it with its fleshless finger and beneath is the inscription (in Latin) 
‘Watch ! because ye know not the day nor the hour.’’’ It reminds us of the assump- 
tion of the Jesuits, in a document presented by the University of Paris to the Parlia- 
ment in 1644, in which, among other pretensions, it is asserted by them that the Lord 
Jesus goes to meet every Jesuit who dies, to receive him, basing it on John 14, “ I will 
come again,’’ etc. Protestants give influence and weight to this view, and the result is 
that it leads into error. Thus e.g. the intermediate state is so exalted that a vast multi- 
tude consider death as a most happy occurrence. Thus, among the adherents of this 
opinion we select the Spiritualists : Owen (Deb. Land, p. 171) gives the common doctrine, 
when he says, ‘‘ in all cases, in which life is well spent, the change which men are wont 
to call ‘ Death,’ is God’s last and best gift to his creatures here,’’—‘* in strictness there is 
no death.’’ Jesus, then, was guilty of great weakness when unable to appreciate this 
“ best gift.’’ The opinion entertained by believers is seized by others, even by sceptics, 
and employed by them as proof that death is no enemy, but is something eminently 
desirable ; and the view of early Christians, Reformers, and eminent men in the Church 
that death is part of the curse—abundantly sustained by Scripture—is regarded as 
unreasonable and antiquated. Hence it is to be regretted that even excellent writers of 
a strong Millenarian cast (as e.g. Olshausen, Com., vol. 1, p. 226) make, in a few places, 
death equivalent to the Coming of the Lord Jesus. There is no foundation whatever for 
such a notion, it being a wrong inference. Let us contrast two of our opponents on this 
point. The author of The Kingdom of Grace (p.10) confidently quotes ‘‘ Come, Lord Jesus, 
even so, come quickly’? (Rev. 22:20) as a Coming in death, and insists that it is utterly 
wrong to pray it in any other sense! On the other hand, Dr. Brown, in his work 
specially designed against us (Sec. Coming, p. 22-24) argues that this substitution of death 
for Christ’s Coming “‘ is not fitted for taking that place in the view of the believer which 
Scripture assigns to the Sec. Advent,’ and assigns the following reasons : (1) “The death 
of believers, however changed in its character, in virtue of their union with Christ, is, 
intrinsically considered, not joyous, but grievous, not attractive but repulsive. It is the 
disruption of a tie which the Creator formed for perpetuity—the unnatural and abhor- 
rent divorce of parties made for sweet and uninterrupted.fellowship. And, as a sub- 
stitute for the expectation of the Redeemer’s appearing, this looking forward to one’s 
own death will be found very deficient in practical effect.’’ (2) ‘‘ The bliss of the 
disembodied spirits of the just is not only incomplete, but in some sense, private and 
fragmentary, if I may so express myself. But at the Redeemer’s appearing all His 
redeemed will be collected together, and perfectly and publicly glorified.’’ (3) ‘‘ To put 
the expectation of one’s own death in place of the prospect of Christ’s appearing, is to 
dislocate a beautiful jointing in divine truth, is to destroy one of its finest collocations,”’ 
etc. Such concessions, so forcibly expressed, are amply sufficient to sustain our posi- 
tion. ‘To preach death in the place of Christ’s Coming is to contradict the Scriptures and 
substitute for ‘* the blessed hope” (for which we are to hope, pray, and watch) an enemy 
that some are to escape (1 Cor. 15:51; 1 Thess. 4:15-17). The Coming of Jesus 
releases the dead from the power of death, and preserves the believing living from its 
sway. ‘The disciples had no idea that such a coming involved death, for (John 21 : 22) 
on the strength of Christ’s assertion that if it were His will John might be sustained 
until His coming again, the report was immediately spread that ‘‘ he (John) shall not die.” 
Here Jesus in the most pointed manner distinguishes between death and His own 
Coming: ‘* if J will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee ?’’—which is explained that 
Jesus “said not unto him, he shall not die, but if [ will that he tarry until I come.’’ If death 
really is denoted by such a Coming, why is it not there distinctly stated, or explained, 
especially when the hearers did not and could not thus apply it? If death is the Coming 
of the Saviour, is it not strange that under the Mosaic law pollution was contracted by 


PLOPy t21:| ‘THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 173 


contact with a dead body, and that priests especially were charged against such defile- 
ment? If it is such an Advent why did not the Apostles, when encouraging the faith 
and imparting comfort to the bereaved, thus describe it? No! Let Universalists 

Swedenborgians, besides many others, including a multitude of professed Orthodox 
endeavor to make death a Friend, the Coming of Christ, ‘‘ the Gate of Heaven,” ete. On 
the other hand the unbiassed student will not forget that the Scriptures (as e.g. Rom. 
5 : 12, 14, 17, 21, etc.) represent death as no Saviour but as the dire result of sin, a 
grievous portion of the curse. If death is the Coming of Jesus, or if it is the arrival of 
a Friend, then certainly the Thessalonian brethren had no reason for their fears, and 
Paul takes a strange method by which to comfort them by speaking of a still future 
Coming of Jesus for the express purpose of delivering from death, and of placing such 
a coming for deliverance after an apostacy and the rise of the man of sin. Dr. Rutter 
(Rom. Cath., in his Life of Jesus, p. 321) refers the Coming of Matt. 24 : 42-51 ; Luke 
12 : 53, thus : “‘ to each individual this return of Jesus is the moment of our departure 
out of this life, when we are immediately to be judged. Jesus knocks at our door when 
He strikes us with a mortal sickness,’’ etc. And (p. 418) he quotes approvingly : ‘* St. 
Austin, in his 80th letter, makes answer, that to each individual Christian, the day of his 
death is the day of Christ’s Sec. Coming.” This is a favorite with Romanists, and 
oe many Protestants. They seem to revel in Young’s saying; ‘* Death is the crown 
of life— 


‘* Death gives us more than was in Eden lost, 
The King of Terrors is the Prince of Peace.”’ 


Whatever gain there is in death to the believer, whatever blessedness may await those 
who sleep in Jesus, etc., all this comes not because death bestows it, but in spite of him, 
through the grace of God in Christ Jesus, and, therefore, we earnestly protest to this 
transforming death into Christ, to this exalting death into a Prince of Peace, a Saviour, 
etc. (comp. Prop. 136). If the student desires a striking contrast of view, let him read 
the unscriptural opinion Beecher (Sermon on Mark 13 ° 33-37, in the Ch. Union, Jan. 29, 
1879) presents, totally ignoring a personal Advent, and applying the Coming to death, 
and then turn to the scriptural view Leask (Proph. Times, Dec. 12, 1866) gives, correspond- 
ing with Brown’s just quoted. Dr. Winslow (The Sec. Com. of the Lord) and numerous 
writers have excellent remarks on this point. 

? Thus to illustrate: Barnes, Com., makes “ the harvest” of Matt. 13 to relate to the 
period of the personal Sec. Advent; he also (thus differing from some other of our 
opponents) makes “ the harvest’ of Rev. 14 to be connected with the same period, thus 
virtually acknowledging a Pre-Mill. Advent, seeing that the scene of Rev. 14 (as well as 
what succeeds, as e.g. Rey. 19 and Rev. 20 : 1-7) takes place under the seventh or last 
trumpet, making the time preceding and introductory to Mill. era. 

4 Those who oppose us admit, that in a marriage the personal Advent of the Bridegroom 
is denoted (as e.g. in their comments on Matt. 25 : 1-13), because the figure, drawn from 
eustom, demands it. Is it not passing strange, therefore, that in the marriage an- 
nounced at the introduction of the Mill. era (Rev. 19 : 7-9), the idea of a present personal 
Bridegroom is rejected. Strange marriage! Some, however, to reconcile this awkward 
discrepancy, shelter themselves behind the far fetched opinion, that the marriage 1s 
simply announced before the Mill. period and is only consummated after the thousand 
years are ended. Remarkable announcement, indeed, when the Bride is ready and the 
express language is that ‘‘ the marriage of the Lumb is come.” Bh. Horsely (Ps., vol. 1, p. 
15) and others notice that a number of the Psalms speak of the Advent of Christ as a 
Conqueror bearing a marked resemblance to the same Coming as presented in the Apoc., 
and that in both the Coming is connected with a marriage, an era of blessedness 
following. 

5 Desirous to present the reasoning of our opponents, we give those of one of the most 
recent. Thus in the Christian Union, Aug. 8th, 1877, is presented Christ’s Coming Post- 
Millennial, by an Anti-Millenarian. To prove the Sec. Advent to be Post-Millennial, the 
following is urged. 1. Need not define the Millennium, because of “the silence of 
Scripture on that subject.” If this is so, how then prove the Coming of Christ to follow 
such an era? 2. Then comes the often refuted assertion that our whole doctrine is 
based on “ one passage,” viz., Rev. 20 : 2-6. Now, this is derived from the assumption 
that our belief is founded on the idea of the duration of the reign of Christ and of His 
saints, and not, as our argument shows, on the Covenants anda multitude of glorious 
predictions. How does this subterfuge prove a Post-Millennial Coming? 3. He says of 
Rey. 20 : 2-6, ‘“‘ The only thing that the interpreters seem to be agreed in, as regards 
this thousand years, is that it is no Millennium at all.’’ He thus makes a play on the 


174 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRoP. 121. 


word ‘‘ thousand,’’ making it appear as if all interpreters either made the thousand 
years symbolical (i.e. each day tor a year), or else to stand ‘‘ indefinitely,’’ thus over- 
looking many who receive them as recorded. He also overlooks two points: (1) that 
the thousand years do not limit the reign of Christ and of His saints, and (2) that the 
word ‘‘ Millennium’’ has (however derived from the time of the passage referred to) an 
extended meaning embracing the glorious era predicted by the prophets relating to 
Christ’s Kingdom, the happiness and exaltation of the saints. Well may we ask, if there 
is no Millennium as the writer asserts, how can Christ’s Coming be Post-Millennial? 4. 
The resurrection of Rev. 20 : 2-6 is “ indefinite,’ i.e. it is “ the reviving and royal 
supremacy of their spirit and life on earth.”’ Our reply is given under Prop. 127, to 
this assertion without proof. The analogy of Scripture sustains our position. 5. Christ 
does not come before the Millennium because He comes at a literal resurrection, as seen 
in Matt. 25 ; John 5 : 28, 29; 2 Thess. 1: 7-10. But this (1) takes for granted that Rev. 
20 : 2-6 embraces a symbolical and not a literal resurrection ; (2) makes no effort, the 
slightest, to remove or meet our reasons for its being a literal resurrection ; (3) overlooks 
how other Scriptures verify our position, even including the passages quoted by him 
(comp. Props. 126and 128). 6. Christ’s Coming Post-Millennial for, as the writer asserts, 
it follows a universal preaching of the Gospel, Matt. 24:14; Mark 13:10, and the 
ingathering of the Jews, Rom., chs. 10 and 11. The reader will find this sufficiently 
answered under Prop. 113 and Prop.175. After this weak and trifling appeal to Scripture 
to substantiate so important a point—an effort unworthy of its serious and commanding 
nature—then follow, making an appeal to prejudice, three false statements. 1. ‘‘ The 
Millenarian view leads to the disparagement of the Gospel by representing it as unequal 
to its work and sure to fail in it.”” While, on the other hand, his view of evangelizing 
the world honors the Gospel. We say the Gospel performs its allotted work, its high 
mission, and is no failure (comp. Prop. 175). 2. ‘‘ The Anti-Millenarian view is the only 
scriptural and spiritual one of Christ’s Coming.” To this assumption the writer is 
welcome, but we object to the reason assigned for the same as anti-scriptural, viz., 
because it holds that Christ may come at any time in death, which nearness to death Paul 
meant when writing to the Thessalonians. This transforms Jesus the Christ into the 
enemy death. 3. Millenarianism obscures and postpones the Coming of Christ, because 
it invites attention tu events, ‘‘ it makes us curious students of history rather than 
devout readers of the Bible,” as e.g. illustrated in ‘*‘ the Cummings and Record school of 
interpreters.” The main objection urged by the religious and secular press against 
Cummings, etc., is that the nearness of the Sec. Advent was so prominent and cardinal 
a feature of the system, and that references to events were given only to enforce it. This 
seeking after objections and such flings at the personal piety of Millenarians cannot and 
will not affect the student. 


Obs. 8. Leaving the objections to be answered by the proof that shall be 
adduced, attention is invited to this feature, viz., that as the covenant 
promises and the Millennial descriptions demand a Pre-Millennial personal 
Advent, we find this very phase of doctrine presented to us in a variety of 
aspects, a8 if purposely to meet and answer the objections that are alleged 
against it. And the Spirit, to confirm our hopes excited by the Covenant, 
presents it in forms so as to leave no doubt of a real, personal Coming 
being intended. We give the evidence as briefly as is consistent with a 
clear understanding of the same, keeping in view the demands of various 
classes of our readers. 

1. In the portraiture of the Mill. era, it is repeatedly promised that all 
suffering, sorrow, shedding of tears—in short, all evil leet be removed by 
a certain Coming. Now such a deliverance, we know from many positive 
declarations, will never be witnessed wntil the Second personal Advent ; 
for down to that period, the Church itself—all saints—shall be subject to 
suffering, sorrow, tears, and trial. The freedom from evil wnited with the 
promises of the personal Advent, are precisely the same specified with the 
Pre-Mill. Coming and Mill. glory to be seen on the earth. And, therefore, 
as we dare not separate what God has joined together, these Comings must 
be the same and relate to the same period of time.? 


PRop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 175 


®. The Millennial descriptions of the Prophets, it must be admitted, 
are not yet realized. ‘They are preceded by and connected with a Coming 
of the Lord ; and if that era is still future (as a comparison of them with 
history unmistakably proves), it follows that the Coming linked with it is 
also in the future. Now the personality of the Coming is admitted as it 
relates to some of the predictions, ase.g. Jer. 23:5; Jer. 30:9: Ezek. 
87 2 22-25 ; Hzek. 34 : 23, etc., under the impression that they relate to 
the First Advent. But if it can be shown that the prophecies were not 
realized at that Coming, the admissions of the personality still remain and 
must refer to the future. ‘To illustrate: Take Jer. 23 : 5, and if we allow 
the context to have its due force, then it follows that it is not yet fulfilled, 
because (1) the gathering of the Jews was not then witnessed ; (2) the 
Jews were not delivered from fear, dismay, and want; (3) Judah and 
Israel did not dwell safely ; (4) instead of dwelling in their own land they 
were driven out, etc. Or, select Jer. 30 : 9, and it was not verified, because 
(1) there was no return of the nation to the land of their fathers ; (2) the 
yoke upon the nation was not broken ; (3) Jacob was not saved out of his 
trouble ; (4) the blessings enumerated as connected with the restoration 
were not experienced. ‘Thus passage after passage might be taken, and the 
same deductions made from the context, all showing that the Advent 
referred to is yet to come. 

3. The doctrine of a literal first resurrection (Props. 125-129) establishes 
a literal Pre-Mill. Advent, seeing that that resurrection precedes the Millen- 
nium. Lange (Com., p. 421; Matt. 24) tersely says: “‘ Jt is baseless to 
regard the Coming of Christ to the first resurrection as altogether spirit- 
ual.’’ Hven our opponents unite the resurrection of the dead with a 
nersonal Coming, and argue, scripturally, that the former is a result of the 
latter. The admissions of Prof. Stuart and others, as to the literalness of 
the resurrection, 72volves this personal Coming. 

4, ‘* The Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all His saints,’’ 1 Thess. 
3:13 (comp. ch. 4:14; Jude 14), is admitted to be a literal one. But 
the same thing is asserted to take place, viz., the Coming of the Lord and 
all the saints with Him, as Pre-Millennial in Zech. 14 : 5.? 

5. The Advent of Rev. 19 : 11-29, is a Pre-Mill. one, and is a personal 
Coming, being parallel with Rev. 14 :14-20.° A large number of our 
opponents, overlooking consistency in their own system, yet forced by the 
scene described, frankly declare that the latter passage (Rev. 14 : 14) 
denotes the literal Advent of the Son of Man. Thus e.g. Barnes, Com. loci, 
informs us that it applies to the end, consummation, etc., at which time 
he locates the Sec. Advent. But in doth places the design in Coming and 
the acts performed by ‘‘ the Coming One’’ are the same, to save His people 
and overthrow His enemies. In Jdoth places the beast and abettors are 
destroyed, for they shall not exist in the Millennium ; and Jdoth places are 
located under the last trumpet, indicating the precise time when we are to 
look for it, viz., before the Millennium commences. 

6. In His Second Advent it is asserted that He shall ‘‘ come in the clouds 
of heaven.’’ Angels, Christ Himself, and the Apostles declare this to be 
a concomitant of the Advent. Daniel (7:13) ‘expressly describes this, 
that ‘‘ the Son of Man came with the clouds of heaven,’’ and on thus coming 
the Kingdom and dominion under the whole heaven is given to Him. In 
Rev. 14 : 14, commentators, etc, as Barnes, loci, admit “‘a designed refer- 
ence to Daniel,’’ but if, as they also admit that, Rey. 14 : 14, refers to the 


176 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 121. 


personal Advent, then Daniel must predict the same. We are not, how- 
ever, left to human conjecture on the application of Daniel’s prediction 
of the Advent. Jesus directly applies it to His future Advent. When 
before Caiphas, well knowing how the Jews regarded this prophecy, He 
boldly (Matt. 26 : 64) says: ‘* Hereafter shall ye see the Son of Man sitting 
on the right hand of power and coming in the clouds of heaven,’’ thus not 
only locating this Coming in the future, reaffirming -i/s personality by the 
‘* shall ye see ;’’ but even, under the grave charge of blasphemy, establish- 
ing the Jewish view, that they made a correct application of the prophecy 
to a personally manifested Messiah.* 

7. To that class of interpreters who confess the personal Advent to be 
designated by Daniel, but refer it to His First Advent, we reply : Notice, 
that the reference made by Christ to it as delineating His Coming at some 
future time confirms the order given by us under Prop. 104. The Coming 
is witnessed, not as at the First Advent when the fourth Empire was un- 
divided, long before the horns arose, etc., but in its divided state, and after 
the horns had arisen and progressed, etc. The unity of the prophecy 
demands the location of the Advent where Jesus places 1t.° 

8. The personal Advent, its uncertainty, suddenness, and stealthy 
approach is likened, by Matthew, Luke, Paul, and others to that of a thief. 
Commentators, etc., abundantly connect the idea of a personal Coming 
with the phrase. It has also been said that a thief does not come figura- 
tively but personally ; and the likening of the one to the other embraces 
the notion of a personal Coming as well as that of the manner of His 
Coming. But mark, under the sixth vial, just before the fearful gathering 
of nations, the outpouring of awful judgments, and the Millennium, the 
Apostle John, giving the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 16 : 15, says: ‘‘ Behold 
I come asa thief. Blessed is he that watcheth,’’ etc. Why does the Spirit 
thus employ expressions identical in spirit and design, if not to teach us 
that this Coming in a thief-hke manner is a personal Pre-Millennial one ?° 

9. The Apocalypse begins with ‘* Behold, He comes with clouds and 
every eye shall see Him,’’ etc., and ends with ‘‘ Surely, L come quickly.” 
The concessions made by opponents on these phrases are numerous, and 
contradictory to their spiritual interpretations. But they are not needed, 
for the great vital topic of the Book, viz., the Coming of Jesus, is seli- 
evident ; for all the predictions are given to testify to the same, and to 
events preceding, connected with, and following it. So apparent is this, 
that some reject the book solely on this ground as teaching a ‘‘ Jewish’’ 
Coming and reign of a personal Messiah. We, however, joyfully accept of 
this feature as blessed evidence of its inspiration, making it confirmatory 
of covenanted promises. Now is it reasonable to suppose, that in a Revela- 
tion designed to give special information respecting this personal Advent 
announced in its opening and close as a source of faith, hope, and warning, 
that an Advent should be specified as preceding the Millennium which is 
to be understood differently from a personal one, when the language 
describing it 7s similar to that employed in other places to designate a 
personal one? ‘The Spirit, we contend, purposely uses the same phraseology 
in order to prevent us, if wise, from perverting this doctrine of His 
Coming.’ 

10. When Christ comes personally, the holy angels or messengers come 
with Him, 2 Thess. 1:7; Matt. 13:39, 41; 16.: 21; 24:31, ete. Thi 
also said in reference to the Pre-Mill. Coming ; for in Rey. 14 : 10 (per- 


PBOPe tel. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. tie 


haps Eng. version of Joel 3:11); Rev. 19:17; Rev. 20 :1, ete., we find 
angels participate in it, and perform the same things ascribed to them in 
the preceding passages. . 

11. When He comes personally we (2 Thess. 1 : 7, 8) read: ‘‘ The Lord 
Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels in flaming fire,”’ 
etc. Other passages teach that then “‘ the tares,’’ ‘‘ the chaff,’’ shall be 
‘cast into a furnace of fire,’’ shall be *‘ burned with fire unquenchable,”’ 
etc. Tire, as descriptive of God’s vengeance, etc., is an element intimately 
connected with it. The very same is frequently stated in relation to this 
Pre-Mill. Advent. Thus e.g. Isa. 66 : 15, 16, ‘** Behold the Lord will come 
with fire and with His chariots like a whirlwind, to render His anger with 
fury and His rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire and by His sword 
will the Lord plead with all flesh,”’ etc., which is almost the phraseology of 
Paul. Then follows the Millennial glory. Daniel, Joel, Malachi, Isaiah, 
and others speak of a fire that shall consume and destroy in connection 
with the Lord’s Coming, to be followed by a glorious Kingdom. This 
confirmatory fact may be added : in Matt. 25 : 31; Matt. 13 : 40-42, etce., . 
it is declared that the wicked are cast into ‘‘ everlasting fire.’’ This is 
done at the personal Sec. Advent, as theologians, of all classes, proclaim. 
If we turn to the events immediately preceding the Millennium and related 
to the Coming then manifested, we read, Rev. 19 : 20, and Rev. 14 : 9, 10, 
that certain wicked are cast into a °‘ lake of fire’ at this very period. The 
Spirit again identifies them. 

12. In His Sec. Advent, He is represented as coming as (e.g. Matt. 
25 : 34) a King. This is also the characteristic attributed to the Pre- 
Millennial Coming that He is revealed as “‘ the King’’ (Zech. 14), even 
** King of Kings’’ (Rev. 19), etc. Our entire argument makes this a pre- 
requisite.® 

13. In the Sec. Advent, Christ comes as Judge, engaged in judg: 
ing. If there is one feature that specially appertains to the Pre-Mill. 
Advent it certainly is this, that in numerous places His Coming as Judge 
and judging is blended with it. See Props. 182, 133, 134. 

14. At the Sec. Advent a Kingdom is said to be revealed, as 2 Tim. 
(4:4, “at Mis appearing and His Kingdom.’’ This is frequently, as we 
have abundantly shown, described as following the Pre-Mill. Advent.° 

15. At the personal Coming of Jesus, the Scriptures locate a gathering 
of saints from all quarters, 2 Thess. 2:1, etc. This is precisely what is 
said to be done at the Advent before the Millennium in numerous places, 
as has already been indicated. This gathering is described, more or less, 
by the Prophets, so that even Augustine (City of God, B. 20, ¢. 23) makes 
Ps. 50 : 3-5, denote the personal Coming of Christ.” 

16. At the Sec. Advent Jesus shall ‘‘ sit wpon the throne of His glory,”’ 
Matt. 25:31. This is also stated. to follow the Pre-Mill. Coming. Both 
the throne and the glory, or ‘‘ the glorious throne’ are mentioned, as will 
be seen in the Prop. on the reign. In comparing such passages as Col. 
3:4, Ps. 102, etc., with the Mill. glory, the identity is established. 
Besides the specific mention of Christ’s throne—a throne even David’s 
(Acts 2 : 30, etc.) belonging specially to Him—upon which He personally 
sits, Rev. 3 : 21, we find the same throne particularly mentioned in the 
Pre-Mill. Coming, as in Ps. 89; Isa. 9:7; Jer. 33; Ezek. 37, etc. — 

1%. Into this Kingdom of Christ’s, linked with His “ appearing,’’ 
believers enter, 1 Pet. 1:7, 13; Matt. 25 : 34; comp. 2 Pet. 1:11, ete. 


178 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop, 121. 


The personal presence of Jesus, as all believe, is then enjoyed. But the 
Scriptures unite in locating this entrance, inheriting, reigning, etc., in the 
Kingdom with the Millennium itself ; and hence it implies His personal 
presence. For, all the promises of future happiness and glory given to the 
saints to be hereafter enjoyed in Christ’s Kingdom and presence, are also 
found recorded and fully designated 7m the Mill. descriptions. 

18. The period of Christ’s personal return is at the time of ‘‘ regenera- — 
tion,’’ Matt. 19 : 28, that great glorious ‘‘ new birth’’ (res.) of the sons of 
God and of Creation. But this ‘‘ regeneration’’ is identified with the 
Mill. age (Prop. 145), and hence the Advent is personal. 

19. So likewise the period of the ‘‘ restitution of all things’ is preceded 
by ‘‘ sending Jesus Christ,’’ ‘* whom the heavens must receive until the 
times’? are ushered in. Barnes, loci, even admits: ‘‘ until: this word 
implies that He would then return to the earth.’’ To effect this ‘‘ restitu- 
tion’’ Christ’s personal presence is promised. But this ‘‘ restitution’’ is 
the grand theme of the Millennial predictions, the scope of its prophecy, 
the alleged design of the establishment of the Millennium. See Prop. 144." 

20. The personal Advent of Christ is united, by nearly all, with the 
deliverance of suffering creation from the bondage of corruption, Rom. 
8: 19-21. The Millennial predictions portray this very deliverance and 
hence it includes that presence. See Prop. 146. 

21. Commentators, etc., inform us that Christ is evidently present in 
the New Heavens and New Earth of 2 Pet. 3 : 10-13, etc. But the New 
Heavens and New Earth of promise (so stated by Peter) are found in the 
Millennial descriptions, Zsa. 65 : 17-25, Jsa. 66 : 22, and, in the nature of 
the case, must zzclude the same presence. See Props. 148 and 151. 

22. The Spirit, as if purposely to meet the anticipated unbelief, even 
condescends to tell us, that ‘‘ His feet shall stand in that day upon the 
Mt. of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the Kast,’’? Zech. 14:4. In 
this Pre-Mill. Advent the ezact locality is pointed out (the same from 
whence He ascended to heaven), and His personality indisputably demon- 
strated by *‘ His feet shall stand,” etc. The language is alone applicable 
to a Pre-Mill. personal Coming, and distinctively refers us to the promise 
of the angels, Acts 1 : 11." 

23. But, in addition, to indicate in the most striking manner the 
personality of this Pre-Mill. Coming, it is stated that He shall be seen at 
that time. Thus, in Micah 3:12, the mountain of the house is made 
desolate, but in Micah 4:1, etc., this same house is restored, and all 
agree that in the latter we have a Millennial description. Now, if we turn 
to Matt. 23 : 38, 39, and Luke 18 : 35, it is stated that Jesus at His First 
Advent did not restore this house which He found and left desolate, but 
will do so when He comes again: ‘‘ Behold, your house rs left unto you 
desolate. Kor I say unto you, ye shall NoT SEE ME HENCEFORTH, fill ye 
shall say, Blessed is He that cometh in the name of the Lord. Behold, 
your house is left unto you desolate, and verily I say unto you, YB SHALL 
NOT SEE ME wntil the time come when ye shall say, Blessed is He that cometh 
an the name of the Lord.’’ This unequivocally teaches that the people saw 
Him there: that for a time He would be invisible to the nation, but that 
they should again see Him ; and that seeing would be at the time when He 
would restore the house from its desolation. The Millennial prophecies show 
the removal of this desolation, and, hence, that He shall de then seen. 
But we have more explicit passages: in Rey. 1: 7%, ‘‘ Behold He cometh 


Prop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 179 


with clouds ; and every eye shall see Him; and they also which pierced 
Him, and all Kindreds of the earth (some read : all tribes of the land) shail 
wail because of Him.’ This at once recalls the parallel prediction of 
Zech. 12 : 10, which binds the whole in unity ; for at the very time ‘ ¢he 
house of David’’ is restored the Millennial predictions are to be verified in 
the bestowal upon the Jewish nation of the long-promised (but long- 
delayed) blessings, then ‘‘ they shall look upon me whom they have prerced, 
and they shall mourn for Him,”’ etc. This is corroborated by the general 
tenor of the prophecies which speak of the presence of the Redeemer, their 
‘King, David, etc., at the restoration of the Jewish nation, and of His 
pleading with the Jews ‘‘ face to face,’’ etc.* 

24, This again is confirmed by James, Acts 15 : 16, 1%, ‘‘ after this I 
(Christ) will return,” etc., 1.e. after a people are gathered out, as pre- 
dicted, Jesus will ‘‘ return’? to rebuild the tabernacle of David, ete. 
Those even who reject our views admit that this ‘‘ return” is a personal 
Coming, but inconsistently and violently apply it to the First Advent. But 
the simple fact that it is a ‘‘ return ;’’ that it occurs after a certain event 
is accomplished (yet in course of fulfilment, viz., the gathering) ; that the 
tabernacle of David 7s ye¢ in ruins ; that it corresponds with the analogy of 
prophecy teaching a personal presence, then an absence, and finally a 
personal return, etc.—makes it alone applicable to the Pre-Mill. Advent.” 

25. Paul significantly points to the Pre-Mill. personal Advent in Rom. 
11, when he connects with it the removal of the blindness of the Jewish 
nation, and says: ‘* There shall come out of Zion the Deliverer.’’ For in 
thus representing Him as Coming in relation to this event, he accords with 
the portrayal of the Millennium, and, as we have previously intimated, 
with the Jewish doctrine that ‘‘ the Coming One’’ is to perform a great 
work for the nation. He links his faith with that of the nation’s, as 
expressed by John the Baptist (“Sart Thow the Coming One ?’’), by the 
people at the entry into Jerusalem (‘‘ the Coming One’’), but transfers it, 
as Jesus did (see above 22, which some render ‘‘ Blessed is the Coming 
One’’) to the still future Advent.* 

26. Rey. 11 : 15-18, with its ‘‘ time of the dead that they should be 
judged,” its ** reward unto Thy servants the prophets,’’ its removal and 
destruction of the wicked, ecte., cannot possibly be reconciled with a post- 
ponement of these events wntil after the Millennial period hasexpired. ‘The 
simple announcement of them under the seventh trumpet is sufficient to 
sustain our position. These things demand for their fulfilment a personal 
Pre-Mill. Advent. 

27. Phrases are employed, in connection with this Pre-Mill. Coming, 
which can only be consistently explained as denoting a personal Coming. 
Thus e.g. in Rev. 14 : 10, the image-worshippers, who are to be destroyed, 
Rey. 19, before the Mill. age, are to “‘be tormented with fire and brim- 
stone in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,’ 
i.e. they are to witness (Alford, ‘‘ visible’’?) their punishment—indeed, as 
we find in other places, inflict it. Again, in Isa. 26 : 21, ‘‘ Behold the 
Lord cometh out of His place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for 
their iniquity,’’ etc., thus vacating the place that now holds Him in 
‘accordance with the promise of the angels, etc. This at once reminds the 
student of Hos. 5: 15, Zech. 8 : 3, etc.” 

28. When Christ comes, He shall ‘‘ rule with a rod of iron,” etc. In 
Rey. 2: 2%, the saints are to be associated with Him in ruling with the 


180 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


same rod. Now, some of our most persistent opposers frankly admit that 
this participation of the saints in such ruling will only be witnessed 
‘“when the Son of God will come to judge the world.’’?*" In Rey. 19 : 15, 
before the Mill. era, Jesus comes, and it is announced that ‘‘ He shall rule 
them with a rod of tron.”’ 

29. Again, we may insist upon the personality contained in the phrase, 
‘Son of Man.’’ It is employed, as all concede, to designate the Sec. 
Advent, a Coming not merely as a divine personage, but as Son of Man, 
glorified it is true, but one united with humanity, a true descendant of 
David’s. He is designated the same, as we have shown, in Pre-Muill. 
predictions (Dan. 7:13; Rev. 14: 14), thus showing, if we will but receive 
it, that a personal Advent is intended. ~ 

30. In correspondence with this, Paul tells us, Acts 17 : 31, that when 
Christ comes to judge, He comes as the ‘*‘ Man ordained.’’ The sacred 
writers designate Him as “‘ the Man,’’ the descendant of David’s, the 
promised seed who comes Jefore the Millennial era ; therefore, we cannot 
mistake the Coming of this personage, who is appointed fo be revealed as 
the appointed, ordained, and actual Son of David. In Zech. 6 : 8, ‘* Behold 
the Man whose name is the Branch,”’’ etc., we have, as the Apostles corrobo- 
rate, the work of salvation in its initial, execution, and completion carried 
on by the Lord Jesus not merely in His relation to God as His Son, but 
as ‘‘ the Man’’ promised to David. Coming as ‘‘ the Man,’’ involves the 
personal Pre-Mill. Advent. 

31. This personality and Pre-Mill. Coming can be derived, by com- 
paring Scripture, in several ways from Phil. 2:10, 11, ‘‘ that at the name 
of Jesus every knee should bow, of things (beings) in heaven, and things in 
(beings on) earth, and things (beings) under the earth.”’ : 

a. The time when this is to be fulfilled is seen from the parallel passage, 
Rom. 14:10, 11, ** We shall all stand before the gudgment-seat of Christ. 
for, it is written, As I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, 
and every tongue shall confess to God.’’ Christ 1s personally present on 
this judgment-seat. But according to Isa. 45 : 23; Isa, 65 : 16, 23; Ps. 
63:11, etc., this will occur at the period when Mill. blessedness is be- 
stowed. See Props, 132, 133, and 134, on Judgment and Judgment Day. 

6. It is admitted even by our opponents, that the ‘‘ things under the 
earth’? that shall ‘* bow’? the ‘‘ knee’’ are ‘‘ beings,’’ viz., the dead, the 
resurrected dead that shall appear.’ The application of the passage by 
Paul indicates a personal presence ; the resurrection of the dead requires the 
same. ‘This resurrection, we have shown, is, so far as the saints, Pre- 
Millennial, and the passage quoted by Paul standing related to the Mil- 
lennium (as shown by many commentators, see e.g. Barnes, On Isa. 
45 : 23), it follows that, if verified, Christ 7s personally present to whom 
this homage is rendered. 

c. The personal name that is to be thus acknowledged is indicative of 
the personal presence. The Jesus, Joshua, or Saviour is designated ‘‘ the 
Christ,’’ “‘ the Messiah.’? By the latter name He is known as the cove- 
nanted seed of promise ; the former is His personal name. The Apostle 
argues that not only the name Christ which both Jews and Gentiles 
acknowledge, but the personal name given by God to this one person, viz., 
that of Jesus as the Christ and consequently the Lord, the predicted and 
covenanted Ruler in the Davidic order, shall de openly acknowledged by 
all. - Now, such an acknowledgment of the name, identifying the Lordship 


=e ee”-lTrO!  lee 


~~ S  e 


| 
| 
; 


Prop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 181 


with the person called Jesus, seems to demand a personal presence, which 
doubtless, led the angels to say so pointedly, Acts 1:11, ‘‘ this same 
Jesus,’ etc. This contributes to the honor and glorification of the Father 
that that which is now denied by so many should be openly manifested, 
especially before His covenanted nation. If we accept of the application 
and amplification of this Millennial description by Paul, then it follows 
that Christ is personally thus acknowledged at the Mill. era. The whole 
passage impresses us with distinctive personality. 

32. In the description of His personal Advent, Matt. 25 : 31, informs 
us that *‘ before Him shall be gathered all nations,’’ etc. This is an 
adjunct of the Pre-Mill. Coming, for Isa., Jer., Hzek., Zeph., Joel, Zech., 
John, and others unite in declaring that a gathering of the nations shall 
take place immediately preceding and connected with such a Coming. 
Rey. 16 : 14-16, and Rey. 19:19, etc., are alone a complete confirma- 
tion of such a Pre-Mill. gathering linked with the Advent. The Spirit 
again identifies the Coming. 

33. It is granted that, Matt. 13 : 30, 39, 41, Jesus personally comes at 
the harvest at the end of the age. Joel (3:13, etc.) informs us that the 
Lord will come when the harvest is ripe, defore the Millennium. So Rey. 
14 : 14, 15, tells us that ‘‘ the Son of Man’’ shall come when ‘‘ the harvest 
of the earth is ripe,’’ and this also precedes the Millennial era. This 
connection of the Advents with the ‘* harvest’’ by the Spirit is intentional 
so that we may identify them as one and the same. 

34, The Coming of the Son of Man, Matt. 24 and Luke 21, is “‘ after,” 
“immediately after’’ a tribulation which runs down through the times of 
the Gentiles, and is accompanied by the gathering or harvest of the elect. 
With all the efforts made by our opponents to spiritualize this Coming 
into a Providential one, nearly all of them are forced to allow that it 
includes a future personal one. But if so (which we believe), then it 
follows that it must be one preceding the Mill. age, because it is to be 
witnessed at the closing period of this long-continued tribulation—a 
tribulation which, in the very nature of the case, cannot enter into or 
exist contemporaneously with the Millennium. ‘This Advent then precedes 
St 

35. The Sec. Advent is designed for Salvation, Web. 9 : 28, etc. This 
we have shown is a distinguishing characteristic of the Pre-Mill. Coming, 
and hence, as Barnes informs us (Com. loci), *‘ Tholuck and the Germuns 
generally’ interpret Rom. 13:11 to apply ‘“‘to the personal reign of 
Christ on earth.’’ That such an application of the passage is correct is 
evident (1) from the contrast of night and day following (see Props. 138 
and 139, on Day of Christ), and (2) in using the words ‘‘ Salvation,”’ 
‘‘night,’’ and ‘‘ day,’’ according to Jewish usage and expectations (comp. 
e.g. Isa. 25 : 9). 

36. Inthe Sec. Advent four things are united, ase.g. in 2 Thess. 1 : 5-11, 
(1) the rest or Kingdom ; (2) the triumphant, irresistible Coming of Jesus ; 
(3) the overthrow of and vengeance upon the enemies ; (4) the deliverance 
and blessedness of God’s people. These four things are also united with 
the Pre-Mill. Coming, as can be seen by reference to numerous Mill. 
predictions, already frequently quoted. Rom 

37. The binding and confinement of Satan is Pre-Millennial. This 1s 
Christ’s work, and the entire train of prediction from Gen. 3:15 down 
leaves the decided impression that this 1s done by a personal manifesta- 


182 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 121, 


tion ; for while provision was made at the First Advent to accomplish 
it, the victory itself is not seen until the time of the Second. Down to 
the Sec. Coming Satan is the avowed, loosened enemy, corrupting the 
Church and the world, exciting the nations to open hostility, to whose 
power the saints are exposed and the sleeping are held fast in his bonds. 
Such a deposing and binding of Satan, as the Millennium demands to 
secure a fulfilment of promise, the appointed Seed alone, in His own 
personal power, can perform. 

38. We may urge even the eminent fitness of Christ, the Second Adam, 
manifesting Himself personally in the very place where Satan obtained his 
triumphs over the first Adam, at the very time that Satan is bound and his 
work of deception is stayed. Where man fell, there the triumph of man, 
the woman’s seed, is also to be exhibited ; and if so, it zmvolves a personal 
Coming at the period of the Millennium. 

39. Hence, this is confirmed by the announcement, that this Pre-Mill. 
Coming is for the purpose of ‘‘ Redemption.’’ It is granted that He comes 
personally in ‘‘ the day of Redemption,’’ Matt. 19:27, 28; Rom. 8 : 23; 
Eph. 4 : 30, etc. The Mill. descriptions are full of this Redemption ; that 
Jesus then comes as ‘‘edeemer,’’ that He then ‘‘ redeems’’ His people, and 
that they shall be called ‘‘ the redeemed,” ‘‘ the redeemed of the Lord,’’ etc. 
The accordance of phraseology, the identity of acts performed, etc., again 
teach us what Coming is intended. 

40. The personal Coming shall occur when ‘“‘the mystery of God ts 
finished.’’ ‘That the finishing of the mystery includes the open revelation 
of Christ, the vindication of God’s ways, the judgments of Christ, the 
overthrow of Satan and his deposition from being ‘“‘ the god of this 
world,’’ and the exaltation of the saints, is admitted by our opponents.” 
In Rev. 10:7 it is asserted in the most express terms, that ‘‘ in 
the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to sound, 
the mystery of God should be finished, as He hath declared to His ser- 
vants the Prophets.’’ Under this seventh trumpet (and mark, too, at 
the beginning of the sounding and not at its close, or, as some even grossly 
have it, a thousand years after the sounding) then, which introduces the 
Millennium, this mystery relating to the Kingdom, the general theme of 
the Prophets, is finished. If the mystery is indeed finished, then the King 
has come and the Kingdom is established. If we notice the events occur- 
ring under this last trumpet, they are precisely such as include the Advent 
and Kingdom. Briefly, if the mystery of God as stated by the Prophets, 
the divine purpose of God in Christ, the consummation of covenanted 
promises, is then finished, completed, manifested, ¢hen it follows, of neces- 
sity, that the Pre-Mill. Coming of Jesus under this seventh trumpet is a 
personal one.** 

Al. The Spirit locates the marriage of the Lamb as Pre-Millennial, 
and against the statements of the multitude who would postpone it until the 
close of the Millennium, expressly says, Rev. 19:7, 8, 9, that this 
‘“marriage of the Lamb 7s come,’’ etc. A marriage without the personal 
presence of the bridegroom is an incongruity. Such a presence is demanded 
by the blessings bestowed by the marriage, and is insured by the Advent 
predicted in its connection, and by the allusions to it, as in Matt. 
25 : 1-13, and in the Prophets.” 

42. This is forcibly corroborated by the Scripture just referred to, viz., 
the parable (Matt. 25 : 1-13) of the ten virgins. or the preceding context 


' eS eee) a 


Ror, 121.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 183 


and the word “‘ ¢hen’’ indicate that a delineation of the Church is given 
as it will exist a¢ the Sec. Advent. The Bridegroom comes, and those who 
are prepared ‘* went in with Him to the marriage.’? The Coming of the 
Bridegroom is represented as personal, for the wise ‘‘ go out to meet Him,”’ 
and are ‘‘ with Him.’’ ‘This Coming must be Pre-Millennial, for such a 
mixture of wise and foolish does not exist inthe Millennium. The parable 
which follows that of the virgins also teaches a personal Coming. 

43. At the Sec. Advent when, Matt. 16 : 27, ‘‘the Son of Man shall 
come in the glory of His Father, then He shall reward every man according 
to his works.’’ The same thing of rewarding is stated in connection with 
this Pre-Mill. Coming. Thus e.g. Isa. 40:10; Rev. 11 : 18, etc., dis- 
tinctly announce it. 

44, Heb. 1:6, ‘‘ And when He bringeth in (marg. read when He 
bringeth again) the first begotten into the world, He saith, And let all the 
angels of God worship Him.’’ ‘This verse which has perplexed many 
expositors is plain, if we but remember that Christ is called ‘‘ the first 
begotten’’ with reference to His resurrection from the dead in Rev. 1 : 5, 
and Col. 1 : 18, and that the Apostle had just referred in preceding verse 
(comp. Acts 13 : 33 with verse 5) to the resurrection of Christ as a beget- 
ting. As taught distinctively in marg. reading, with which critics 
generally agree, this same resurrected, first begotten Jesus shall come 
‘Sagain.’’? ‘This must be applied to His Second Coming, seeing that it is 
after He is constituted ‘‘ the First Begotten.’’ If the personal Advent 
is Intended, as expositors hold, it can be shown to be Pre- Millennial by the 
quotation appended by Paul, ‘‘ let all the angels,’’ etc. If the quotation 
is derived (Barnes) from the Septuagint rendering of Deut. 32 : 43, then it 
is identified with ‘‘ avenging the blood of His servants, and rendering 
vengeance to His adversaries,’’ thus agreeing with the acts assigned to 
Christ’s Pre-Mill. Coming. If, on the other hand, it is taken from Ps. 
97 : 7, then it stands in immediate relation to the reigning and ‘‘ presence 
of the Lord of the whole earth,’’ the destruction or ‘‘ burning up’’ of His 
enemies, the overthrow of image-worshippers, the exaltation of Zion, all 
people seeing His glory, etc., thus again corresponding with events ascribed 
_ to Christ’s Advent before and at the Millennium.” 

45. There is a day of the Lord, of Jesus Christ, of the Son of Man to be 
revealed in the future. In Luke 17 : 24; Phil. 1:6, etc., itis allowed that 
Christ will be personally present in that day. It is easy to show by a 
comparison of Scripture that ‘‘ the day of the Lord’’ mentioned in Mil 
lennial predictions 1s the same spoken of by the Apostles. This we will do 
hereafter (Props. 138 and 139), and for the present it is amply sufficient 
to say that the use of the phrase by the Apostles confirmed the Jewish 
idea of ‘‘the day of the Lord,” ‘‘ the day of the Messiah,’’ as the pre- 
dicted Millennial day. If the Jewish expectation was erroneous, as mod- 
erns now say, then it was wrong for inspired men to employ such conjirma- 
tory phraseology without appending a suitable correction or definition, etc. 

46. The reader, if a careful student of the Word, must have noticed the 
peculiarity, that not one of the Prophets speak of an Advent ¢o follow the 
Millennial age. It is something—although now so prevalent — utterly 
unknown to them. The Coming of the Lord, the predicted Seed, etc., 1s 
always represented as occurring previously, and that age is described as 
the result of such an Advent. It is in vain to look for any other order 
given by the holy men of old; and therefore, in the nature of the case, 


184 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


they denoted, as the Jews, disciples, and Apostles held, a personal Com- 
ing.” 

47. In addition to this, in the epitome of events running down from the 
establishment of the Christian Church to the Sec. Advent, such as Matt., 
chs. 24 and 26; 2 Thess. 2; Mark 13; Luke 21, in direct reference to 
this personal Coming, no mention is made of an intervening Millennium 
of blessedness, such as the Prophets describe, but tribulation, oppression, 
apostasy, etc., are to be experienced and witnessed. Hence that See. 
Advent attached to these epitomes, allowed by commentators, etc., to be 
personal, must precede that age.” 

48. Eminent writers on prophecy have well remarked, that the First 
and Second Advents are sometimes so linked together in prophecy that it 
requires discrimination to discern what belongs to the one or to the other. 
The same language is applied to doth so far as Coming is concerned, only 
that the one (the First) refers more directly to humiliation, suffering, etc., 
the other (the Second) to the glory that shall be revealed. ‘The Sec. 
Advent is an outgrowth or result of the First (Props. 34, 66, 75, etc.). 
The simple fact that they are thus spoken of fogether, without an effort 
at discrimination ; that the Second is far more definitely and minutely 
described than the First; that they doth (the First as preparative) stand 
related to the Millennium—this should influence us to believe that as one 
was literal, so the other wili be the same. 

49, ‘his Pre-Mill. Coming is a personal one, on the ground that the 
objections alleged against its personality apply, if legitimately carried out, 
with equal force against the First Advent or a future personal Sec. Advent. 
If so many arguments, showing that it is personal, have no weight, if they 
can be so readily explained away as figurative, or spiritual, or providential, 
then it follows, if that principle of interpretation is logically applied, that 
there is mo personal Coming of Christ in the future. Who that hath faith 
in the simple, sublime utterances of God will credit this? Alas! multi- 
tudes are doing this to-day ; taking the weapons forged to their hand by 
reputed orthodox divines, influenced by the refining mystical process so 
generally adopted in these passages they spiritualize the Sec. Advent ; 
churches, counting their thousands upon thousands, utterly reject a 
personal Sec. Advent, and the leaven is penetrating far and wide. Such 
an Advent as we contend for is personal, thus making our system of 
interpretation a consistent and uniform one, leaving no room, and afford- 
ing no refuge, for the denial of a Second personal Advent.” 

50. But brevity demands a mere mention of other arguments, such as 
(1) the supernatural and miraculous events connected with the Kingdom 
(Props. 6 and 7). (2) The prophecies interpreted literally (Prop. 21) sus- 
tainsit. (3) The preaching of John, Jesus, disciples, and Apostles indorses 
it (Prop. 16, etc.). (4) The re-establishment of the Theocracy in the 
Davidic line demands it (Props. 31, 32, 33, 48, 49, ete.). (5) The postpone- 
ment of the Kingdom indicates it (Props. 56, 57, 58, 59, etc.). (6) The 
preaching of the Apostles after the death and ascension of Christ (Props. 
71-74). (7) The removal of the Kingdom to the close of the tribulation 
and times of the Gentiles (Prop. 66). (8) The doctrine of the election 
corroborates it (Props. 62-65). (9) This Kingdom a Jewish one in its 
foundation, etc. (Prop. 68). (10) Arguments can be derived from what 
has been said respecting the Church (Props. 88-104, ete.). (11) The 
specific mention and promise of the Kingdom to Dayid’s Son (Prop. 84). 


a a ell. ee 


Prop. 121.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 185 


(12) Incidental arguments from the visibility, etc., of the Kingdom, the 
oneness of the Kingdom, the teaching of the parables, the inheriting of 
the land by David’s Son and His brethren, the corroboration of passages 
supposed to teach the contrary, the restoration of the Jewish nation, ete. 
(see Props. on these), (13) Additional arguments will be found in follow- 
ing Propositions.” 

51. Millenarian writers have always insisted that a personal Pre-Mill. 
Advent is to be witnessed under the seventh or last trumpet. Now, 
Bengel in his Gnomon has shown, that by the authority of the earliest mss. 
the phrases ‘‘ and art to come’’ in Rev. 11:17, ‘‘ and shalé be’’ in Rev. 
16 : 5, are to be rejected. This criticism is fully sustained by the authori- 
tative Sinaitic Mss. discovered by Prof. Tischendorf. The student may 
well ponder ¢his omission thus given by the Spirit. Why should the title 
of ‘‘ Who is to come,”’ or ‘‘ the Coming One’’ given in Rev. 1: 4, 8 and 
4:8 be omitted in 11:17 and 16:5? ‘The reason, so corroborative of 
our faith, was given long ago by Ansbert (as quoted by Bengel) : ‘‘ They 
do not here subjoin, as they are accustomed, ‘and Who art to come ;’ 
they speak of Him as already present.’’ This omission, as the weightiest 
Mss. (admitted by Anti-Millenarians, as Prof. Stuart, Com.) prove, is not 
accidental but intentional, showing that the Coming One is no longer 
expected to come, but has already come. It is a beautiful, incidental, and 
most powerful proof confirmatory of our position, indicative of a Pre-Mill. 
arrival and presence.” 

52. The Jews (Prop. 160, Obs. 2, etc.) held that the Antichrist preceded 
the personal Coming of the Son of Man, which view was derived from 
Dan. 7, etc. Now (1) the Antichrist did not precede the first Advent ; (2) 
Paul (2 Thess.), John (Apoc.), well knowing this Jewish doctrine, locate 
this Antichrist in the future ; (3) they, employing language expressive of 
a personal Advent and without indicating the Jews to be in error, associate 
with this Antichrist (i.e. his destruction) the personal Coming of Jesus ; 
(4) this Antichrist, the Coming of Christ, and the overthrow of the former, 
are witnessed defore the ushering in of the Millennium. ‘This is the plain 
order laid down by the Spirit. 

53. It is admitted, as we have repeatedly shown (Prop. 75, etc.) from 
others, that the Apostles and those under their immediate instruction 
looked for a near Advent of the Saviour. ‘The express language is so 
definite on this point that it is not susceptible of a different interpretation, 
so that commentators concede it, some with and others without any 
explanation. Having previously given (e.g. Prop. 74) the probable reasons 
for such a faith, we now refer to it as a decided proof of their belief in a 
personal Pre-Mill. Advent. For urging this nearness, an event that 
might at any time occur, after the rise and progress of an apostasy, In- 
dicates in the clearest manner that they at least did not entertain the 
modern Whitbyan ‘‘ new hypothesis’ of an intervening Millennium before 
the Advent. ‘Taking it even for granted (which we do not) that they were 
‘‘ionorant’’ or ‘‘ mistaken’’ as to future events and the period of time to 
clapse before that Advent, it does not follow that they were also *‘ 1gno- 
rant,’”’ etc., as to the nature of the Advent or its connection with continued 
suffering, etc., down to its occurrence. If the Advent itself that they 
looked for is personal, then the knowledge they had received from Christ 
respecting the Kingdom and the plain predictions of Millennial blessedness 
to be realized at a Coming of Christ’s, if they were to be experienced in 


186 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 121: 


this dispensation, would most certainly have prevented such utterances 
in men who were guided into truth by the same Spirit that gave the pre- 
dictions. The unity is alone preserved by admitting that the Advent is 
Pre-Millennial. If in error on the one point, they were the same in making 


it Pre-Millennial. We arecontent to remain ‘‘ ignorant’’ and ‘‘ mistaken’’. 


in such company, for we recognize a@ propriety in such declarations 
utterly irreconcilable with current doctrines. 

54. We hold to this Pre-Mill. Coming as personal, because we are plainly 
told that as the Millennial age draws nigh, the world, and even the pro- 
fessed Church, will be disinclined ¢o believe in a personal Coming. ‘The 
world shall reject the doctrine and ridicule it ; the Church as a body shall 
slumber and sleep ; professed servants shall say, ‘‘ My Lord delayeth His 
Coming ;’? and many shall declare, ‘* Where ts the promise of His Coming ?”’ 
‘“‘When the Son of Man cometh shall He find faith on the earth?’ Surely He 
would find such, if the earth just emerged from Millennial glory, but in the 
darkness, etc., preceding that age, faith is almost extinct in His Coming. 
Nearly all prophetical writers agree that, owing to the limitcd nature of 
the chronological prophecies, the Mill. era cannot be far distant, and we 
find that the world and Church are rapidly drifting into this precise con- 
dition of unbelief. Such a position of unbelief in a personal Coming 
cannot exist in the Church in its present form after the Millennium ; and, 
therefore, its extensive existence, advocated by all classes, is a strong 
presumptive proof, why we should insist on its being a literal Coming.” 

55. Christ will come personally to introduce Mill. glory just previous to 
a period—connected with this dispensation—of apostasy and unbelief, 
2 Thess. 2:8; 2 Tim. 3:1-5; 2 Pet. 3: 3, 4, etc., of great trouble and 
trial, Rev. 19; Ps. 23 Luke 21 : 25-28, etc., of scepticism and indifference, 
1 Thess. 5:3; Jude 14, 15, 16, etc., so that it shall come ‘‘ as a@ snare,” 
Luke 21 : 35, etc. But while this is so, God, simply judging from the 
past, will never permit such an occurrence as this Pre-Mill. Advent, so 
tremendous in its effects both upon the world and the Church, to take 
place without suitable warning. It is reasonable to expect from the past 


dealings of God, that, in His providence, He will raise up men, who, amid © 


sarcasm, ridicule, charges of error, heresy, folly, enthusiasm, fanaticism, 
etc., will, Noah-like, faithfully point to this personal Coming, and warn the 
Church and world of its approach by direct appeals. Amos 3: 7, ‘‘Surely 
the Lord God will do nothing, but He revealeth His secret unto His servants 
the prophets,’’ compared with Ps. 25 : 14, ‘‘ the secret of the Lord is with 
them that fear Him and He will show them His covenant’? (marg. read. 
‘Sand His covenant to make them know it’’). Now, if this Coming is 
personal we ought to find (1) predictions that it would be recognized by 
some ; and (2) that as the age is approaching, men will proclaim it. This 
we do, for (1) it is promised that some shall know it, and a ery of its 
nearness shall be raised, Luke 21 : 28; 1 Thess. 5:4; Matt. 25:6; Mal. 
4:5,6; Rey. 16: 155 and (2) some men in nearly all denominations hold 
to and proclaim this warning, ‘‘ Behold, the Bridegroom cometh.’’ Such 
a striking and predicted coincidence serves ¢o confirm our faith in the Pre- 
Mill. personal Coming. It is also one of the evidences given by the Spirit, 
and as such we accept of it. Thus we have the Spirit, in the most various 
and accommodating forms, shaping His revelations to swstaim our weak- 
ness and preserve us from forsaking ‘* the old paths’’ of belief. 


* 


PRop. 121. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 187 


1 Thus to illustrate : As long as the Jewish ‘‘ house”’ is ‘‘ desolate” there can be no 
Millennium. For this would contradict the prophets and Jesus, seeing that the restora- 
tion of that ‘‘ house’'—the removal of desolation —is inseparably linked with the return 
or Advent of Jesus the Christ. So also Isa. 25 : 8, pertaining to Millennial blessedness 
can only be verified by the Coming of Him who alone has the power to remove suffering, 
bereavement, and death. The magnificence and glory of Isa. 60, and numerous other 
predictions, can only be realized through the wonder-working power of a present, a re- 
turned Restorer. 

? An opponent, Henderson (Minor Prophets), reads Zech. 14 :5, on the authority of 
numerous mss. ; ‘* The Lord, my God, shall come and all the saints with Him,” instead of 
‘‘with Thee.’’ So Lange’s Com. loci, and others. That which is applied to the Messiah 
elsewhere is here referred to ‘‘ Jehovah, my God,” thus indicating the Divine lodged in 
the Christ. 

3’ The critical reader, observant of the different stages of the one Advent, will notice 
that Christ is personally present before the Millennium is inaugurated (necessarily so), as 
seen e.g. Rev., 14 : 1, which represents:a personal presence of Christ just as much as it 
does the personal presence of the saints symbolized by the 144,000 ; by Rey. 11 : 18, 
which includes things that pertain to the same; by Rev. 14 : 14, etc. Comp. Lange’s 
Com., Rev., with Dr. Craven’s admirable additions, Alford’s, Bengel’s Roos’, Lord’s, 
Elliott’s, Auberlen’s, Goodwin’s, etc., comments on Rey. 19. 

4 The student will here observe a contradiction in Neander. In Life of Christ, s. 283, he 
makes Jesus’s declaration before Caiaphas to be “a figurative expression,” but (s. 253) 
allows Matt. 23 : 39 to be literal, saying : ‘‘ He obviously in this last clause betokens 
his second and triumphant Advent, as Theocratic King.’’ The ‘‘ seeing” in the one 
passage is figurative and in the other literal, which is a mere arbitrary interpretation. 
The critical reader need not to be reminded that our position corresponds with the 
Jewish attitude. Dr. Gleig (His. Bible, vol. 2p. 190) incidentally remarks: ‘‘ There 
was a tradition current in Judea that the Messiah would come direct from the clouds of 
heaven.” Hence, some writers say, the Messiah was named ‘“‘ the Son of Clouds.”’ 
Such an expectation was evidently based on the prophecy of Daniel, and this indicates : 
(1) that Jesus in His address to Caiaphas indorses this view ; (2) that He places His 
Kinedom after that period as they understood it ; (3) that Daniel must have been in- 
spired when he passes over this dispensation—the First Advent—and locates the 
Coming of the Kingdom in the future, at the Sec. Advent. How writers, who oppose us, 
fiatly contradict themselves is illustrated e.g. by Barnes, on Acts 1 : 9, who says: “ It is 
remarkable that when the return of the Saviour is mentioned, it is uniformly said that 
He will return in the clouds. Verse 11, Matt. 24 : 30, and 26 : 64; Mark 13 : 26; Rev. 
1:7; Dan. 7:13,” He thus gives as proof passages which in other places, when meeting 
our view, he explains away. It is singular that the ‘‘ Haictites’ (Art. Hncy. Relig. Knowl.) 
to unite their faith with Christianity should expect the Sec. Coming of Jesus Christ as 
the Judge, quoting these words from the Koran : ‘‘O Mohammed, thou shalt see the 


Lord, who will come in the clouds” (Rycaut’s Ottoman Empire). 


5 When Dr. Hodge (Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 794) admits the following passages, Matt. 26 : 64 
and 24 : 30 ; Luke 21 : 27; 2 Thess.1: 7 and 2 : 1, to refer to a literal personal Advent, he 
affords us all the proof desired to show that the Coming of Dan. 7 is still future, and 
that the Kingdom to be introduced by the Advent is also future. To indicate how the 
ancients applied this Coming, we refer to Justin Martyr (Dial. Trypho, ch. 32), who 
represents Trypho as objecting to the applicability of the Advent of Dan. 7 to Jesus the 
Christ, because His First Advent was in humiliation, and not at all commensurate with the 
greatness and results predicted (a fact which our opponents would do well to ponder). 
Justin, instead of denying the fact, or covering it over with spiritualistic glosses, as 
moderns do, frankly meets the objection by acknowledging that the First Advent. did not 
meet the requirements of the prophecy, but claimed its ample realization at the Sec. 
Advent. 

6 The late Bh. McIlvaine (Standard of the Cross, quoted Proph. Times, Jan., 1871) employed 
at a clerical meeting the following reasons for a Pre-Mill. Advent : “1. The Sec. Advent 
is made a topic of consolation. 2. Nothing placed between the Church and Advent. 3. 
The revelation of a thousand years does not alter or modify this early expectancy. 4. 
This confirmed by general tenor of a sudden, unexpected Advent.” To the critical 


reader we add ; the fact that in the New Test. so little is said of the Mill. age and so 


much of the Sec. Advent and its imminency, implies that the Mill. follows that Advent. 
7 The Pharisees, even, in their Messianic hopes entertained the belief that He would 
come ‘‘in a sudden and unexpected manner in the midst of the people, so that He 


188 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 121. 


might be recognized without any preliminary manifestations.” The language employed 
by Jesus and the Apostles confirms this view, as is evidenced by the early Church faith. 
The student needs not the concessions of opponents (as e.g. Barnes, Rey. 1 : 7, etc.) as 
to the personality and visibility of this Coming, for the general analogy of the Word is 


sufficient. Yet he cannot help to reflect : that if the Apoc. begins with a direct reference ~ 


to a visible, personal Coming, as conceded, all other references in the same book to a 
Coming must, unless specifically asserted to the contrary, accord with the introductory 
reference. Simple unity requires this position. 

8 'To be revealed as a King, according to Covenant requires a personal Advent. Jesus was 
literally, personally a Prophet in teaching ; He was also a personal Priest, offering up a 
real sacrifice in His own person. Thus He will also personally manifest His Kingly 


office, for the same language is employed in relation to this Kingship that is used in © 


reference to His Prophetical and Priestly offices. The Kingly was not revealed at His 
First Advent, for then He came in humiliation, suffering, and death. It will be accom- 
plished ; for if two of His offices were personally, visibly exhibited, the third will also 
be, and here on earth as predicted. This accords with the prediction of the Sec. Advent 
that all acknowledge, and equally so with the Kingly manifestation in the Mill. age. A 
kingly revelation, as given in Rev. 19, is necessarily a personal one. 

® That is, instead of delivering up the Kingdom to the Father at the Sec. Advent, as 
multitudes hold, the Sec. Advent is followed by a Kingdom which is ruled over by 
Christ, and which is perpetual (see Prop. 159). 

10 Even such a writer as Dr. Chalmers (Posth. Works, vol. 3, p. 51) applies Ps. 50 : 1-6, 
to *‘ the descent of the Son of man on the Mt. of Olives, with all the accompaniments of 
a Jewish conversion, and a first resurrection, and a destruction of the assembled hosts 
of Antichrist.’”” Many able writers agree with him in thus considering it prophetic of 
the Sec. Advent. 

11 The “ times of refreshing” or reanimation “ from the presence of the Lord,’’ conjoined 
(Acts 3) with the admitted Jewish usage, must also be considered (Prop. 144), Jesus 
now remains in heaven as to person until this return, which is also in person. 

12 Moore (Com. on Zech. 14), hampered by his preconceived Whitbyan theory (as evidenced 
by his entire exposition), remarks : ‘‘ It is impossible for us to take this whole passage 
literally, for God cannot literally place His feet on the Mt. of Olives ; but how far it must 
be taken figurative we cannot tell.” It is sufficient for us, that He who is called ‘*‘ God” 
did place His feet literally on the Mt. of Olives, and that it is promised (Acts 1 : 11, 12) 


that He shall literally descend again. But Moore (Com. on Hag., Zech., and Matt.) is’ 


forced to the conclusion that ‘‘ it is evident that no events have yet occurred in history 
to which these predictions are applicable without much forcing.” This is far better 
than Henderson’s (Com. Minor Prophets) absurd position, who, over against his spirit- 
ualizing system, is compelled by the tenor of prophecy to make it literal, but violates all 
connection and order by this arbitrary application ; he, against the facts of history and the 
occurrences here presented, makes the taking of the city to occur under Titus ; and then 
refers the Coming of the Messiah, immediately connected, to a future Millennium, of 
which he says, “I cannot entertain a doubt ;’ but, with express language indicative of 
personality, he cannot find ‘‘ a future personal and Pre-Mill. Advent of the Redeemer.’’ 
Strange! but then it is very easy not to find that which you do not desire to find. 
Barnes (Com., 1 Thess. p. 58), in his eagerness to combat our views, says : ‘‘ Indeed, 
there is no evidence that He (Jesus) will return to the earth at all ;’ how then are His feet 
to stand on the Mt. of Olives, and how then are Covenant aud prophecy to be fulfilled? 
None so blind as those who are wilfully blind. 

13 The physical objection is urged by many of our opponents that it is impossible for 
** every eye to see Him’’ (Rev. 1:7), that only those who live in the locality where He 


appears can see Him, etc. But observe (1) this is to deny the fulfilment altogether, for 


if pressed to an extreme, it is as great an objection to Post-Millenarianism as to Pre- 
Millenarianism ; (2) the passage must be interpreted according to the general analogy, 
and if so, it stands in unity with Zech. 12 : 10, etc., and this is corroborated (a) by the 
fact that ‘‘ every” is not to be unduly pressed (as e.g. the Gospel has not been 
preached to ‘‘ every creature,’’ etc.) ; (b) that it is used to indicate a prominent, con- 
spicuous appearance ; (c) that direct reference is made to “‘ the tribes of the land ; (d) 
that the visibility of the King is extended to the Jews, to the nations arrayed against 
Him, and ultimately to all that come up to Jerusalem to worship, etc. This seeing is 
thus expressive of visibility and its extent to both friends and enemies. But no amount 
of reasoning can reach those who are prepared to explain this visibility—so generally 
manifested—of Rey. 6 : 16, of the Mighty One, into a visibility of barbarian hordes, the 
Goths and Vandals, or of Pagan powers. The student may observe how our opponents 


F 


Prop. 121. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 189 


try to evade this visibility. We quote Dr. Brown (Com. Matt.) on Matt. 23 : 38 :“ In what 
sense they (the Jews) shall then *‘ see Him’ may be gathered from Zech. 2 : 10-13 : Ezek 
37 : 23-28, and 39 : 28, 29, etc.” (comp. Meyer, Alford, and others ; Sepp (Life of. Christ, 
3 : 31) includes ‘‘ a definite promise of the national restoration of Israel.” 

4 The taking possession of His own inheritance as David’s Son involves His personal 
Coming. This Davidic tabernacle is His special inheritance, and the restoration of this 
now ruined, tabernacle is the grand theme of Millennial predictions. To separate the In- 
heritor from His inheritance is opposed to the entire spirit of express Covenant and 
prophecy. Compare next Prop., and see how utterly inconsistent it would be to have 
the Kingdom of David’s Son given to Him here on earth, and the covenanted Son to 
be absent in person. Yet, alas! multitudes take such a position, and have an inheritance 
without the personal presence of the Inheritor, a marriage with the bridegroom absent, 
a pier without a visible King, a Millennium without the Restorer’s presence and 
work. 

16'The student will observe that Paul adds, Rom. 11 : 26: “And shall turn away ungodli- 
ness from Jacob.”” Now the simple scriptural truth is this : this ungodliness shall not be 
turned away from Jacob (however individual Jews may believe and be saved) unfil the 
times of the Gentiles are ended, and until the period designated e.g. Zech. 12 : 10, and 
14:8, etc. This removal of ungodliness from Jacob, so that “‘ all shall be righteous,’ etc., 
is united with Millennial predictions. The conversion and restoration of the Jewish 
nation is inseparably united with the personal Advent of the Messiah (comp. Prop. 113). 

16 Indirect references, that can only be understood in the light of more extended portray- 
als, are purposely omitted. Ase.g. Ps. 19:15. The LXX. has this, ‘‘ At the appearing 
of thy glory ;’ the Vulg., Arabic, and Ethiopic, ‘*‘ When thy glory shall appear ;’’ Geddes, 
‘With the reappearance of thy countenance.” The implication of a personal presence 
in Ps, 2, ‘‘ Rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies,” etc., His presence implied in 
“ Zion,’’ as Alexander loci, interprets it ‘‘ His earthly residence, the seat of the The- 
ocracy.” The place of manifested royalty implies the same. So also Matt. 26 : 20, drink- 
ing ‘‘this fruit of the wine,” is indicative of personal presence. ‘‘ The times and 
seasons,” Acts 1 : 7, has evident reference to Daniel's (the Seventy, as Olshausen notices, 
applied the same Greek words to Dan. 2:21), and the manner in which used, with 
disciples’ views, shows a future fulfilment, ete. 

11 K.g. Barnes’s Com. Rev. loci. 'The admission is so fatal to his own expressed views of 
Ps. 2 and Rev. 19, that the reader will be pleased to notice his language: after stating 
that this promise denoted an invincible sway and the complete subjugation ofall enemies, 
he adds : ‘‘ the speaker does not intimate when this would be, but all that is said here 
would be applicable to that time when the Son of God will come to judge the world, and 
when His saints will be associated with Him in His triumphs.’’ 

18 To indicate that we do not manufacture an interpretation to suit a theory, we give a 
few illustrations : Barnes, Com. loci, says the word ‘‘ things’ is improperly supplied by 
the translators, that it ‘‘denotes beings rather than things. Things do not bow the 
‘knee,” etc., and adds: *‘‘ And things under the earth.’ Beings under the earth. The 
whole universe shall confess that He is Lord. This embraces, doubtless, those who have 
departed this life, and, perhaps, includes also fallen angels.’’ Bloomfield, Com, loci, 
says the Eng. version adopted an error of Tyndal in giving the rendering ‘‘ things” 
which ought to be “persons, i.e. beings as translated by Doddr. and Newe. And so 
the Pesch. Svr. translator evidently took it, as also Chrys., Theophl., and Theodoret.” 
The phrase ‘‘ beings under the earth,” ‘‘ is best explained by Theodoret and many eminent 
modern expositors, to denote the souls of the departed.”” Knapp, Ch. Theol., s. 92, “* the 
inhabitants of heaven, earth, and the under world should bow the knee,” etc. 

19 Fyen such a writer as Neander, so strongly inclined to make the Coming relate to the 
overthrow of the Jewish polity and nation, etc., concedes (Life of Christ, sec. 254) that it 
also refers to the Sec. Advent and the consummation of the Kingdom. So Barnes, Brown, 
and others, follow in the same track, but none of them seem to observe that if this dis- 
pensation is thus bounded, first by a Coming to destroy Jerusalem and second by a 
‘“‘ Coming to judgment” “at the last day,’’ then, seeing that the tribulation extends from 
one to the other, no place is found therein fora Millennial era, and if such a period is to 
be realized it must be after the last Advent. Hence Van Oosterzee (Lange’s Com., Luke, 
p. 326), on Luke 21 : 25-36, pertinently remarks : “ Whoever asserts that the expectation 
of a personal, visible, glorious return, which shall put a decisive end to the present condi- 
tion of things, belongs only to Jewish dreamings, which one from a Christian spiritualistic 
position may look down upon with a certain lofty disparagement, is here contradicted by 
our Lord in the mest decided manner” (comp. also Oosterzee’s excellent remarks in 
Theol. of the New Test., where he makes Matt, 24 : 29; Matt. 20 219; Luke 12 : 45, and 


190 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 121. 


21 : 24, containing ‘‘ clear indications” that our position is correct). Hence Nast (Com. 
loci) says: “Such is the force of the chronological order pointed out in vy. 29, that the 
most distinguished modern expositors, such as Steir, Lange, Ebrard, Auberlen, Alford, 
and others, find themselves compelled to adopt the interpretation of the Pre-Millenarians, 
according to which at the close of the long period of tribulation—during which Jeru- 
salem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles —Christ will appear in person on the earth 
to usher in the Millennium. Philologically, this interpretation is more natural than any 
other.” 

20 Here we find the most astonishing perversion of the order Jaid down in the Word. 
We give an illustration: Rev. Dr. Cox, Introd. to Bower’s His. Popes, has the finishing 
of the mystery after the Millennium—the last thing in his programme. Many writers 
state the same without seeing the palpable contradiction involved. 

21 No space need be given to prove the self-evident fact that the 7th trumpet precedes the 
Millennial age. The order laid down by the Spirit positively demands this, and any 
deviation from it does violence to the Word. We know only one writer (whose name 
has escaped memory) who brings one or two of the trumpets into the Mill. era, regarded 
as future. In behalf of our view, compare e.g. Dr. Craven’s note to Lange’s Com., Rey. 
10:7, and the remarks of commentators generally on ‘‘ the mystery finished.” Lange 
(loci) explains: ‘‘ the mystery of the last things, announced by the prophets; in a 
wider sense the eschatological mystery of the world’s history.” Craven unites the 
mystery of 1 Cor. 15 : 51, 52, with this expression. 

22 It has been observed by able writers (e.g. Bh. Horsley, Ps., vol. 1, p. 15) that quite a 
number of the Psalms, which speak of the Advent of Christ as a Conqueror, bear a 
remarkable resemblance to His Coming as presented in the Apoc., and in both are con- 
nected with a marriage. Our opponents generally refer this to a personal Coming at the 
First Advent ; but to which does it best correspond—to an Advent in humiliation and 
death or to an Advent, such as the Second, in glory and power, connected with a pre- 
dicted marriage? The one that portrays a triumph over enemies, a glorious reign, the 
exaltation and glory of God’s people, etc., accurately corresponds with the Pre-Mill. 
Coming and results. Hence it is that, in view of such an agreement, a multitude of 
writers regard such Psalms as prophetic of the Sec. Advent. 

*3 Thus e.g. Lange’s Com., loci, has ‘‘ when he shall a second time have introduced,” etc., 
and in notes remarks: ‘‘ The language refers to the second introduction —yet in the 
future—of the First-born into the world (Liin.). The oikoumene (world) is the inhabited 
earth on wltich the Son has already previously lived and labored.” ‘‘ Even Greg. Nyss. 
(Contra Ennom. Orat. 111, p. 541) recognized the reference of the passage to the Sec. 
Coming” (comp. entire note, and Doc. 5). The Variorum gives “ when he bringeth (lit. 
shall have brought) in again.” Comp. Alford, Linemann, DeWette, Moulton, Davidson, 
Delitzsch, ete. 

*4 The student will see by Christ’s language to the disciples, Luke 17 : 22, that a day of 
the Son of man necessarily includes His actual personal presence. 

*>'The opinion of Steir, and others, that there are two Advents in the future, one Pre- 
Millennial and the other Post-Millennial (the latter based on Rev. 20 . 11) does not—if any 


are inclined to adopt the view— conflict with our estimate, seeing that Rev. 20:11 isa — 


revelation added to all the preceding ones. But we reject the latter addition by Steir, 
as inconsistent with the nature and duration of the Kingdom, as will be explained under 
another Proposition. We only say this now: Rev. 20 :11 describes no Advent, but is 
retrospective in order to identify the One on the throne. 

*6 A number of impressions imply the same feature, viz., no intervening Millennium and 
a personal Coming, as e.g. 1 Thess. 4:15, ‘‘ we which are alive and remain unto the 
Coming of the Lord ;” John 21 ; 22, 23 ; Luke 18: 8, and 13 : 35, ete. 

*7 In Luther's Pope Confounded (quoted by Taylor, Voice of the Uhurch) is the following 
applicable utterance : ‘‘ It may be interpreted thus ; it may also be undersood thus ; it 
may also be answered thus ; it may be literally interpreted thus ; it may be mystically 
interpreted thus ; away with all these may be’s. These, my friend Catharinus, are all 
refuges of lies, mere loopholes of escape, and evidently go to confirm the truths I main- 
tain. Speak thus, ‘ This is the meaning of the passage, and it cannot be understood 
otherwise.’ You will thus keep to one simple and uniform sense of Scriptvre, as I 
always do, and always have done. This way of proceeding is to be a Divine ; the former 
is a Sophist. For you know that in every controverted subject we must abide by the 
literal sense, which is uniform throughout the Scripture.’’ To make the Coming of 
Christ something good, or something evil, everything else but what the words plainly 
signify, at the pleasure of the interpreter, is, to say the least, a dangerous procedure. 

> Other reasons incidentally appear corroborating those more clear, such as the follow- 


Prop. 121. ] _ THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. LL 


ing : (1) The allusion to false Christs is indicative of their personal coming ; now the 
speaking of His own Coming in connection with such, without any discrimination as to 
the manner of coming (i.e. as to personality), shows that a personal Coming is denoted. 
(2) In Acts1 :6 the Greek, rendered ‘‘ times and seasons,” has evidently a reference to 
the times and seasons of Daniel, for it is worthy of attention that the same Greek words 
(as Olshausen, Com. on Acts 1 : 6, noticed) are applied by the Seventy to Dan. 2 : 21. 
Now, the employment of the same words, with which the disciples were familiar, in- 
dicated the fulfilment as future, etc. (3) The Advent which introduces the Kingdom of 
the Messiah in all its glory is invariably associated with a time of war, suffering, ete. 
This is characteristic of the future Sec. Advent, as a host of passages declare, while the 
First Advent took place in a time of peace. Therefore, the Sec. Advent inaugurates the 
Millennial era. (4) Arguments of some force might be derived from The Antitypical 
Parallels, as given by others (e.g. Lieut.-Gen. Goodwyn), but as they cannot be abbre- 
viated without losing strength, a mere reference must suffice. (5) Passages imply it as 
e.g. Ps. 2,, ‘‘ Rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies,” and the mention of ‘* Zion,” 
which Alexander, Com. loci, admits, in its literal meaning, to denote ‘‘ His earthly 
residence, the seat of the Theocracy.” (6) The extensive holding of a Pre-Mill. Advent 
as evidenced in the Apocryphal books, Oracles of the Sybils, etc. (7) The declaration of 
Jesus, Matt. 26 : 20, when referring to ‘‘ this fruit of the vine” (i.e. “ wine, the fruit or 
produce of the vine’—so Barnes), He declares that He would not drink of it ‘‘ until the 
day when I drink it new with you in my Father's Kingdom.” 'To make this material wine 
merely typical of something else, does violence to the passage. A comparison of this 
passage with Luke 22 : 29-30, with the renewal of nature, with the eating of Jesus after 
His resurrection, etc., shows that humanity (however glorified) is retained, and that a 
personal Coming is related to the Kingdom. 

29 See an article by the author on this omission in the Proph. Times, vol. 8, Nos. 6 and 
7, 1870. Bengel refers to Haymo, Purvey’s Com. in Pref. of Luther, and Zeltner as 
noticing the change, etc. This remarkable omission teaches us several important 
lessons : (1) that our English version by the addition made removes one of the proofs of 
a Pre-Mill. Advent ; (2) that such an addition is utterly unauthorized, being made, as 
Bengel suggests, under the supposition to bring the phraseology of the latter part of the 
Apoc. in unison with the first part ; (8) that the added phrase is not merely expressive 
of eternal duration, etc. (as some contend), but of personal Coming (comp. Heb. 10 : 37 ; 
Matt. 11:3; Luke 7:19); (4) that the adoption of the phrase is in accord with 
Jewish usage and expectation (comp, Matt. 21:9; Luke 13 : 35; Matt. 23:39), and 
thus points to a personal Coming—hence the omission is most significant of presence ; 
(5) that the selection of the phrase,‘* Who is to come,” instead of ‘‘ Who is to be” (i.e. 
the latter more expressive of self-existence, etc.), shows that the Coming One is denoted 
in His promised Advent—and hence the omission teaches us that the Advent has taken 
place ; (6) that the omission, being given without explanation or warning of any kind, 
is indicative of the thief-like stage of the first Advent—see Props. 166, 130, 167, 171, ete. ; 
(7) that Christ having come personally to inaugurate the Mill. blessedness, the former 
use of the title is dropped so far as it relates to coming, making it then in accordance 
with existing facts, and that the omission cannot be satisfactorily explained in any other 
way ; (8) that ‘the omission of the phrase at the designated time, without explanation, 
etc., is only such as an inspired book can give ; (9) that such an omission cannot (in 
view of previous usage, Jewish usage, meaning, etc.) be reconciled with a spiritual or 
providential Coming ; (10) that the omittal of the phrase at a certain designated period 
is evidence of a distinguishing crisis having arrived, in which its usage would be con- 
tradictory to a Saviour present, its retention still making Him a Saviour to come, The 
Cod. Vaticanus, as critics inform us, had the Apoc. supplied by an inferior uncial of — 
little critical value. 

30 Under Obs. 3, and notes, we have referred to this lack of faith in a personal Sec. 
Advent. We are prepared for Strauss to boldly say, ‘‘ The Advent did not happen as 
Jesus predicted, and all that can be said is, that He was not a Divine being” (for he 
ignores the testimony on the subject) ; or for Renan, with his stabbing apologetics to 
declare : ‘‘ Pardon Jesus His expectation of an empty Apocalypse, a Coming in the clouds 
of heaven. Perhaps it was the fault of others more than his own, the Millenaries sunk 
in the lowest depths of Christianity” (for this accords with his assumed friendliness), 
but we are not preparéd for professed believers of the Word to deny this “ blessed hope’ 
as an absurdity, etc. We may not be surprised at Shenkel saying : ‘‘ It may be doubted 
whether Jesus ever made such statements about His Coming” (for this agrees with his 
rationalizing spirit); or at Matthew Arnold callingit: ‘“‘ A grand, turbid, Oriental, 
phantasmagorial Advent” (for it had no place in his spiritualistic system), but we are 


192 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 121. 


surprised that multitudes of Christians can take this Sec. Advent and transmute it into 
other things, good or bad, spiritual or temporal, earthly or heavenly, past, present, or 
future, just as it happens to suit an intended application. It is not merely Rev. Taylor 
(Old Theol. Turned Upside Down, etc.), who descries as folly a belief in a literal, personal 
Sec. Advent and resultant resurrection, but thousands in the ministry and Church are 
doing the same. Take e.g. Elihu Burritt, in the Christian at Work (Oct. 31st, 1878), and 
he makes the Sec. Advent to be realized by the resurrection of Jesus and His promised 
presence with His people since, declaring that the religious experiences of the past 
“ prove that the Sec. Coming of Christ has been an accomplished fact, from the Pentecost 
to the present hour.” This total denial of the Sec. Advent as future (without the least 
regard to the accompaniments of the same) is supported by a series of objections which 
sufficiently indicate the learned writer’s lack of knowledge respecting the foundations of 
our doctrine. For, instead of examining the Covenant and prophecies, he contents 
himself with the following : How the human and divine can appear at the same time ; 
how the human can be confined to one place and the spiritual presence be everywhere ; 
how can the whole race see Him; what central location will He select, Jerusalem, or 
Rome, or London ; what kind of a government, or what Church and State system will be 
established? Suppose that we were unable to answer these questions, what do they 
decide respecting the Sec. Advent? They leave it untouched, and one single passage 
like 2 Thess. sweeps them all aside. But just such lack of faith, just such ignoring of 
Scripture testimony, just such misleading theories, are promulgated in numerous peri- 
odicals and works, sanctioned by eminent names, Even multitudes that admit a future 
personal Sec. Advent, solely however for purposes of judgment, and not to bless the 
world with salvation, bitterly oppose this Pre-Mill. Sec. Advent. The objections of 
Brown, Barnes, Waldegrave, Hodge, Sanborn, Ralston, Tomlinson, Berg, Rice, and 
others (all giving the same oft-repeated and as oft-answered ones) are met under the 
several Propositions, The tendency of it all, however, is as Dr. Nast (West. Ch. Ad- 
vocate, July 23d, 1879) has asserted, to ‘‘ evaporate into mere figure all that the Bible says 
on a visible, personal return of Christ.’? And if a Sec. Advent in one instance (viz., of 
judgment) is allowed, then (Barnes, etc.) it must be carefully avoided to place Him on 
the earth, just as if His Coming to earth would pollute Him. The central point of ad- 
herence among them all is to get rid of the Coming in Dan. 7. We leave the champion 
opponent express his opinion: Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming, p. 2, ch. 3), opposing a 
personal visible Advent (which others of his brethren allow, but carefully apply to the 
First Advent), says of the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven : ‘‘ Who does not 
see that this has nothing to do with the Sec. personal Advent of Christ? The Coming of 
the Son of man here is not, be it observed, a coming to men et all, but a coming to God ; 
nor is it any local coming even to Him. It is simply the advancement and the recognition 
of his claim to rule the world, clothed in state forms—in the symbolic drapery of an 
august installation or inauguration.’’ If this is so, then Dr. Brown makes the Saviour 
misapply this prediction to Caiaphas (Matt. 26 : 64), where both the personality of the 
Coming and the seeing by men is affirmed. While this opponent overrides the humanity 
and consequent personality contained in the phrase, ‘‘Son of man,” others, more 
guarded, refer the whole, no matter how it fits as to order of events, to the First 
Advent. Weare satisfied to receive the Primitive Church application. 


Obs. 9. (1) An argument might be erected on the chronological proph- 
ecies which approzimatively would indicate a Pre-Mill. Advent, but they 
are purposely passed by, because they would require extended notice. (2 
So also the theory, so prevalent in the early Church, of the six thousand 
years before the Advent and Millennium, which is only susceptible of 
indirect corroboration. (3) Another class of arguments might, however, be 
advanced with advantage. Thus e.g. if the Millennium is experienced as 
predicted, then, owing to the state of universal righteousness and blessed- 
ness, much of the New Testament would be in a great degree inapplicable. 
To illustrate : how could ‘‘ the friendship of the world’’ be ‘‘ enmity against 
God’’ when allits Kingdoms do Him honor and service ; how could those who 
‘“live godly in Christ Jesus suffer persecution’? when all persecution had 
ceased ; how could the way to life be ‘‘ narrow’? and the way to destruction 
‘*broad,’’ etc., when to follow the multitude would be to follow the 


Pop Let: | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 193 


righteous, etc. ?* It appears necessary therefore, in consideration of the ex- 
traordinary changes that will then be wrought in the condition of God’s 
people, in such a dispensation of affairs, that Christ should in some special 
manner manifest Himself and bestow, in such a revolution, a revelation 
of His will adapted to the actual circumstances of the saints, etc. (Prop. 
167). That there will be a Coming and a special revelation suited to that 
state all believe, but, on reflection, what Coming is so suitable, so desir- 
able, so applicable to the intended change as the personal? (4) Besides 
this, as we have shown, in the Millennium is to be secured an infallible, 
accessible head (of which Popery is a shabby imitation) to secure perfect 
government, union, etc. ‘To secure such a needed visibly manifested 
source of knowledge and power, able to unite all nations, to give forth all 
law, to establish the true sense of Scripture beyond appeal, ete.—a want 
which the world sadly feels—the personal Advent alone gives satisfaction, 
meeting the demands. The current of prophecy teaches, that this want 
will be supplied, in the Coming of a Ruler, now absent, who shall be 
accessible to the nations—in the Advent of a King whose infallibility and 
divine attributes will secure the establishment of a government of indis- 
putable authority, etc. (Props. 200-204). (5) Again, the Old Test. Script- 
ures hold up to the eye of faith as its chief prospect, and to the heart of 
hope as its great object, a glorious Millennial period in which Christ, the 
Messiah, the promised Seed, should manifest His glory and firmly establish 
the happiness and exaltation of His people. Now, if those who for many 
centuries read these descriptions and hoped that they themselves should 
experience this blessedness, are not raised up by a Pre-Mill. Coming 
and resurrection so that they can enter into the enjoyment of this 
predicted state of glory, then indeed the wisest and best (including, as 
our opponents admit, inspired men and their disciples) have indulged a 
faith that is vain, and a hope that is delusive. But God does not deal 
thus with His creatures, when His Word contains promises which in their 
simple grammatical construction involve His honor in performance. (6) 
Again, in order to fully exhibit a Pre-Mill. Advent, a number of adjuncts 
are indispensably necessary, such asa resurrection, a judgment, a Kingdom, 
an inheriting, a new creation, etc., seeing that all these are waited with 
the Sec. Advent. How comes it then that all these are either directly 
mentioned in connection with the Pre-Mill. Coming or with the age 
itself? No one who rejects our view has been able to give an explanation 
of this remarkable coincidence. We, on the other hand, rejoice in it, as 
being a matter of design to lead inquirers into the truth. One single 
flaw (omission) here in reference to any important event united with the 
Advent, would indeed be a serious defect in our system and render it, 1n 
so far, worthy of grave suspicion. Thus e.g. if no judgment was connected 
with this Pre-Mill. Coming, if we could not consistently show from the 
Scriptures that the judgment (for instance, in Matt. 25) was just previous 
to the Millennium, then, we admit, a most serious and inseparable objec- 
tion would be raised up against us. But since not only the judgment but 
all the other eyents are distinctly Hnked with the Pre-Mill. Advent, we 
insist that all these concurrent facts, which do not occur by chance, but 


* See Woodward's Essays on Mill. in the Literalist, vol, 1, in which this thought is ably, 
and at length, presented. 


194 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 121. 


were purposely engrafted upon it, contain the evidence of so many separate 
witnesses to the truth of our doctrine. We can justly claim, that such @ 
union of events is a powerful reason why we should receive so cheering a 
belief. Especially so, when we again remind the reader how the Jews 
believed in such a Pre-Mill. Advent, how Jesus and the Apostles em- 
ployed the language of the prophets pertaining to it, and, without any 
intimation of a change in the meaning, transfer it over and apply it to 
the Sec. Advent, thus directing Jews and Gentiles to a future, glorious 
Pre-Mill. Coming. 


Hence, we regard it as simply faithless to leave these plain Scriptures and stumble 
over e.g. Gal. 3:1, as if that forbade a visible appearing. Suppose we could not show 
that Jesus Christ was set before the eyes of the Galatians as crucified in the Lord’s 
Supper (“ Ye do show forth the Lord’s death till He come’’), or that it was descriptive 
of the reality and vividness of faith, or of Christ’s sufferings continued in His followers, 
this passage cannot be in opposition to the general analogy on the subject. Indeed, in 
this direction, the Yezidis (Layard’s Discoveries in the Ruins of Nineveh and Babylon), with 
all their ignorance, have more faith (in that they believe that Christ will come to govern 
the world) than many cultured Christians. 


Obs. 10. The fact is, that arguments in favor of a personal Pre-Mill. 
Advent abound on all sides. That this is no empty boast, we select some 
more, in addition to those given, for the reader’s consideration. (1) If 
we are allowed to take the application of Isa. 63, the Coming from Edom, 
to Christ, as given by the early Church, by Origen, Jerome, Cyril, Euse- 
bius, Procopius, etc., by Lowth, Cocceius, Calovius, Vitringa, etc., while 
rejecting the notion held by some of its denoting the First Advent as 
utterly inconsistent, yet, accepting of the notion of personality admitted, 
by a comparison of Scripture, it will be found to sustain a Pre-Mill. 
Coming. (2) The exceeding prominency given, and frequent allusions 
made, to the Sec. Advent, which is only reconcilable with our doctrine. 
(3) The general prophetical announcements of the Pre-Mill. Coming are 
sustained by the same given without symbol in a plain grammatical sense, 
as e.g. Zech. 14. This has indeed proven to be one of the most difficult 
passages for our opponents to spiritualize. Some have candidly confessed 
that they know not what to do with it ; and if the order there laid down is 
observed, it is ¢mpossible for them to fit it into their system. (4) The 
' design in giving the transfiguration (see Prop. 153 on Transfig.). (5) 
Even Isa. 49:2, embracing (Alex. versions) the sharp sword out of 
Christ’s* mouth, is admitted by numerous commentators to refer to His 
personal Advent ; but the same thing is said of Him in Rey. 19. (6) ‘* As 
long as I am in the world, L am the light of the world,’ John 9 : 5, this 
taken in connection with the fourth verse, as Neander well states (S. 198, 
note, Life of Christ) has reference to ‘*‘ His personal, visible manifestation,” 
being ‘‘ the Sun of the world, visible upon the earth itself.’’ » Now, con- 
sidering how Christ employed the figure, can we not justly and forcibly 
employ it, when interpreting ‘‘ the Sun of righteousness’’? of Mal. 4, as 
denoting the same visible presence, especially when the context demands 
it? The early Church, and many writers, thus regarded it. (7) So if we 
were to take ancient comments on Mal. 3:1, 2, an argument could be 
formed by comparison of Scripture. For, Clement (First Epis., ch. 23) 
quotes Mal. 3:1, 2, to be fulfilled hereafter, and Augustine (City of God, 
b. 18, ch. 35) has: ‘‘ in this place, he has foretold doth the First and the 


Second Advent of Christ ; the First, to wit of which he says, ‘ And He 


4 
. 


Prop. 121. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 195 


shall come suddenly in His temple,’ etc. And of the Second Advent he 
says, ‘ Behold, He cometh, saith the Lord Almighty, and who shall abide,’ 
etc.’ (8) The entry into Jerusalem by which as many admit ‘ the 
Saviour appears to have awakened and nourished those earthly Messianic 
hopes’”’ (Olshausen, Com., vol. 2, p. 142) is only reconcilable with our view 
of this Coming and Kingdom. (9) Every dispensation in the historical de- 
velopment of Redemption is preceded by a personal manifestation of God, 
as the Adamic, Mosaic, the present; and as the Millennial differs from 
this one also, introducing a new era, and promises in glowing terms a 
special manifestation, we cannot see why it should form an exception. 
(10) If we do not divide or separate what the Mill. descriptions contain, but 
allow them to describe one period of time here on the earth as they evi- 
dently do, zen our doctrine legitimately follows. Hence, against us, by 
spiritualizing, the most arbitrary measures are taken with these predic- 
tions, locating part here and another part in heaven, and making a part 
present and a part future, etc. (11) The dominion that Adam forfeited 
was to be exercised here on the earth personally, now if the Sec. Adam 
restores that dominion in his own person, it must also be exhibited 
personally. The Mill. predictions require ¢his feature in their demands, 
so that the three aspects in which Paul represents Christ (as many writers 
have shown) meets this condition : (a) sub-angelic humiliation ; (0) heaven- 
ly exaltation ; (c) earthly dominion. (12) The last seal, Rev. 6 : 15-17, 
evidently describes a personal appearance of Christ, ‘‘ hide us from the 
face of Him that sitteth on the throne and the wrath of the Lamb,’’ ete. 
This period is made by many writers, as Woodhouse, Lord, Cunninghame, 
etc., to synchronize with latter part of Rev. 19; and the same is asserted 
by others, even by some of those who have an inchoate fulfilment on the 
year-day interpretation. We are not now concerned in its application, 
excepting that it is Pre-Millennial ; that it somehow includes the personal 
presence of Christ ; and that the same idea is used by Jesus in reference 
to His personal Advent in Luke 23 : 30. (13) A prophet like unto Moses, 
Deut. 18 : 13-19, is supposed by many to include characteristics which 
Jesus will only fully reveal at the Sec. Advent, such as Judge, etc. The 
connection, etc., requires a personal presence.’ 

1 Fausset (Com., Mal. 3) takes this view ; and that an ultimate reference to the Sec. 

Advent is intended becomes self-evident, when it is seen that the refining, punishing, 
restoring to former power and prosperity, was not realized at the First Advent, but is 
precisely what pertains to the Second. 
_ ® Faber (Diss. on Proph., ch. 3) asserts that the original of ‘‘ the last days” of Isa. 2 : 2; 
Micah 4 : 2, etc., literally and properly ought to be rendered “the end of days.’’ 
In this he is sustained by many able critics. Undoubtedly this end of days refers 
to the ending of the days of Jewish tribulation, the ending of the prophetical periods 
of Daniel, the ending of the dispensation (compare e.g. Acts 2:16, 17; Heb. 1 : 12; 
1 Pet. 1:20; 1 John 2:18), when the mystery of God shall be finished. ‘‘ The 
appearing and the Kingdom’’ are linked by the prophets with the end of these days. 
Thus the prophets unite, with the New Test., in asserting that certain days—including 
those in which we live—must pass, and then this revelation of glory will follow. A 
visibly manifested Theocracy demands, as an essential, the presence of the Ruler. 


Obs. 11. Again, we ask the reader to consider the peculiar and distinc- 
tive work that is to be accomplished in the Mill. age, and are we not 
abundantly justified in insisting upon a personal Coming which alone 
(Prop. 120) can adequately account for its performance? The resurrection 
from among the dead, the renovation of nature, the restoration of all 


196 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop., 121, 


things, the re-establishment of the-Davidic throne and Kingdom, the 
complete subversion of anti-christian domination, the exaltation to power 
and authority of the pious, the entire reversal of the moral, social, and 
political condition of the world, the binding of Satan, the utter destruc- 
tion of the enemies of God, the perfect vindication of truth and justice, 
etc.—all this, embracing the most radical and grand changes that the 
world has yet witnessed, demands the personal intervention of Him in 
whom all power is lodged. Therefore the general analogy of Scripture, as 
our line of argument clearly evinces, insists upon, and takes even for 
granted, this personal Pre-Mill Advent. 


In thus presenting our reasons for the faith that is in us—a faith precious to the Jews, 
to the Primitive Church, and to a noble lst of witnesses down to the present day—we 
can say (2 Pet. 1 : 16) with Peter: ‘‘ We have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we 
made known unto you the power and Coming of our Lord Jesus.” ‘The objections derived 
from inferences, the mistaking the general Divine Sovereignty for this special Theocratie 
Coming and Kingdom, etc., have been sufficiently noticed. All such objections are 
founded on isolated passages which are pressed beyond a legitimate meaning and the 
analogy of Scripture. On the other hand, our doctrine is part of a regularly divided 
Redemptive Plan, and finds support in a multitude of predictions and promises. It is 
singular that some persons (as Prof. Sanborn, etc.) instead of candialy weighing the 
Scripture evidence in our favor, merely present a tirade of abuse and misrepresentation 
making the Pre-Mill. Advent ‘‘ animpossibility,” “ an error,’’ “ an absurdity,” ‘‘ another 
Gospel,” and ‘‘an evil’ (comp. Lord’s scathing reply to Sanborn’s EHssay on Millenarian- 
ism, in Lit. and Theol. Journal, Jan., 1856). We are slow to believe that this is done 
intentionally, but charitably ascribe it to ignorance respecting the real foundation upon 
which our doctrine rests. Such writers, seeing the mass of Scripture on our side (and 
which they confess in its grammatical sense teaches our view) should certainly, even if 
opposing us, be more guarded in their manifestations of respect for a doctrine so strongly 
fortified, lest, peradventure, they at last be found ridiculing and decrying God’s Plan and 
mode of procedure. 

A caution is, requisite: the doctrine of the Sec. Advent to be fully and practically 
beneficial is not simply to be confined to a belief in its mode (i.e. personal) or time of 
occurrence (i.e. Pre-Millenial), but must be extended to a just apprehension of its great- 
ness, importance, and glory as a Theocratic ordering. The heart must not rest satisfied 
with a mere knowledge of the manner and time, but must receive both the grand fact as 
a realization of Covenant promise with its blessed redemptive results, and the application 
of the same to ourselves personally, i.e. our interest init, etc. It is to be feared that 
this doctrine, like all others, may be held purely speculatively, theoretically, without 
exerting a practical influence upon the life. Unless it be, as James expresses it, an ‘‘ en- 
grafied word,” exerting a sanctifying influence, urging to duty, etc., it will be of little 
benefit. 


Obs. 12. Considering the prominence and preciousness of this doctrine 
of a Pre-Mill. Advent, it is strange that men should so persistently reject 
and condemn it, notwithstanding the cautions and warnings given. ‘The 
reason for its unpopularity and bitter opposition must be found in its 
condemnatory nature, It sets aside all human systems, all worldly schemes 
of regeneration, all man-devised plans to realize the Messiah’s Kingdom 
on earth, all confidence in the resources of nature, reason, etc., declaring 
that the personal intervention of Jesus, the Christ, is requisite to bring 
about the world’s restoration to Millennial blessedness. This is humbling 
to man’s pride, to his worldliness, to his schemes of reformation, all of 
which this Advent dooms to destruction. ‘This exalting of the Christ and 
His work is condemnatory of man and his work, and hence man hates it, 
for it is a constant and jarring protest to his vain ideas of progress and 
reform, to his estimate of the Church’s and world’s actual mission and 
condition. 


PROP. 121. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 197 


Hence, largely follow the resorts of opponents to rid themselves of the doctrine. To 
make the Coming to be Titus and his army at the destruction of Jerusalem is a palpable 
violation of the order laid down (e.g. Matt. 24; Mark 13; Luke 21, and 2 Thess. 2). 
To make the Advent to be providential movements, a constant exertion of the Divine 
sovereignty, is not only to ignore its special covenanted relationship, but, if logically 
carried out, leads to a denial of a future Second Advent of a personal nature (instances 
of which we have already quoted). ‘To interpret it as manifested in the progress of the 
Church is to overlook that it is described as something separate and distinct from the 
Church, in e.g. the acts and results ascribed to it being different from those attributed 
to the Church ; the Church also being exhorted to look and watch for it as something 
outside of it, etc. To apply it to the Coming of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost 
is to forget that the Holy Ghost is ‘‘ another Comforter” (John 14 : 16, and 16 : 7, 26) 
distinguished from Jesus (Luke 1 : 35 ; Matt. 3 : 16), who does not supersede that which 
is specifically ascribed to Jesus at His Coming. But men, to carry out their theories 
will, in some way or other, apply this Coming, so as to avoid this future Pre-Mill. 
Advent. Thus e.g. Rev. Hequembourg (Plan of Creation) denies it, and makes it either 
past (as in the destruction of Jerusalem), or past and present (as in ‘‘ an advent of His 
Word and promises, or a regeneration of the world by the Gospel”). He coolly informs 
us ‘‘ that the Coming of Christ was not intended to be literal.’’ ‘‘ The Saviour can never 
be expected, therefore, to come in a personal manner. His Second Coming has, at least, 
as regards the beginning or inauguration of the event, been accomplished, and no other 
is predicted in the Scriptures.” He has even the assurance (against the overwhelming 
testimony to the contrary) to tell us that ‘* by universal agreement everything points to 
the destruction of Jerusalem as the time when He came, if He came at ail. And He 
actually came then according to the intention of his prediction, or else the reconciliation 
of the Scriptures with one another is impossible, and the words of the Redeemer of 
mankind must be classed with the idle tales of weak and deluded humanity.” That is: 
admit a still future personal Sec. Advent, and it is an idle tale of deluded humanity, 
because men like Hequembourg conceive it to be an impossibility! Lord, in a review 
of’ Hequembourg’s work, correctly shows his theory of the fall, etc., necessitates the 
removal of our doctrine, in order to save his system from contradictions, etc. The 
Spiritualists (New Test, as corrected by the Spirits) blasphemously declare in the name of 
Jesus: “I, Jesus, appeared in spirit in 1861, and do say and declare unto the worlc, 
that the new era or dispensation has commenced, called the Coming of Christ. It 
commenced about the year 1847, and, as represented and spoken of by the prophet 
Daniel and others, by my coming as a cloud in the heavens, with tens of thousands of 
angels, to overshadow the earth with my glory” (quoted by McDonald, On Spiritualism, 
p. 27). Alas! what perversions men seek out. The Bible statements are, however, so 
strong that now and then they cause a retractation of previous denials. Thus e.g. 
Rev. Adams (Relig. World, vol. 3, p. 396, foot-note) says, that Dr. Priestly at one time 
denied the personal reign of Christ on earth, but at a later period advocated it ; and for 
proof refers to his Sermon preached on the General Fast, Feb. 28th, 1794, and to his 
Farewell Sermon preached at Hackney before his removal to America. 


Obs. 18. This Sec. Advent will be the greatest and grandest event that 
the world has ever yet witnessed. Great and glorious as was the First 
Advent—unspeakably precious and indispensably necessary unto Salvation 
—yet it was a Coming in humiliation and ending in death, with a glimpse 
at exaltation, but this is a Coming in overwhelming power, splendor, 
majesty, and glory—a Coming in triumph and like the mighty Theocratic 
King. 'To this Coming the Scriptures especially turns the eye of faith and 
speaks of it in the most lofty and exultant strain ; and we may rest 
assured that what God ¢hus describes, and to which He directs the hope of 
prophets, Apostles, and believers, must be tnconceivably magnificent. It 
is an honor to aid in upholding and directing attention to it. 


In the pages of history we read of the grand receptions of great men, of conquering 
heroes. The ringing of bells, the thundering of cannon, illuminations, fireworks, music, 
congratulatory addresses, joyful assemblages, shouts of welcome, all figure largely in 
these descriptions. This, of course, is the strongest evidence of the personal presence 
(as well as appreciation) of the one receiving such testimonials. Now, the Spirit 


198 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [| PROP. igi 


foreseeing the hearty repentance and conversion of the Jews at this Advent of Jesus, 
portrays to us His public reception by the nation (e.g. Micah 2:13; Zeph. 3:15; Zech. 
2:10-13, ete.). Jesus Himself predicted His future triumphal entry in Matt. 23 : 39, 
expressive of His recognized personality and the glory of that Coming. Jesus, when He 
wept over Jerusalem and lamented the sad fate of the nation, grasped with faith the 
glorious future, the joy set before Him, when the nation, recognizing Him as the Mes- 
siah, should say to Him personally (for they shall see Him whom they pierced), ‘‘ Blessed 
is He that cometh in the name of the Lord.’’ What Jesus thus beheld, we would also joy- 
fully believe ; yea, more, we desire, through God's abounding grace, as one of the 
magnificent retinue of the great King, to witness this glorious reception of a nation and 
its King, and to hear the glad hosannas bursting from a nation’s heart, whose sin is 
pardoned and whose favor is now evermore insured. 


Obs. 14. The early Christians, as numerous writers assert, had as their 
watchword the expressive ‘‘ Maranatha,’’ or ‘‘ The Lord Cometh.’’ This 
word ‘‘ Maranatha’’ was used by the Jews (comp. Macknight, Hncy. Relig. 
Knowl., etc.) expressive for ‘‘ our Lord comes’’ (Lange, 1 Cor. loci), and is 
appropriately applied by Paul (1 Cor. 16 : 22) to the Sec. Advent of Jesus, 
thus according with the ‘‘ Coming One” of Matt. 11:3; Luke 17:19, 
20; John 6 : 14, and 11 : 27; Jude 14, and in Revelation. The usage (see 
Props. 74 and 75) and belief based thereupon forbid the notion of an in- 
tervening Millennium. Considering the Scriptural testimony for our faith 
already given (and much to be presented in following Propositions), and the 
exceeding preciousness of this Coming, well may we conclude this Prop. by 
urging the reader to have impressed upon mind and heart the pregnant 
word ‘* Maranatha’? (comp. Brookes’s Maranatha, pp. %-11). 


PROP. 122. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 199 


Proposition 122. As Son of Man, David's Son, Jesus inherits 
Dwvid’s throne and Kingdom, and also the land of Palestine. 


This has been already proven under the Propositions pertaining 
to the covenant (49, 50, 51, 52, etc.), and was so understood by the 
Jews and the early Christians.’ Leaving the proof already assigned, 
directly derived from the covenant, attention is now called to the 
manner in which this inheritance is spoken of in the Scriptures. 
(With this comp. such Props. as 117, 131, 182, 187, etc.) 


1 The views of the Jews have been presented in previous Propositions, and are con- 
firmed by the statements of able scholars, such as Lightfoot, Neander, Schaft, Knapp, 
Smith, and others, whom we have quoted. This was perpetuated in the early Christian 
Church, as we have already shown (Props. 70-76), and evidently led to the inquisition of 
Vespasian, as e.g. stated by Milman (His. Jews, vol. 3, p. 90) : “‘ The Christian Hegesip- 
pus relates that Vespasian commanded strict search to be made for all who claimed de- 
scent from the house of David, in order to cut off, if possible, all hopes of the restoration of 
the royal house, or of the Messiah, the confidence in whose speedy Coming stil] burned 
with feverish excitement in the hearts of all faithful Israelites. This barbarous inquisi- 
tion was continued in the reign of Domitian.’’ This only shows how the promises were 
associated in prevailing faith with a restoration of David’s throne and Kingdom, so much 
so that Roman emperors had their attention and jealousy directed to it, but totally failed 
to apprehend its Theocratic nature and relationship to the crucified Jesus. To give an 
idea of the more modern Jewish view, several quotations from the prayer books (Art. 
Jews, in the Galaxy, Jan., 1872) will suffice : ‘‘Oh, return with mercy to Jerusalem, Thy 
city, and reign therein as Thou hast promised to do ; rebuild it soon, during our exist- 
ence, to remain imperishable, and speedily re-establish in it the throne of David. Praised 
be Thou, O Eternal! who buildest up Jerusalem!” ‘* Fill us with rejoicing; O Eternal, 
through Elijah the prophet, Thy servant, and through the royal house of David, Thy 
anointed ; may He soon come and gladden our heart. Upon His throne let no stranger 
sit ; no others take unto themselves His glory ; for by Thy holy name hast Thou sworn 
unto Him, that His light shall never be extinguished in all eternity. Praised be Thou, 
O Eternal ! the shield of David.” 


Obs. 1. Writers by confining themselves to the Divine Sovereignty and 
overlooking the specific promises to David’s Son, have Christ now in the 
enjoyment of the promised inheritance. ‘To make this out, the language is 
spiritualized until David’s throne and Kingdom is elevated ¢o heaven and 
the land itself is converted znto the Church or heaven or the universe. 
Besides this, it is rashly asserted that for Jesus to come again and obtain 
such a Theocratic rule here on earth would be derogatory to His dignity, 
etc. Having already replied to this and showed the impropriety and dan- 
ger of our prejudging what is right and proper for Christ to perform, we 
rest content with the plain and repeated statements of the Word. And, 
moreover, it can be seen that the fulfilment of these promises will subserve 
noble purposes. The humanity of Christ, His contact with man in David’s 
line, gives Him the leverage for Redemptive purposes ; so also His contact 
through humanity with the throne and Kingdom of David gives Him the 
requisite leverage for a Theocratic rule, a divine government over the human 


200 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 122. 


race for the completion of Redemption. In looking closely at this wonder- 
ful arrangement, we find it most singularly adapted to secure the happiness 
of the creature man. In the infinity of matter, in the immensity of the 
universe, the man feels himself in almost the condition of an atom, and he 
finds only a consoling point of contact, of union, with the Infinite Archi- 
tect in the Incarnation of Christ ; so in the astounding, outgrowing laws of 
government, felt to be necessarily universal, acknowledged to be inseparable 
to order, happiness, etc., and yet in the history of the world running in 
selfishness and antagonisms through depravity, man can only find a point 
of union and needed support with the Divine in the reign of the glorified 
humanity of David’s Son. It brings God to man and man to God in the 
highest of all relations, that of religious, social, and civil law and order. 


It prevents us from indorsing views, which, presented under the honest supposition 
of honoring Christ, are antugonistic to His Theocratic position. Thus to illustrate : 
Farrar (Life of Christ, vol. 2, p. 188) says that ‘‘ the Coming of God’s Kingdom is as little 
geographical as it is chronological] (Steir, 4, 287).’’ To this misconception it is only 
necessary toreply : if not geographical, what becomes of the express covenanted land, throne, 
and Kingdom ; if not chronological, what becomes of the past history of the Theocracy, the 
overthrow and postponement, the prophetical periods, the times of the Gentiles, and the 
Sec. Advent? Farrar (p. 274) fully admits that the house remains desolate until Jesus 
comes again, saying in foot-note : ‘‘ At the Sec. Advent, Zech. 12 :10 ; Hos, 3:4, 5.’’ This 
admission is sufficient. But this reference to Farrar must not be regarded as placing him 
among those who refuse to believe that there will be ‘‘ the establishment of Christ’s King- 
dom at His Sec. Coming,”’ see e.g. vol. 2, p. 259. A writer in the Christian Union asserts 
that the Kingdom of David was not of God’s concurrence, and that He only permitted it 
as an accommodation to human weakness. Many authors proclaim the same. But that 
this is a misconception of the plain facts pertaining to incorporation and adoption, is 
seen e.g. under Props. 28, 31, etc. Dr. Gleig (His, Bible, vol. 2, p. 204) makes, in answer 
to infidel objections, all references to an actual, real occupation of the Davidic throne 
and Kingdom, figurative, thus under a spiritualizing process of covenant and prophecy 
seeking to escape the grammatical sense. And led on by his zeal, he appends the utterly 
unfounded (as a brief examination will evince) assertion : ‘‘ Besides, it is an error to 
assert that the Messiah is more frequently described ”’ (i.e. in prophecy) ‘‘ as a triumphant 
monarch than as a suffering man.’’ These illustrations will suffice. We only add that 
excellent writers in their zeal for a spiritual Kingdom overstep all bounds in their rejec- 
tion of geography and chronology, and yet these same authors when commenting e.g. on 
Dan. 2 and 7; Rev. 11 : 15, etc., have much to say of a Kingdom manifested geographi- 
cally and chronologically, thus involving themselves in palpable contradictions. Our view 
is the only one that fully explains the selection of a nation, throne and Kingdom, for 
Theocratic rule. 


Obs. 2. Having previously shown how Jesus as David’s Son is entitled to 
David’s throne and Kingdom ; how ¢he same throne and Kingdom over- 
thrown and for a long time remaining overturned is finally restored (Hzek. 
21 : 25-27 ; Hos. 3:4,5; Amos9:11; Acts 15: 16, etc.), it is only nec- 
essary to indicate how the Scriptures in their general tenor preserve the 
idea that such is the inheritance of David’s Son. This Kingdom is de- 
clared to be ‘* His inheritance’’ the Lord’s (1Sam. 10 : 11) : ‘* mine inheri- 
tance’ (2 Kings 21:14), “‘ Thine inheritance’’ (Ps. 28 : 9 etc.), and ‘‘ the 
inheritance of the Lord’’ (1 Sam. 26 : 19 and 2 Sam, 21 : 3), in view of the 
Theocratic arrangement, for, as Solomon stated in his prayer (1 Kings 
8 : 51, 53), this nation is ‘‘ Thy people and Thine inheritance,’’ ‘‘ for Thou 
didst separate them from among all the people of the earth to be Thine in- 
heritance, as Thou spakest unto Moses.’’ Hence they are called ‘‘ the 
tribes of Thine inheritance’ (Isa. 63 : 17), ‘* the mountain of Thine inheri- 
tance’? (Ex. 15 : 17), “‘a@ people of inheritance’ (Deut. 4 : 20), ** Thy peo- 


Prop. 122.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 201 


ple and Thine inheritance’ (Deut. 9 : 26, 29). Such language repeatedly 
employed must have a significant meaning, and this is only found in the 
special relationship that the Jewish nation sustains to God as their Ruler. 
But having shown that this Theocratic rule is absorbed and manifested in 
the Davidic line, and culminates in the Person of Jesus Christ, who is both 
the Son of David and the Son of God, the Scriptures speak of this inheri- 
tance belonging to Christ in this double relationship ; but especially, be- 
cause of the Covenant with Abraham and then with David, speak of it as 
pertaining to Him as David’s Son, the Son of Man, seeing that the King- 
dom is to be administered by Him because of His descent in the covenanted 
line, and only through this Humanity can the Ruler Himself be exhibited, 
etc. In addition to our previous argument showing that as David’s Son 
He inherits David’s throne and Kingdom, we add in this connection—that 
“her of all things’? (Heb 1 : 2) to whom the heathen also shall be given as 
an *‘ inheritance’ (Ps. 2:8); yea, even the kingdoms of this world (Dan. 7, 
and Rey. 11), yet He is also ‘‘ owt of Judah an inheritor of My mountains”’ 
(Isa. 65 : 9), who will “‘ return for Thy servants’ sake, the tribes of Thy in- 
heritance’’ (Isa. 63 : 17), for ‘‘ the Lord shall inherit Judah, His portion in 
the holy land and shall choose Jerusalem again’’ (Zech. 2 : 12), because ‘‘ the 
Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of His father David, and He shall 
reign over the house of Jacob forever’’ (Luke 1 : 32, 33). Men may think 
that this Heir of David’s will not care for such an inheritance, but ‘‘ the 
Lord will not cast off His people, neither will He forsake His inheritance’ 
(Ps, 94 : 14), for the time will come when this Heir whom His own people 
killed shall return again and claim His right. The reasons having been 
given under the covenant, this will be confirmed by showing in the follow- 
ing Observation that not merely the throne and Kingdom but even the ter- 
ritory, the land itself, is claimed as part of this inheritance. If the latter 
is the case, then the former is the more readily acknowledged. 


It is suggested that this subject may give a clew to the words ‘‘ out of Egypt have I 
called my son,” Matt. 2:15, which has been the matter of much dispute. One party 
alleges that the original passage could have in no sense a prophetical reference to Christ ; 
another party asserts that it was used merely by way of accommodation ; while still a 
third insists that in some way it had a reference to Christ, but exactly how it was to be 
explained they could not tell, because all the circumstances were not given, and the 
brevity necessarily obscured the interpretation. This subject, taking its connection with 
what preceded, suggests the following : Jésus was born in the promised inheritance, i.e. 
in the land, but it was proper as part of His humiliation that He should be driven out of 
it. This was done, and He was again recalled, thus being ‘‘ made like unto His brethren,” 
for His experience followed that of Israel. Hence He, with propriety, is included in the 
prophecy or in its application. 


Obs. 3. Jesus, as David’s Son and the Theocratic Ruler with whom the 
Father is united and identified, is the Heir of Palestine. If any one is 
disposed to object to what follows, on the ground that such an Heirship 
reduces Christ too much to the level of man, we remind him that this is of 
God’s own ordering and for the purpose of accomplishing the most noble de- 
signs pertaining to Redemption. Precisely the same reason might be (and 
has been) adduced against the Incarnation itself, and, therefore, we should 
be guarded in bringing forward objections based on our own ideas of the 
fitness of things. It is natural to suppose that to a believer who accepts the 
Word as written by faith, the simple reason assigned in Ps. 132 would be 
sufficient to remove all objections ; for David, after declaring God’s fixed de- 


202 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 122. 


termination confirmed by oath, ‘‘ of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy 
throne,’’ adds: ‘‘ for the Lord hath chosen Zion ; He hath desired it for His 
habitation. This is my rest forever ; here will I dwell ; for I have desired 
it.”’? ‘The Theocratic-Davidic arrangement involves the actual, real posses- 
sion of the land by the Ruler. The covenant, prophecy, and promise de- 
mand it. Let the reader notice that just so soon as this Theocratic 
arrangement is entered into, and God condescends to act in the capacity of 
earthly Ruler, ¢hen special claims are made in reference to the land occu- 
pied by His nation. ‘The land is expressly called ‘‘ His land,’’ and cannot 
be sold in perpetuity (lev. 25 : 23); ‘‘ the land shall not be sold forever : 
for the land is Mine ; for ye are strangers and sojourners with Me.’’ It 
is frequently called ‘‘ the inheritance of the Lord,’’ and by names indicative 
of its sustaining a peculiar affinity to God and His Son Jesus Christ. This 
nearness of the land, its possession, is even represented under the figure of 
marriage, that the Saviour is married or wnited to the land (Isa, 62:4). 
Having proven (Prop. 49) that the land is Christ’s, it only is requisite to 
show that His inheritance is not vitiated by the sad condition in which 
the land has lain for many centuries. ‘This is done abundantly by the 
prophets who predict its restoration to an Edenic fruitfulness, etc. It is 
amply sufficient, for the present, to say that Ged in Ley. 26 declares that 
in case of wickedness and rebellion He will make the land desolate and 
waste, even an astonishment, but that He will not ‘‘ dreak His covenant ;”’ 
for, after all the desolation, the time will come, when ‘‘ J will remember My — 
covenant with Jacob, and also My covenant with Isaac, and also My cov- 
enant with Abraham will I remember ; and I will remember the land.’’ 
This is still more distinctly asserted in the remarkable predictions in Deut. 
32, which is particularly commended to the reader’s attention. After de- 
scribing that ‘‘ the Lord’s portion is His people; Jacob is the lot of His 
inheritance,’’ that this people would rebel and that fearful, prolonged 
disaster would occur to them and the land, he informs us that God 
willreturn again for purposes of vengeance and restitution, breaking forth : 
‘* Rejoice, O ye nations with His people, for He will avenge the blood of 
Ilis servants and will render vengeance to His adversaries, and will be mer- 
ciful unto His land and to His people.’? We need not be surprised at this, 
seeing that it is a solemnly covenanted land, ‘‘ a land which the Lord thy 
God careth for (marg. read. ‘‘ seeketh’’) ; the eyes of the Lord thy God are 
always upon tt, from the beginning of the year even unto the end of the year.”’ 
This land so near and dear to God; so intimately associated with His Son 
Jesus as His representative Ruler of that land ; so united with the legal, 
royal, covenanted claims of David’s Son, is yet destined in the Divine Pur- 
pose to play the most important and glorious part in the history of this 
world. And, if we are wise, those divine intimations of God’s condescen- 
sion and intentions, will be gratefully received. This land, which is 
called by way of pre-eminence and relationship ‘‘His Sanctuary’’ (Ex. 
15 :175; Ps. 78 : 54, ete.), will finally be cleansed and become as predicted 
‘* the Sanctuary’ for the nations of the earth. This ‘‘ rest’’ of the Lord’s 
which He desires to dwell in, shall, in the age to come, gratify the desires 
and secure the blessedness of His co-heirs and co-dwellers, who will also de- 
light in it with gladness and singing. 

This line of argument might be extended by noticing the passages which speak of the 


time when (Joel 2 : 18) “ the Lord will be jealous for His land ;” when (Ezek. 36 : 34, 35, 
36, etc.) the desolate land shall * become like the Garden of Eden ;” and when (Joel 2 : 21) the 


PRopP. 122. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 203 


~ 


land shall ‘‘ be glad and rejoice ; for the Lord will do great things’ ; by referring to the pre- 
dicted dwelling again of God in the restored Jerusalem with the resultant joy and pros- 
perity ; by reference to the Davidic throne and Kingdom, as connected with the land 
restored (Prop. 49) ; by the statements respecting the place of manifested royalty (Prop. 
168); by its relation to a restoration of the Jews (Props. 111-114), a visibly manifested 
Theocracy (Prop. 117), Pre-Mill. Advent (Prop. 123), the visible reign of Jesus (Prop. 
131), etc. It is linked with a variety of things, which will be presented in detail here- 
after. Bh. Lowth’s version of Isa. 62 : 5 still more forcibly presents the idea of Christ’s 
marrying the land, i.e. being permanently united with it as husband to wife, for instead 
of ‘‘ thy sons’’ he reads ‘‘ restorer” or ‘‘ builder.’’ The bishop also remarks: ‘‘ In the 
prophets a desolate land is represented under the notion of a widow ; an inhabited land, 
under that of a married woman, who has both husband and children.’’ Oriental nations 
represent the accession of a prince to kingship, the occupancy of supreme power over a 
land, under the figure of a marriage ; so the Bible delineates the establishment of this 
Theocratic rule (comp. Prop. 169). The reader will observe that our argument now only 
refers to the inheritance that specially is covenanted to David’s Son--this is not the only 
inheritance (as we abundantly show) that belongs to Him, for this Theocratic-Davidic 
government established in this inheritance is to extend over all the earth until all nations 
and lands are embraced, as predicted, in its universal dominion. This view is opposed 
to those mystical and spiritualistic notions, found incorporated in the writings of emi- 
nent men, viz., that the future Kingdom has reference merely to state, condition, or 
character, and not to place or locality. Much that is finely portrayed in this direction, 
must be discarded as unscriptural. ‘‘ Jehovah’s Land” (Hos. 9:3), ‘“‘the glorious 
Land” (Deut. 11:41), “the Holy Land’’ (Zech. 2:12), will see and rejoice in the 
Inheritor. 


Obs. 4. The absence of the Lord as indicated by the parable of the no- 
bleman ; His concealment, as noticed by Isa. 49 : 2, during this period of 
removal, is only preparative to the final return and enforcement of His 
claims as the mighty and wrresistible Heir. Take e.g. the chapter of Isa. 
just alluded to and we have (1) this hidden position of the one called from 
the womb; (2) an allusion to His rejection at the First Advent ; (8) His 
ultimate success in the restoration of the Jews, the conversion and subjec- 
tion of the Gentiles and the glorious reign ; (4) to effect this He delivers 
the prisoners, He restores the earth, removes the desolations, in an especial 
manner blesses Zion, etc. ‘The delay of fulfilment is 20 reason for believ- 
ing that it never will be realized, because the fact of such postponement 
accords with the previously given predictions intimating it. 


The reasons for this postponement of inheriting have been given (1) as a punishment 
to the Jewish nation for its sinfulness ; (2) as a means of grace and mercy to Gentiles for 
engrafting ; (3) as a measure by which to obtain the allotted number of the elect to sus- 
tain the Kingdom, etc. Hence, a present non-fulfilment should only confirm our hope in 
a future fulfilment. Advantage is taken of this absence by impostors, as e.g. in the im- 
position of David El-Roy of Amaria, as related by Benjamin of Tudela in his Travels 
(Bohn’s Ed.), and by Major Rawlinson in Trans. of Geographical Society of London. Many 
impostors have thus arisen as can be seen in encyclopedias under Art, ‘‘False Messiah.” 
Another instance of claiming the throne of David can be seen in Robertson’s His. of 
Charles V., p. 468. These are some of the most sad exhibitions of depravity. This also 
explains the extraordinary honors paid to the princes of the captivity, who professed to 
be descendants of David (Benjamin of Tudela’s Travels, and Histories of the Jews). The 
student scarcely need be reminded of the Anabaptists of Munster, among whom John of 
Leyden (with twelve associated chiefs) was ordained to reign over the whole earth, pro- 
fessing—according to a prophet announcing it on the feast of St. John, 1534—“* to occupy 
the throne of David ’’ (Michelet’s Life of Luther, p. 234). The perversions of the divine 
teaching, the misapplications of the doctrine, the spiritualistic and typical interpreta- 
tions, will not retard the ultimate fulfilment. Jesus now sits on His Father's throne 
(distinguished from His future one, Rev. 3 : 21), and when He comes to sit on His own 
(Matt. 25 : 31), it is as the mighty covenanted Theocratic King. The angel’s announce- 
ment (Luke 1 : 32,, so confirmatory of Jewish faith in the grammatical sense of covenant 
and prophecy, will be faithfully fulfilled. The Davidic throne (Amos 9 : 11-15), allied 


204 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 122. 


with the restoration of the Jewish nation (being necessarily identified with it) to their 
own land, will be restored with the greatest splendor and glory in David’s Son (and 
James, Acts 15:16, confirms it). David will yet say, in view of his resurrection and par- 
ticipation in this restoration (Ps. 30): ‘‘ Lord, by Thy favor Thou hast made my moun- 
tain (i.e. Kingdom) to stand strong,’ and to be ‘‘ girded with gladness,” and to ‘‘ give 
thanks forever” (for the ages). 


Obs. 5. The student will see that the inheritance covenanted is not typ- 
ical of something else. ‘The mystical views that would make it a type of 
something spiritual are refuted by the literal tenor of the covenant, and 
that all the prophecies and promises reiterate that literality which is cor- 
roborated by the idea of inheriting. The Kingdom at the time of the coy- 
enant was literal ; the promise of inheriting is literal, confined as it is by 
the express terms to the literal Theocracy ; the Coming of the Heir is lit- 
eral ; the postponement is literal ; all is literal. Whatever spiritual bless- 
ings and additional glory may be added, the inheritance cannot, without 
the greatest violence, be transmuted into something else. ‘The same taber- 
nacle fallen down (Acts 15 : 16) is Christ’s inheritance, and to fulfil the 
covenant is to be rebuilt again when Jesus, David’s Son, comes again. It 
is the same Kingdom that (Props. 69, 70, and 71) the preachers of the 
Kingdom under special Messianic instruction declared as seen e.g. in 
Acts 1:6. It is (Props. 32 and 33) the same 'Theocratic-Dayvidic Kingdom 
that was removed, that is finally, after (e.g. Hos. 3 : 4) a long interval, to 
be restored. 


Those who (like Fairbairn, Typology) make Canaan a type of a heavenly inheritance, 
will also, of course, make everything relating to the inheritance (throne, Kingdom, and 
nation) typical, although positively forbidden by the specific covenant promises and by 
the predicted restitution. But our opponents differ widely among themselves in this 
typical application. Some apply it wholly to the Church as now existing ; others to the 
Church and heaven united ; others to heaven itself, where throne and inheritance are 
located. The simple fact, as the childlike faith of the early Church evidenced, is this: 
that the inheritance of David’s Son forbids all those views, from the earliest down to the 
latest (e.g. Balfour, Barbour, etc.), of an exclusive spiritual Kingdom, seeing that it is 
linked with a visible, well-defined, outward Theocracy, once established but now, owing 
to sin, withdrawn, but which the Heir is fo restore at the appointed time. The restora- 
tion of this inheritance to the rightful Heir will inaugurate one of the most terrible con- 
flicts that this earth has ever witnessed. While distinctively brought out in covenant 
and promise, it is not so paraded e.g. in Daniel, Apocalypse, etc., as to excite the prej- 
udice of Gentile kingdoms and become offensive to them. When the time comes for 
obtaining the inheritance, He will not fail in securing it. As to the high spirituality 
connected with it, compare e.g. Prop. 197. The student will observe that our line of 
argument leads us only to consider the inheritance due to Jesus as the Son of David in the 
covenanted line ; added to this must also be regarded the inheritance (if it may be thus 
designated) belonging to His divine Sonship, i.e. those things specially belonging to Him 
and exerted by Him as God. For in the consideration of this subject, both the human 
and the divine aspects must be regarded in order to preserve a completeness. 

We may again briefly refer to Acts 15 : 14-16, which our opponents attempt to wrest 
from us. (The Latin Vulgate, Dub. Transl., gives the following : ‘‘ Simeon hath related 
how God first visited to take of the Gentiles a people to His name. And to this agree the 
words of the prophets, as it is written : After these things I wilk return, and I will rebuild 
the tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, and the ruins thereof I will rebuild, and I 
will set it up’). No matter what version we take, two things are self-evident: (1) that 
after the gathering out of this people, Jesus will return again ; and (2) that David’s King- 
dom, which is purposely (as if to avoid the glosses not put upon it by human wisdom in 
its efforts at spiritualizing) identified as the one fallen, shall then be restored by this Jesus. 
And to this agree, as Simeon intimates, not merely a prophet but the prophets in gen- 
eral, as seen by our quotations from them. Hence we can well afford to pass by the far- 
fetched applications given to the passage. Thus e.g. the Compreh. Com., loci, says : ‘* But 


PROP. 122.] THE THEOOCRATIO KINGDOM. 205 


God will return and build it (David’s house, and family, and Kingdom) again, raise it out 
of its ruins ; and this was now lately fulfilled, when our Lord Jesus was raised out of that 
family, had the throne of his father, David, given him, with a promise that He should reign 
over the house of Jacob forever. And when the tabernacle of David was thus rebuilt in 
Christ, all the rest of it was, not many years after, wholly cut off, as was also the nation of 
the Jews itself, and all their genealogies lost.” Can prejudice present a more one-sided 
and contradictory exegesis! One-sided : because there is not a particle of proof that 
this throne was given to Him, or this tabernacle was rebuilt. Contradictory : because it 
implies that ‘‘ the house of Jacob” is not what the term expresses, and that this nation 
(or ‘* house of Jacob’’) is forever cut off ; and that the tabernacle is rebuilt with the 
nation left out. Again take this same Com. on Acts 1 : 6, and we have: “‘ Their expecta- 
tion of the thing itself, that Christ would restore (and perfect) the Kingdom to Israel, i.e. 
make the nation of the Jews as great and considerable as it was in the days of David, 
Solomon, Asa, and Jehoshaphat ; whereas Christ came to set up His own kingdom, and 
that a Kingdom of heaven, not to restore the kingdom to Israel, an earthly kingdom.’’ 
Then referring to the disciples as mistaken, etc., he adds: ‘‘ They thought God would 
have no Kingdom in the world unless it were restored to Israel, whereas the kingdoms of 
this world were to become His, in whom He would be glorified, whether Israel sink cr 
swim. See also how apt we are to misunderstand Scripture, and to understand that liter- 
ally which is spoken figuratively, and to expound Scripture by our schemes, whereas we 
ought to form our schemes by the Scriptures.’’ The last sentence illustrates the com- 
mentator’s own position. We would rather trust to the God-given literal sense than to 
his unproven statements ; and give our credence to the alleged ‘‘ mistaken’’ disciples 
(authorized and instructed) than to his modernized comments. Had the disciples no 
right to expect (Props. 46 and 47) this predicted grandeur (Props. 52, 68, and 114) of the 
restored (Props. 111, 112, and 113) nation? Is Christ’s ‘‘ own Kingdom” different from 


that covenanted (Prop. 49) to David’s Son? Is this Kingdom, according to prophecy and 


covenant, separated from the Jewish nation so that it makes no difference ‘‘ whether 
Israel sink or swim?’ ‘This writer evidences that he has not the slightest idea of the 
elect position of the nation or of the nature of the Kingdom ; and in this category must 
be placed many able and talented writers, who are blinded to the truth by the generally 
adopted spiritualizing system of interpretation. To such, even the significant title of 
Jesus, “King of the Jews,’’ has no special meaning ; and the acclamations (Mark 11 : 10) of 
the people, “ Blessed be the Kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of the Lord ; 
Hosanna in the Highest,” was only an exhibition of ignorance and prejudice. 


Obs. 6. The continued covenanted relationship of Jesus to the throne 
and Kingdom of David is asserted in the last revelation given, as in the 
Apoc. 3:7, ‘‘ He hath the Key of David.’’ This is indicative of the 
Messiahship, the Key (Horne’s /ntrod., vol. 2, p. 466) being symbolical of 
‘* power or authority,”’ or (so Barnes, Com. loci, with which compare Bush, 
Lowth, Alexander, etc., and the Chaldee Targum on Isa. 22 : 22) rather 
of ‘‘ regal authority,’’ ‘‘ government.’’ It is equivalent to saying that He 
is the Theocratic King to whom David’s throne and Kingdom is given. 
It is not merely ‘‘ supreme power’’ (Lange, etc.) that is meant, but such 
power and authority as pertains to the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, 1.e. 
the dignity, etc., pertaining to David now relates to David’s august Son. 
But while having this ‘‘ Key of David,’’ He does not now exert its power 
(just as He has also the keys of death and the grave), for He awaits the 
period of the Sec. Advent when this bestowed authority will be duly 
manifested. 

The primitive Church, however ‘‘ ignorant” moderns may deem it, was far more con- 
sistent in its belief than multitudes are to-day ; for it clung to the oath-bound promises 
of God given in language which—as our opponents are forced to admit, however after- 
ward changed—conveys our doctrine. Our opposers base their view on sheer inference and 
assumption. Thus Storr (Crit, Diss. on Kingdom) concludes : ‘‘ It follows, then, that the com- 
mencement of Messiah’s Kingdom, although in a certain sense it may be traced from His 


birth, yet properly is to be reckoned from His ascension into heaven. Which proves that 
a far different appearance was then given to the Kingdom of David which Jesus possessed 


206 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 122. 


after His death and return to a new life ; and that the throne of David became a far more 
exalted seat of majesty, from the time it was occupied by Jesus.’’ ‘The postponement of 
the Kingdom (Props. 58, 66, 67, 87), aside from covenant and prophecy, is a sufficient 
reply. So also a writer in the Princeton Review, Ap., 1851, p. 192, undertakes to prove 
that Jesus is “ now occupying the throne of David,” and gives us the sermon of Peter in 
Acts, and the phrase ‘‘ He that hath the key of David” in Rev. But Jesus being now 
‘* exalted,’’ and ‘‘ both Lord and the Christ’’ on the Father’s throne (preparatory), does 
not convert the Father’s throne into David’s ; and having “ the key of David ’’ does not 
prove that the authority implied by it is exercised. Indeed, the ascension of Jesus to 
heaven did not, as we have repeatedly proven, influence the inspired apostles to think 
that Jesus now occupied David's throne, for e.g. James, Acts 15 : 16, after the ascension 
and exaltation, still speaks of the tabernacle as downfallen. The proof that such writers 
allege, only gives us the qualifications and assurances that in Him the covenant promises 
will be realized. The objection urged respecting a material throne is simply childish, as 
every one knows that ‘* throne’’ is expressive of personal royal dominion. Waldegrave 
(New Test. Millenarianism) has a lecture entitled, ‘* The Kingdom of Christ, as now exist- 
ing, the true Kingdom of his father David,” i.e. the Church. Multitudes indorse it. A 
Roman Catholic writer, indorsed by high authority, presents the same, as follows. Dr. 
Rutter (Life of Christ, p. 62) comments thus on Luke 1 : 32, 33. After making the reign 
over ‘* the house of Jacob’’ to be ‘‘ over the Church of God, composed of Jews and Gen- 
tiles,” he then informs us that His Kingdom is ‘‘ only of a spiritual nature: He reigns 
over the minds of men by faith, over their hearts by charity, and lastly, He will reign 
over all mankind forever hereafter, either in a state of happiness or misery, according to 
each one’s respective merits. His throne is called ‘the throne of David’ because the 
throne of David prefigured that of the Messiah.”’ Hence (p. 69) the phrase (Luke 1 : 69) 
‘the house of His servant David’’ is made equivalent to ‘‘ His holy Catholic Church.”’ 
This theologically constructed throne of David is a great favorite, and, with claimed 
superiority, our view is ridiculed. Thus Klihu Burritt (Christian at Work, Oct. 31st, 1879), 
in a weak (its weakness demonstrated by making the Sec. Advent past) article against us, 
after referring to the Pre-Mill. reign of Christ at Jerusalem, endeavors to show off his 
(learned) wit (at the expense of the everlasting Davidic covenant) by ridiculing our doc- 
trine as follows : ‘‘ This would be like conferring a new dignity on the Queen of England 
and Empress of India by inviting her to descend from the throne and sit upon a milking- 
stool in the barnyard of an Illinois farmer !’ Our answer to such intended sarcasm will 
be found under Prop. 203. It is evident that Burritt cannot discriminate between the 
Divine Sovereignty (Props. 79 and 80) and the special covenanted Kingdom (Prop. 49) 
given to David’s Son (Props. 81 and 83). Thousands make a similar mistake. Perhaps 
one of the most extravagant theories is that of Wild (The Lost Ten Tribes) and several 
others, who make David’s throne to be ‘‘ the English throne”—so that ‘*‘ Queen Victoria 
is of David, and the English throne is David’s ;’’ a view which is supported by a bold- 
ness of credence in alleged historical facts (lacking decisive proof, as e.g. as to descent) 
that is amazing; by an ignoring of the facts that David’s throne runs in the line of 
Judah, that its perpetuity follows after a long period of downfall and ruin, that the pre- 
dictions relating to it are not met with in the history (notwithstanding the eulogies so 
liberally bestowed) of the English throne, that it cannot—according to prophecy—exist 
during these ‘‘ times of the Gentiles,” that it stands related in its restoration to a restored 
(not downtrodden) Jerusalem and restored (not scattered) nation, that its restitution has 
been postponed to the Sec. Advent, that its recovery is inseparably united to a future 
Coming Messiah, ete. Under various propositions we fully meet the objections that this 
theory presents—a view which finds its main support in applying Scripture promises to 
the present that consistently relate to the future. 

We may, by way of illustration and contrast, present a few expressions of faith. We 
have already (as e.g. John Bunyan, Prop. 78) given a variety, but the reader may appre- 
ciate some more. Brookes’s (Maranatha, p. 442), after stating that God will fulfil His 
promises made to the Patriarchs, and that ‘‘ the blood of His own Son has been poured 
out to ratify the covenant,’ then adds: ‘‘ No power, then, on earth or in hell can set it 
aside. That Son shall yet reign upon the throne of David, as announced to the Virgin 
Mary and elsewhere throughout the New Test., and if readers of the Bible would stop to 
think, instead of blindly following tradition, they would see that in no conceivable sense 
is the throne of David in our hearts, nor yet in heaven, but just where our Lord says it 
is,’ viz., in Jerusalem. Dr. Seiss (Last Times, p. 135), after referring to this dispensation 
in which ‘‘ the throne of David is yet less than a cipher,’’ and during which His inheri- 
tance ‘‘ is still trodden by the vile foot of the destroyer,’’ remarks : ‘‘ Oh, tell me not that 
this is the glorious reign of the Messiah! Tell me not that these are the scenes to 


a 


Prop. 122. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 207 


which the saints of old looked with so much joy! I will not so disgrace my Saviour or 
His Word, as to allow for a moment that this dispensation is the sublime Messianic King- 
dom. No, no, no; Christ does not yet reign in the Kingdom which He has promised, 
and for which He has taught us to pray. Isaiah and Gabriel have said that He should 
occupy the throne of His Father, David, and reign over the house of Jacob, and establish 
His government in eternal peace and righteousness ; but David’s sceptre He has never 
held, over Jacob’s house He has never ruled, and the whole world is yet full of iniquity 
and woe.” (Comp. e.g. Luther on Ps. 2, quoted by Seiss, p. 254.) Hundreds of able and 
talented pens express the same faith and hope, for which we thank God. We hold (Mil- 
ton, Par. Lost, xii. 369) that 


“hse ue en esshalezscend 
The throne hereditary, bound His reign 
With earth’s wide bounds, His glory with the heaven.’’ 


With Bh. Heber—in that sublime poem descriptive of the Sec. Advent, the enthronement 
of the saints, the restoration of the Jews, etc.—we hold that 


** On David’s throne shall David’s offspring reign, 
And the dry bones be warmed to life again.” 


Obs. 7. The time will come, when this covenanted and predicted truth, 
now so ignored and perverted, will be fully recognized by earthly King- 
-doms. And this recognition will be the real cause for the formidable array 

f the nations against the Christ at His open revelation, for they will be 
unwilling to yield to this re-establishment of the Theocratic-Davidic 
throne and Kingdom (comp. Props. 160, 161, 162, and 163). 


Obs. 8. It may be added: unless this Theocracy is restored in grandeur 
and glory, as covenanted and predicted, then God’s earthly government in 
the union of the civil and religions (Church and State) has, amid the 
Kingdoms of the earth, proven a failure (comp. Prop. 201). God, as an 
earthly King, has had rule but a brief period. Willit ever be so? No! 
God’s Word assures us that when He comes again, it is to a glorious reign. 
Once ‘‘ He came to His own land and His own people received Him not’’ 
(Campbell’s rendering of John 1: 115 so Alford, ‘‘ His own inheritance or 
possession and His own people,”’ etc., comp. Matt. 8:20 and 21 : 33), 
but when He comes again to His own land or inheritance, His own people 
will receive Him with penitence and gladness, and then the Theocracy will 
be manifested in and through Him with an exaltation and splendor 
commensurate with the predictions given. 


Some writers (as R. D. W. in Proph. Times, vol. 9, p. 21) insist upon it that: ‘‘ David 
the King’”’ and “ David the Prince’’ (Ezek. 37 : 24, 25 ; 34 : 23, 24 ; Hos.3 :5; Jer. 30 : 9) 
denotes not Jesus, the Christ, but David himself. The theory is that David is raised up 
and reigns over Israel ; that’ Jesus Jehovah reigns over the world, including, in general, 
Israel. Jerusalem being the capitol, David under the Messiah rules over the Jewish 
nation, and the twelve apostles are rulers over the twelve tribes subordinate to David and 
Jesus. Nowsuch a view might be entertained without materially affecting the Theocratic 
ordering as advocated by us ;-indeed, if requisite, it could be incorporated without detri- 
ment. (Some few declare that to make David mean Christ is “ mystical,’ as e.g. Dunn’s 
How to Study the Bible.) We, however, are not prepared to accept of the theory, whatever 
high station may be allotted to David in the Coming Kingdom, ‘The reasons that influ- 
ence us are the following : (1) The throne and Kingdom is specifically given to David’s 
Son ; (2) the same is spoken of as the Messiah’s inheritance ; (3) the covenant and 
prophecies particularize the reign of David’s Son ; (4) otherwise the promises are made 
contradictory and a unity destroyed ; (5) the Jews understood this to refer to the Mes- 
siah, us e.g. the Targum reads Hos. 3:5: ‘* They shall obey the Messiah, the Son of 
David, their King ;’’ (6) Many of our opponents apply it to the Messiah ; (7) Peter's 
argument in Acts expressly makes Jesus to sit on David’s throne ; (8) it has been cus- 
tomary to call a descendant by the name of his ancestor (as e.g. Czsar), so e.g. the Mes- 
siah is designated “ Israel ’’ (Isa. 49 : 3). 


208 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 123. 


Proposition 128. The Pre-Millennial Advent and the accom- 
panying Kingdom are united with the destruction of Anti- 
christ. 


This is a decided landmark in prophecy, and nearly every 
prophet dilates, more or less, on this feature, viz., that Antichrist 
is destroyed at the personal presence of the Christ. We, for the 
present, only direct attention to three: Paul in 2 Thess. 2, Daniel 
in ch. 7, and John in Rev. 19. The early Church and a long line 
of witnesses held that these synchronize; and we know of no 
legitimate argument adduced by our opponents to the contrary ; 
while, on the other hand, a host of admissions, favorable to their 
identity in time and destruction of the Antichrist, could readily be 
gathered. If we can give decided proof that one of these predic- 
tions relates to a personal Coming to destory the Antichrist, the 
others naturally—describing the same event and results—range 
themselves in the same order. 2 Thess. 2 is selected as a special 
subject for examination in this connection. 


Obs. 1. It is admitted by all our recent prophetical writers that Anti- 
christ shall exist previous to the Millennial age—this is so plain in the 
confederation of nations existing then, that it needs no additional proof— 
now if we can show that he is destroyed by the personal Coming of Jesus, 
we have a personal Pre-Mill. Coming. The predictions relating te the 
Millennium clearly portray the removal of the man of sin and of his 
adherents before that age ; and they reveal the impossibility of reconciling 
their presence with the realization of that age of blessedness. The true 
sense of the Scripture is contained in 2 Thess. 2, ‘‘ which’’ (as Taylor, 
Voice of the Church, p. 293, remarks) ‘‘ all Pre: Millenarians with the Hon. 
B. Storer pronounce to be ‘the unanswerable argument ;’ and of which 
they may well declare in the decisive words of Bish. M’Ilvaine, ‘ /¢ ts wholly 
unanswerable.’’’* And the reader is requested to notice, that in the 
following discussion we are not chargeable with endeavoring to make out, or 
force, a meaning ; seeing that we are accepting of that which is given to 
it by many of our opponents and a host of men rejecting our Mill. views. 
This makes the testimony more valuable and correspondingly more conclu- 
sive. 

1 The late Dr. Marsh (quoted p. 159, vol. 5, Proph. Times) gives the view of a large 
number of writers : “ As to the Coming of our Lord, I simplify it thus : There is no in- 
tervening period of a Millennium between Daniel’s Son of Man coming in glory and the 
destruction of the fourth empire. Nor, in our Lord’s prophecy of the fall of the civil 
and ecclesiastical sun, moon, and stars, and His return. Nor in the Apostle Paul’s reve- 
lation of the Man of sin (2 Thess. 2 : 1-8), and the Lord’s return to destroy him. Jrgo, 
the Millennial period succeeds, not precedes, the Lord’s return. The prophecies of the 
Old Test. proceed on this plan.’’ ‘‘ I never knew an Anti-Millenarian give a satisfactory 


Prop. 123. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 209 


answer to 2 Thess. 2:8. If the Man of sin must be destroyed before that period, the 
Lord must come before that period ; for it is of His personal, not spiritual Coming, that 
the Apostle is speaking. Spiritual, indeed, that will be also, for there will be but little 
spirituality tillthen. Judah will vex Ephraim and Ephraim envy Judah.”’ 


Obs. 2. The passage to which special attention is called reads: ‘‘ And 
then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the 
spirit of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of His Coming,”’ 
2 Thess. 2: 8.* Owing to its importance and the efforts made to give it 
an interpretation adapted to the modern Whitbyan theory, it will be best 
to examine it in detail. : 

A. Those to whom Paul wrote were looking for the personal Advent of 
Christ. ‘This appears from several considerations. 1. The Apostle dis- 
tinctly and repeatedly mentions the personal Coming. Thus in 1 Thess. 
Mee loo Ios 4216353 2383 2--Thess. 1373, 221s 3:6. 
Hence the minds of the Thessalonians were specifically directed to this 
subject. 2. This very Coming, we are told, 2 Thess. 2 : 2—the subject 
matter of Paul’s discourse—was calculated to shake and trouble them, 
deeming it past and they not saved. If a ‘spiritual’ or ‘‘ providential 
Coming’ was only intended, as some contend, it is singular that Paul 
does not explain it as such ; if it was to ‘‘ convert’’ and not ‘‘ to consume 
and destroy,’’ it is astonishing that Paul does not declare the same ; and if 
it was a providential Coming at Jerusalem (as a few assert) in which the 
Thessalonians were not personally concerned, it is strange that the Apostle 
does not mention the fact to relieve their minds. ‘The only satisfactory 
explanation which meets the condition of their trouble is, that they sup- 
posed the day of Christ had come, was inaugurated, and hence they 
expected that a personal Advent had taken place. They believed in such 
a personal Coming from Paul’s previous teachings. ‘They supposed it at 
least to be imminent, if it had not already transpired. The Apostle seeing 
that this supposition agitated their minds, etc., makes the imminency, the 
nearness of such a visible Coming as they believed in, the subject of his 
remarks. It would, in the nature of the case, be unreasonable for him to 
introduce any other Coming than the one under consideration, without a 
specific mention that they were mistaken in their ideas respecting such a 
personal Coming ; or, if another Coming was to be understood, growing 
out of the one stated, without pointing out, in some way, the distinction 
between them. 3. The reference to a personal Coming is established by 
the phraseology appended, “‘ as that the day of Christ ts at hand.’’ The 
period when the Messiah is to be personally manifested as the Judge, the 
King, etc., is often called “‘ His day,’’ etc., and was so understood both 
by the Jews and early Christians. This phrase clearly proves that the 
Apostle was writing to those who not only held to a personal Advent, but 
united the day of Judgment, the distinctive day of Christ in which His 
power and majesty was to be revealed, with that Coming. Paul’s en- 
deavoring to show that such a day of Christ (see how he used the phrase in 


* The Kevision has: ‘‘ And then shall be revealed the lawless one whom the Lord 
Jesus shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and bring to naught by the manifestation 
of His Coming (or presence).’’ Lange’s Com. loci ; ‘‘ And then shall that Wicked be 
revealed (shall be revealed that lawless one) whom the Lord (Lord Jesus) shall consume 
with the Spirit (breath) of His mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness (appearing) 
of His Coming.” 


>. 


210 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PrRop. 123. 


Acts 17:31; Rom. 2:5; 1 Cor. 3:13; 2 Cor. 1:14; 1 Corsi 
Eph. 4:30; Phil. 1 : 6, 10), of which he had told them in the First Epis. 
(1 Thess. 5:2), ‘‘ the day of the Lord so cometh as a thief in the night” was 
not so near as they apprehended, that certain great events would intervene, 
unmistakably corroborates his entire and exclusive reference in this verse 
to a personal Advent." 

B. The Apostle then designs to correct the mistake respecting the 
presence or nearness of that personal Coming in which they believed, and 
the manner in which he does this confirms the allusion to the personal 
Coming. Instead of denying such an Advent (which he could not do) he | 
enters into the question concerning the time of the very Advent whose 
expected speedy approach or supposed occurrence caused their alarm. He 
enlightens them on time and confirms their ideas of personality. He 
introduces the subject by several distinct references to the personal 
Advent, and then asserts, that it shall not come until at least a certain 
event, viz., the appearing and power of the man of sin, was first witnessed ; 
then after this it would occur as stated in the passage under consideration 
and ‘‘the day of Christ’? would be witnessed. His argument is wot that 
they were mistaken in a personal Coming, or that it would .nof at some 
time or other take place, but is directed to the ¢ime when it will be mani- 
fested. To show the latter, that it is not ‘‘ at hand’’ or ‘‘ present,’’ as 
they supposed, he introduces the predicted fact that before that visible 
Advent or day of Christ, the wicked one must arise and be exalted in 
power. It legitimately follows from the tenor of the proof given, that this 
personal Advent is not ‘‘ at hand”’ or ‘‘ present ;’’ that it will, after an 
intervening event has been fulfilled, then come to pass. Any other con- 
struction than that which makes the writer speak of the same day of 
Christ and Aivent which the Thessalonians expected, which troubled 
them, and which he stated was only to be expected after the accomplish- 
ment of the revelation of the son of perdition, is a manifest violation of 
the Apostle’s reasoning, and a gloss put on the passage.’ 

O. The Apostle’s proof of the day of Christ and hence also the personal 
Advent not being ‘‘at hand” or ‘‘ present,’’ thus fully accords with the 
analogy of Scripture. Many are the predictions and pointed allusions that 
Christ’s visible personal Advent only takes place at a time when Antichrist 
or a mighty confederation of wickedness is developed, and that He will at 
such a Coming take vengeance and utterly destroy the wicked arrayed 
against Him. All prophecy agrees in uniting the destruction of the Anti- 
christian power with a personal Advent. The simple fact that acts of 
judgment and the destruction of the ungodly are united with, in passages 
admitted to relate to the Sec. Advent (as in this same Epistle, ch. 1: 
7-10), and that the same is expressed here in this Scripture when the pur- 
pose of the Apostle was to tell the Thessalonians why ‘* the day of Christ” 
and its attendant Advent was not present or immediate, or near, firmly 
establishes the truth that no other but a@ real personal one is intended. 
The proof alleged by him thus accords with all his previous utterances on 
the subject, with the tenor of the Record, and was suited to convince those 
brethren that a delay in the Advent was inevitable, since it would require 
time, and probably a long time, for such an apostasy to develop itself into 
the giant form of wickedness predicted.’ . 

D. The Apostle, in introducing the Coming of the Lord Jesus to destroy 
this Antichrist, was undoubtedly aware of the views of the Jews on this 


Prop. 123. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 211 


subject. ‘The Jews, impelled by the prophecies, looked for a personal 
Coming of the Messiah to destroy the wicked one.* If their belief was an 
erroneous one, why is it that Paul employs the very language, calculated 
(see below) beyond any other, to express such a Jewish faith, and thus 
confirm them, should any see the Epistle, in it? The knowledge that such 
a belief was extensively current among them, if it were an unscriptural 
one, should have led him to use different words—not words which in their 
naked, -_primary meaning corroborate their opinion. This union of the 
destruction of the wicked one with words that literally import a personal 
Coming is the strongest possible indorsement of their faith.® 

H. The import of the two words rendered “ brightness of His Coming.”’ 
Epiphaneia, émdaveta, called here ‘‘ brightness,’’ and Parousia, tapovoia, 
translated ‘‘ Coming.”’ 

1. Notice how these words are used in the New Test. (a) The word 
Epiphaneia occurs six times, 1 Tim. 6:14; 2 Tim. 1:10; 2 Tim. 4:1 
and 8; Tit..2 : 13, and in this place. In one place it refers to the personal 
First Advent, and in the four remaining, as our opponents concede, to the 
personal Sec. Advent. Now, why, unless the clearest proof can be given, 
should it in the only remaining place, with the light before us, attain 
another meaning? Whoever undertakes to foist a definition at variance 
to the New Test. usage, ought to be able to give conclusive reasons for 
such a departure. (6) The word Parousia is used in the New Test. 
twenty-four times, Matt. 24 : 3, 27, 37, 39; 1 Cor. 15 : 23, and 16:17; 2 
Seemeo. 7, and 10:10; Phil. 1:26, and 2:3’; 1 Thess. 2:19, and 
Seeronvand 4:15, and.5: 23; 2 Thess. 2:1, 8,9; James5: 7, 8; 2 Pet. 
1:16, and 3: 4,12, and 1 John 2:18. In all places where applied ¢o 
persons it denotes, as all admit, a personal presence or arrival, and hence 
we have no just reason to discard that meaning in this place, especially 
since the argument of the Apostle makes the retention of the meaning thus 
given necessary." 

2. But in addition, the fact that the Apostle wnites together those two 
words, each one expressive of a personal Advent, adds weight to the inter- 
pretation we claim. As if aware of the future denial of such a personal 
Coming, and purposely to guard against it, he employs two werds unitedly, 
each one of which is singly applied to the Sec. Advent. Why select two 
such, so expressive of a real, actual presence, if he did not intend to teach 
the same? One of these words would be sufficient to sustain our argu- 
ment, both make it irresistible. Dr. Duffield (On Proph., p. 324) well 
says: ‘‘ If neither, when separately used, can be metaphorically understood 
to denote a spiritual Advent, much less can both when united. If the 
words, ‘ the shining forth or appearance of His presence,’ do not mean the 
visible personal revelation or manifestation of Himself, it is ampossible to 
employ terms that can express it. Human language is utterly incapable of 
being interpreted on any fixed and definite principles whatever, if it be not 
a literal personal manifestation and Coming.’’ Dr. Seiss (Last Times, p. 
48), after using very nearly the same language, adds: ‘‘ Hither of these 
words is held sufficient in other passages to prove a real and personal 
appearing and presence. And when both are united, as in the case before 
us, how is it possible that they should mean anything less than the literal, 
real, and personal arrival and presence of Jesus, with reference to whom 
they are used 2’? The same was noticed by earlier writers, and has been 
frequently repeated as worthy of attention.* 


212 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 123; 


3. The testimony of lexicographers.* (1) Hpiphaneia. Pasor, N. T. 
LIex., says it denotes ‘‘appearance. In one place it is applied to the 
nativity of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Tim. 1:10; in other places of the 
Scriptures for’ His glorious Coming to judgment, as 2 Thess. 2:8.” 
Stockius, Clavis, vol. 2, remarks: ‘‘ 1st, It denotes, when applied to 
genus, any appearance whatever. 2d, when applied to a species, it 
properly denotes the appearance of some corporeal and shining matter 
which bursts forth with great splendor. In a metaphorical sense, it is 
applied to the appearance of Christ: First, His gracious appearance in 
the flesh, which is called His first Coming ; second, His glorious appear- 
ance to judge the world, which will be gracious to the righteous and 
faithfpl, but terrible to the sinner and infidel, and which is called His 
Second Coming, 2 Thess. 2:8,’’ etc. Leigh, Critica Sacra, p. 161, 
writes : ‘‘ This word signifieth a bright, clear, glorious appearing, from 
which word we take our Epiphany, specially Adventus Numinis (1.e. the 
Coming of the Divinity), It is taken for the First Coming of Christ, 2 
Tim. 1:10; for His Sec. Coming, as 2 Thess. 2: 8,’’ ete. Suicer( 7hess 
Fiecles., vol. 1, p. 1202), ‘‘ after mentioning the use of the word, Ist, the 
heathen use of it in reference to the manifestation of one of their gods ; 
2d, in reference to the First Advent, proceeds: 3d, ‘ This is frequently 
applied by the Apostle to the Second Coming of Christ, which will be to 
judgment, 2 Thess.2.:8.’”? Scultetus, Lver. Hvang., Lib. 2, ch. 1, after 
noticing that the pagan writers called any appearance of the gods by this 
word, adds: ‘‘ The Apostle also applies ému@aveta—appearance—to the first 
and last Coming of Christ.’’ Bretschneider, Lew., ‘‘ émubdveia is used in the 
New Test. in the writings of Paul concerning the splendid appearing and 
future Advent in which Christ, who is now concealed from our view in 
the heavens, shall appear coming in the clouds (literally, borne on the 
clouds or wafted by the clouds) to administer judgment, 2 Thess. 2:85; 1 
Tim. 6:14; 2 Tim. 4:1,8; Titus 2:13; and concerning His appearing 
in the world, which has already taken place, viz., when He was born, 2 
Tim. 1:10; or, in other words, His first Advent.’’ Wahl, Lez., defines 
the word to be an appearing, and quotes the same passages, and expressly 
applies 2 Thess. 2:8 to Christ’s ‘‘ future glorious return.’’ Pickering, 
Jex., defines it to mean an appearance, and applies it to *‘ an unexpected 
coming and to the Advent of Christ.’’ Donnegan, Lez., gives the more 
classical use, ‘‘ appearance or apparition, particularly that of a Deity, or 
of one who comes up suddenly to offer aid or for other purposes,”’ etc. 
Liddell and Scott, Lez., *‘ the appearance, manifestation, e.g. dawn of the 
day—&pecially of the appearance of deities to aid a worshipper.’’? Green- 
field, Lex., ‘‘ brightness, splendor, 2 Thess. 2: 8, an appearance, i.e. the 
act of appearing, manifestation.’”’® (2) Parousia. Bretschneider directly 
refers the word in 2 Thess. 2 : 8 to ‘‘ the Advent of Christ from heaven to 
administer judgment.’’ So Wahl, to ‘‘ the futwre Advent of Jesus the 
Messiah, to enter gloriously upon His Kingdom.’’ So also of the others 
quoted under Epiphaneia. Pickering, ‘‘ presence, arrival, to be present ;’’ 
Donnegan, ‘‘ to be present, to arrive ;’’ Greenfield, ‘‘a coming, arrival, 
advent ;’’ Liddell & Scott, ‘‘a being present, presence of a person or thing, 
especially present for the purpose of assisting, arrival,’’ etc." 


* See Voice of the Church, pp. 315-317, where a number of these are given. Others are 
added. 


Prop. 123. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 213 


F. 'The opinions of commentators—of the class who have no sympathy 
with our views, but yet are candid enough to concede this vital point, and 
of others who express themselves independently of any theory or bias, etc. 
Barnes, Com. loci, on ch. 2:1, says, that the phrase ‘‘ by His Coming,’’ 
etc., means “‘ respecting His Coming,’’ and refers it to a personal one, the 
same specified in 1 Thess. 4, and argues that the alarm, etc., of the Thess. 
was produced by the expectation of the speedy Advent of Christ to 
judgment. He then consistently explains v. 8 to embrace a personal 
Coming in the following words: ‘‘ this (with the brightness of His 
Coming) is evidently a Hebraism, meaning His splendid or glorious 
appearing. ‘The Greek word, however, rendered ‘ brightness’ means 
merely an appearing, or appearance. So it is used, 1 Tim. 6:4; 2 Tim. 
1:10, and 4:1, 8; Tit. 2:13, in all of which places it is rendered 
appearing, and refers to the manifestation of the Saviour when He shall 
come to judge the world. ‘There is no necessary idea of splendor in the 
word, and the idea is not, as our translators would seem to convey, that 
there would be such a dazzling light, or such unsufferable brightness that 
all would be consumed before it, but that this Antichristian power would 
be destroyed by His appearing ; that is, by Himself when He would return. 
The agency in doing it would not be His brightness, but Himself. It 
would seem to follow from this that, however this enormous power of 


wickedness might be weakened by truth, the final triumph over it would 


be reserved for the Son of God Himself on His second return to our world.’’ 
This honest but fatal concession destroys at one stroke all the reasoning 
abounding in his commentaries against our doctrine.*?. Dr. Adam Clarke, 
Com., after quoting Bh. Newton, who endorses our view, says : ‘‘ the prin- 
cipal part of modern commentators follow his steps,’’ and notwithstanding 
his cautious and in some respects contradictory exposition indorses the 
same. For in his pref. to 2 Thess. he informs us that Antichrist will be 
destroyed ‘‘ by a visible and extraordinary interposition of the power of 
Christ in the government of the world,’’ and on Rev. 17:17 he more 
plainly declares: ‘‘ This deplorable state of the world is not perpetual, it 
can only continue till every word of God is fulfilled upon His enemies, and 
when this time arrives, which will be that of Christ’s Sec. Advent, then 
shall the Son of God slay that Wicked with the spirit of His mouth, and 
destroy him with the brightness of His coming.’’ Dr. Scott, Com., is 
forced to acknowledge, notwithstanding his efforts to make out a figurative 
coming, that it will on/y receive its ultimate fulfilment at the coming of 
Christ to judgment, for he writes: ‘‘ He will shortly destroy the whole 
Papal authority, and all obstinately attached to it, by the brightness of 
His Coming, to spread the Gospel through the nations, and He will final- 
ly condemn and punish with everlasting destruction all the actors in this 
delusion when He shall come to judge the world.’? Bloomfield, Gr. Test. 
Notes, speaks of it as indicative of ‘* His very presence,’’ ‘‘ His glorious 
presence,” and adds: ‘‘ Indeed the expression is often both in the Script- 
ures and classical writers used to denote Divine Majesty.’’* Matthew 
Henry, Com., says: ‘‘ The apostle assures the Thess. that the Lord would 
consume and destroy him (viz., the Antichrist) ; the consuming of him pre- 
cedes his final destruction, and that is by the spirit of His mouth, by His 


* In another place he observes : ‘‘ It is especially suitable, as here, to His final advent 
to judgment.’’ 


214 _ THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 123: 


word of command ; the pure Word of God, accompanied by the Spirit of 
God, will discover this mystery of iniquity, and make the power of Anti- 
christ to consume and waste away ; and in due time it shall be totally and 
finally destroyed, and this will be by the brightness of Christ’s coming. 
Note: the Coming of Christ to destroy the Wicked will be with peculiar 
and eminent lustre and brightness.’’ Ferguson, Com. on Hpis., ‘* He 
shall utterly destroy him, that is, utterly abolish, enervate, make void, and 
that with the brightness of His Sec. Coming, for the word rendered 
‘brightness’ is usually joined with His coming to gudgment.’’ Salmasius, 
Com., after refuting Grotius, says: ‘‘ It is not true that Paul in the limits 
of the same discourse was so wandering as to commence to speak concern- 
ing one coming of Christ and end in speaking of another,’ etc. ‘* From 
whence ém@aveia, when applied to Christ, in my opinion, is always used to 
denote the last coming of Christ.”? Schoettgen, Heb. Com., ‘‘ énipavye, 
that manner of coming which bursts brilliantly wpon the eyes of all, the 
majesty and exceeding splendor of which no one can deny.’’ Westminster 
Assemb. Annotators (Bonar’s Com. and Kingdom, p. 360), ‘‘ On 2 Thess. 
2, ‘destroy with the brightness of His Coming,’ that is, at the day of judg- 
ment, for then shall He come in flaming fire, taking vengeance,’’ etc. 
Jenks, Comp. Com., makes the total and final destruction at the Sec. Ad- 
vent. So also Lange, Bengel, Alford, Roos, Gill, Olshausen, Steir, Jones, 
Ebrard, etc. 

G. It is important to notice the opinions of the early Apostolic Fathers, 
who being acquainted with the language as a living spoken one, and who 
receiving their interpretation of a passage which would excite special at- 
tention from the hands of the apostles or their immediate disciples, may 
thus afford strong corroborative evidence. Knowing that they were all de- 
cidedly Millenarian, that they all believed that Antichrist would be de- 
stroyed by the personal Sec. Advent, we have sufficient testimony concern- 
ing their mode of interpreting 2 Thess. 2:8. Having previously given the 
authorities, it is only necessary to append a few examples of this belief. 
Thus, e.g., Barnabas (martyred about A.D. 75) says (Apost. Fath., p. 186) : 
‘* The day of the Lord is at hand, in which all things shall be destroyed to- 
gether with the Wicked one.’’ On the Creation week he adds: ‘*‘ And 
what is that He saith ‘and He rested the seventh day ;’ He meaneth this : 
that when His Son shall come and abolish the Wicked one and judge the 
ungodly, and shall change the sun, and:moon, and stars, then He shall 
gloriously rest on the seventh day,’’ alluding to the Millennial era. Ire- 
neus (Adv. Her., 8 v. c. 35) takes the same view, and declares that when 
‘* Antichrist’’ has reigned his allotted period ‘‘ then the Lord shall come 
from heaven, in the clouds with the glory of His Father, casting him and 
that obey him into a lake of fire, but bringing to the just the times of the 
Kingdom, that is, the Rest or Sabbath, the seventh day sanctified, and ful- 
filling to Abraham the promise of the inheritance.’’ Justin Martyr (Dial. 
with Trypho, referring to Micah 4 : 1, etc., see Bh. Kay’s Justin) point- 
edly unites the Second Coming of Jesus in glory with the destruction of 
‘the man of apostasy.’’” 

fl, Kvyen after the allegorizing interpretation, introduced by the Alexan- 
drian school, by which such passages as these are so readily transformed 
into various meanings, the Divines still insisted that this Scripture taught 
a personal coming to destroy Antichrist. In fact, so general was this opin- 
ion, that do¢h Millenarians and their opposers held to it. The names of 


Prop. 123. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 215 


Cyprian, Lactantius, Tertullian, Hippolytus, Cyril, Gregory Nazianzen, 
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Jerome, Hilarian, Theodoret, and a host of others, 
embracing various classes, etc., clearly teach this, referring to the phrase 
itself, adducing it as a warning, etc. Thus to illustrate : Augustine, on 2 
Thess. 2:8, wrote : ‘‘ No one doubts that the apostle said these things of 
Antichrist, and that the day of judgment, which he here calls ‘ the day of 
the Lord,’ will not come, unless he whom he calls an apostate. that is to 
say from the Lord God, shall first come.’”’ (City of God, B. 20, c. 19, B. 
18, c. 53.) ‘‘ Truly Jesus Himself shall extinguish by His presence that 
last persecution which is to be made by Antichrist,’’ quoting as confirma- 
tory Isa. 9:4; 1 Thess. 1:9. How the passage was regarded is proven, 
not only by the writings and commentaries handed down to us, but by the 
prevailing looking for of the Antichrist as stated by history ; and this con- 
tinued until some suggested, in order to avoid making professedly Christian 
Rome the seat of the Antichrist (as alleged by many, although some con- 
fined it to Jerusalem), that Pagan Rome was said Antichrist and the com- 
ing a spiritual one, etc. But few even of those dared, in the face of the 
general testimony to the contrary, to tamper with 2 Thess. 2 : 8, and ad- 
mitted that it also referred to the future day of judgment and a literal 
coming of Christ. So that of the great number who adopted anti-mille- 
narian views, nearly all, so far as we have any record, indorsed our meaning 
of the phrase, ‘‘ the brightness of His Coming.’’ It was only when the 
modern Whitbyan theory came in vogue that men were found bold enough 
to interpret the verse in such a manner as to make it consistent with that 
theory, and then insist upon such an interpretation as the true one. But 
even many of the advocates of the Whitbyan theory (as we have shown 
under this and previous propositions), unable to oppose the express words 
with any degree of candor, have honestly confessed its legitimate meaning 
without any effort to reconcile it with their system of belief. Those also 
who have been Anti-Millenarian, opposed to a Millennium in the future 
(either locating it in the past, or denying that any shall be witnessed on 
earth), freely (saving perhaps’* Grotius, Bossuet, Hammond, and a few 
others) admit the force of the passage, and locate it in the future. Dr. 
Greswell (Hxp. of Parables), a Patristic student, says: ‘‘ That Antichrist 
must come and must be destroyed by the Advent of Christ ; in this per- 
fectly agree all, whether friends or foes of the doctrine of the Millennium. 
The only distinction was that the advocates of the Millennium expected 
their Kingdom to begin and proceed after the destruction of Antichrist ; 
the opponents of the doctrine expected the same of the Kingdom of 
heaven.”’ 

I. The Popish writers, however they may apply it, ascribe it to a per- 
sonal Advent. he larger and more learned portion (See Calmet and En- 
cyclops. art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’’ and Prop. 161) refer it to a personal coming 
of Jesus at the destruction of a future Antichrist. Another party, in retal- 
iation for the application of the terms ‘‘ man of sin,”’ etc., to the Pope, 
apply the same phrase to Luther or the Reformation, but nearly all of 
these also apply it as an ultimate fulfilment to the day of judgment, when 
the Christ shall come to destroy the wicked.™ 

J. The opinions of the Reformers, although making the apostasy and the 
man of sin to be one and the same, are distinctly in our favor.. Thus to 
give a few illustrations : Luther, as is well known, making the Pope or 
the Papacy Antichrist, frequently expresses his belief that the Papacy was 


216 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 123. 


not to be destroyed by human agency or by the power of the truth, but by 
the personal Advent of the Christ. Thus e.g. ‘‘ Our Lord Jesus Christ yet 
liveth and reigneth, who, I firmly trust, will shortly come and slay with the 
spirit of His mouth, and destroy with the brightness of His Coming, that 
man of sin’’ (D’Aubigne’s His, Ref., vol. 2, p. 166). “* The apostle expresses 
this Pope’s destruction thus: ‘When the Lord shall consume,’ ete. 
The laity, therefore, shall not destroy the Pope and his Kingdom. No, he 
and his wicked rabble are not deserving of so light a punishment. ‘They 
shall be preserved wntil the coming of Christ, whose most bitter enemies 
they are and ever have been (Pope Confounded, p. 177).”’ In opposing the 
Anabaptists, one leading argument against them consisted in his constantly 
declaring that Christ’s personal coming would overthrow His enemies, eic., 
appealing to Paul and Daniel as foretelling their destruction, not by the 
hand of man, but by the Advent of Christ. (Sleidan’s Com. L. 5.) Melanch- 
thon held similar views. The sentiments of the other Reformers are 
given in Elliott’s Hore. Apoc., Voice of the Church, including Zwingle, 
Latimer, Calvin, Knox, Cranmer, etc., and require more space than is 
really necessary to show a continuous line of interpretation. They are, 
however, as pointed as the following: Beza, Notes on WN. T., ‘“‘ Thus I 
have deemed it best to translate the name émefaveia, which Paul designedly 
used in order to represent to our eyes that most brilliant splendor of Zs 
last Coming.’’ ‘‘ At length by the word of the Lord that impiety will be 
exposed, and by the Advent of Christ wholly abolished.’’ Bh. Jewell, Com. 
loci, says: ** The Lord shall come and shall make His enemies His foot- 
stool ; then shali the sun be black as sackcloth and the moon shall be like 
blood. Zhen shall Antichrist be quite overthrown,’’ etc. ‘‘ He will over- 
throw the whole power of Antichrist dy His presence and by the glory of 
Hie Comings it 

&. The opinions of eminent Divines who indorsed the Whitbyan theory. 
Having already given a number, an illustration will suffice to indicate the 
spirit: Dr. Knapp, Ch. Theol., s. 155, 5, p. 543, says: ‘‘ The Christian 


Church will hereafter be subjected to great temptation from heathen pro- - 


faneness, from false delusive doctrine, and extreme moral corruption, and 
will seem for atime to be ready to perish from these causes ; but then 
Christ will appear, and, according to His promise, triumph over this oppo- 
sition ; and then, and not till then, will the end of the world come; Christ 
will visibly appear and hold the general judgment and conduct the pious 
into the Kingdom of the blessed. This is the distinct doctrine of Paul, 2 
Thess. 2: 3-12, and is taught throughout the Apocalypse.’’ The reader 
will notice the admission made in the last sentence ; and we may well ask 
if 2 Thess. 2 synchronizes with Rev. 19, etc., how can it be fitted without 
violence into Knapp’s system?'® Leaving quotations, which might be 
given from a host of able writers, either directly Millenarian or at least re- 
jecting the idea of a conversion of the world previous to the Advent, who 
favor our interpretation, we turn, in conclusion, to the concessions made by 
two prominent opposers, viz., by Whitby himself, author of the prevailing 
Millennium theory, and by Dr. Brown, author of a work specially devoted 
to its defence. Whitby allows (Com.) that a literal coming is the most con- 
sistent interpretation of the coming in 2 Thess. 2 : 1, but makes the coming 
(in violation of connection thus admitted) in verse 8 a providential coming 
to destroy Jerusalem, and then says, in view of the use of the word in the 
First Epistle : ‘‘ lt may be thought more reasonable to refer this passage to 


mE ROP, 123. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 217 


the same (i.e. the second personal) advent.’’ Why give utterance to such 
a thought if it did not commend itself as ‘‘ more reasonable’’? Surely it is 
far ‘‘ more reasonable’’ than the interpretation which he has foisted on the 
passage to aid him in his ‘‘ new hypothesis’’—an interpretation which 
even the mass of his followers reject as utterly untenable, being only held 
by a few Universalists and some others classed among the destructive 
critics. Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com.) writes: ‘‘ There can be no doubt that 
the whole passage admits of a consistent and good explanation on the view 
of it above given—i.e. the Pre-Millenarian view. Nor is this view (i.e. of 
a literal personal coming to destroy Antichrist) confined to Pre-Millennial- 
ists. ‘Those of our elder divines who looked upon the Millennium as past 
already, and considered the destruction of Antichrist as the immediate 
precursor of the eternal state, understood this ‘ coming of the Lord’ to de- 
stroy Antichrist, of His Sec. personal coming. 'There are other opponents 
of the Millennial theory, who explain this coming to destroy the man of 
sin, of Christ’s Sec. Coming. They make ‘the apostasy,’ ‘the man of 
sin, ‘the lawless one,’ here spoken of, to embrace all the evil, apostasy, 
and opposition to Christ, which are to exist till the consummation of all 
things ; in which case the destruction of it will, of course, not be fill the 
Sec. Advent. In neither of these views, however, can ‘I concur.’’ Here we 
have the frank, manly admission that our interpretation is ‘‘ a consistent 
and good explanation,’’ and that many others, beside Millenarians, concur 
in making this coming a personal one. Dr, Brown, however, in viewing 
the ground upon which the Whitbyan theory rests, was too wise and pru- 
dent to admit our interpretation, well knowing that it would de fatal to his 
own theory (Whitbyan) ; for had he admitted that this coming, taught by 
Paul, was a personal one, then the necessary and inevitable conclusion 
would follow that no such a Millennium of holiness, happiness, security 
and blessedness as predicted, could possibly arise before it, seeing that that 
would make the apostasy and subsequent man of sin contemporaneous with 
it. Hence, while he rejects Whitby’s theory of ‘‘ the Coming”’ as inconsis- 
tent, he frames one to suit the case, viz., that Christ comes providentially 
to inflict judgments on the apostate Roman Empire, etc. But this theory 
of ‘‘ the Coming’’ is also so unreasonable, cven to many who adopt the 
Whitbyan Millennium, that they refuse to accept of it, and continue to 
hold (as Barnes, etc.) to the old view of a personal Advent." 

We hold, therefore, that 2 Thess. 2:8 teaches a personal coming of Christ 
to destroy the Antichrist (whatever the latter may be), and in support of 
such an interpretation confidently appeal to the kind of Advent the Thess. 
were anticipating ; the design the apostle had in view in writing the pas- 
sage ; the plain import of the words rendered ‘‘ brightness’’ and ‘‘ com- 
ing ;’’ the N. T’. usage of these words ; the union of two such words; the 
testimony of lexicographers, critics, commentators, divines, reformers, 
friends and foes, the early Fathers, the concessions of opponents, etc. If 
we have established our position authoritatively, then, as intimated, such an 
Advent is necessarily Pre-Millennial. For, it is utterly impossible to recon- 
cile the existence of Antichrist with the state delineated in the Millen- 
nium—a state in which all shall be subject to Christ, all shall be righteous, 
and all shall enjoy a condition of security and happiness. On, the other 
hand, we have his complete destruction and consignment to the lake de- 
scribed in Rev. 19 (with which the Prophets coincide) as immediately pre- 
ceding the Millennium, and what the Spirit has so plainly described and 


218 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 123. 


located we dare not deny and transfer. The same Spirit in both places, in 
accord with the tenor of prophecy, promises no intervening or contempo- 
raneous Millennium, but predicts a developing and overshadowing power of 
an apostasy which must be destroyed by the personal Advent of the Son of 
Man, and then, only then, shall the promises of Millennial glory be ful- 
filled.** 


1 The student will not overlook the force of ‘* The Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and by 
our gathering together unto Him ,”” which, as commentators generally show, directly refers us 
to the Coming and gathering spoken of in 1 Thess, 4:15, etc. Hence those who admit 
that the latter refers to a personal Coming and literal gathering, are forced by simple con- 
sistency to allow the same to this introductory. ‘The reader also will notice that we are 
strongly inclined to receive the expression ‘‘ is present’ instead of ‘‘is at hand,’’ as more 
expressive of the original, of the usage of the word translated, of the tenor of the con- 
text, etc. Alford’s Gr. Test. loci, Lange’s Com. Amer. Ed. loci, Olshausen’s Com., Ben- 
gel’s Gnomon, etc., indicate this feature, so that e.g. Alford remarks, after showing how 
the word is employed in other places: ‘‘ The teaching of the Apostles was, and of the 
Holy Spirit in all ages has been, that the day of the Lord is at hand. But these Thessalo- 
nians imagined it to be already come, and accordingly were deserting their pursuits in 
life and falling into other irregularities, as if the day of grace were closed.’’ <A multi- 
tude of able writers indorse this view, and it is found in various versions. We only as 
illustrative append Fausset’s (Com, loci) comment: ‘‘ is immediately imminent ; liter- 
ally, is present ; is instantly coming. Christ and His apostles always taught that the 
day of the Lord’s Coming is at hand ,; and it is not likely that Paul would imply anything 
contrary here ; what he denies is that it is immediately imminent, instant, or present, as to 
justify the neglect of every-day worldly duties. Chrysostom, and after him Alford, trans- 
lates, ‘ Js (already) present’—Cf. 2 Tim. 2 : 18,is a kindred error. But in 2 Tim. 3:1 the 
same Greek word is translated ‘ come.’ Wahl supports this view. The Greek is usually 
used of actual presence , but is quite susceptible of the translation ‘ is all but present.’ ” 
Comp. Dr. Lillie’s able comment in Amer. Ed. of Lange’s Com., who insists that usage 
requires ‘‘ has come, is present.”” So Ellicott renders it, ‘‘ is now come.’’ We only add: 
If we take the phrase ‘‘is at hand” in our version, then it really would be contradictory 
to other Scripture. For then the Coming of the Lord Jesus, which is always represented 
as a period of rejoicing, the blessed hope, and as at hand so that all are exhorted to look 
for it (and for which the Thessalonians are to wait and long for as an object of desire), is 
held up as not nigh at hand (with which compare e.g. Rom. 13 :12; Phil. 4:5; Heb. 
10 : 25; James 5:8; 1 Pet. 4 : 7, etc.), and an object of fear and dread. Now according 
to the best critics the Greek does not involve such a contradiction. Hence the most 
recent commentators adopt the idea of being present or is come, which is given by vari- 
ous versions, as the Syriac and Italian, which have “ the day of the Lord is come.”’ 

2 Brown Ch. Sec. Com., p. 456, ed. of 1879) fully admits : ‘‘I am constrained, by all the 
laws of exact interpretation, to apply the destruction here predicted to that specific 
enemy so minutely described, and ‘ the Coming of the Lord’ here announced—whether 
personal or figurative—to a Pre-millennial Coming.’’ But then he asserts that a figurative 
Coming is intended, a Coming through other agencies, viz., by that employed in, and by, 
the Church. ‘The reader will place this figurative Coming in contrast with Paul’s previ- 
ous references to the Sec. Advent. If Brown is correct, it certainly was an exceedingly 
strange method that Paul adopted to soothe the Thessalonian brethren, by informing 
them in figurative language (which Brown supposes their acquaintance with the Old Test. 
allowed them fully to grasp) that an apostasy, etc., should intervene, and that certain 
acts of Providence in and through the Church should destroy it. He overlooks a vital 
point in this discussion, viz., what kind of a Coming, the Scriptures and the primitive 
Church allied with ‘‘ the day of Christ.”’ He forgets, too, that the primitive believers, 
the nearest to the apostles, had no idea that this language was to be taken figuratively. 

’ That the reader may see for himself how our opponents contradict themselves, and the 
general analogy, a few illustrations are in place. Scott (Com. loci) makes the Papacy to 
be the Antichrist here delineated, and then comments : ‘‘ He (Jesus) will shortly destroy 
the whole Papal authority, and all obstinately attached to it ‘by the brightness of His 
Coming to spread the Gospel thfough the nations.’ ’’ Now if we only turn to Rev. 17, we 
find that the Papacy (represented, according to Protestant interpretation and applica- 
tion, by “‘ the whore’’) is not overcome by the Gospel, but by the beast and ten horns—is 
thus destroyed nol by religious but by civil powers, the enemies likewise of the Christ. A 


PRopP. 123.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 219 


bitter opponent, Ross (quoted by Dr. Craven in Evangelist, of Feb. 6th, 1879), says : “ Anti- 
christ shall not be destroyed till Christ’s Sec. Coming to judgment (2 Thess. 2 : 8), that 
Christ shall destroy him with the brightness of His Coming. But Millenaries will have 
him destroyed before the beginning of these thousand years, which is flat against Script- 
ure.’ Observe that over against Scott he acknowledges that the language demands a liter- 
al, personal Coming, but then, over against us, locates the Coming after the thousand 
years. By the latter process he has (over against a multitude of predictions and the plain 
chronological order of the Apoc. which places the Millennium after the destruction of Anti- 
christ) the Antichrist existing continuously through that blessed age. Waldegrave (Lec. 
7, New Test. Mill.) takes precisely the same position, and concedes the personality of the 
Coming. Macnight (Com. loci), while in his Pref. (Sec. 4) he gives a one-sided representa- 
tion of the passages referring to the Sec. Coming and easily disproven by a comparison 
of Scripture and the Primitive Church belief (and which we answer under other head- 
ings), yet is forced by the strength of the language to compromise his steady leaning to 
spiritual and figurative comings by saying that the passage calls for ‘‘ a visible and eatra- 
ordinary interposition of Christ.” 

4 In addition to illustrations previously given, Bh. Newton (On Proph., Diss. 22) says 
that this passage, 2 Thess. 2: 8, ‘‘is partly taken from Isa, 11:4, ‘and with the 
breath of His lips shall He slay the wicked one’ ; where the Jews put an emphasis 
upon the words ‘the wicked one,’ as appears from the Chaldee, which renders it, 
‘ He shall destroy the wicked Roman.’ ’”’ Barnes Com., Isa. 11:4, quoting from Castell 
says : ‘‘ The Chaldee Paraphrast translates it, ‘ And by the Word of His lips Heshall slay 
the wicked Armillus.’ By Armillus the Jews mean the last great enemy of their nation 
who should come after (or with) Gog and Magog and wage furious wars, and who should 
slay the Messiah Ben Ephraim, whom the Jews expect, but who would himself be slain 
by the rod of the Messiah Ben David or the Son of David.’’ Here we see a mixture of 
Rabinnical conjecture with some truth. The ancient Jews, the Jews at the First Advent, 
and modern Jews of the orthodox (not rationalistic or progressive who are much divided) 
party, all unite in believing in the destruction of an Anti-Messiah or great enemy by the 
personal Coming of the Messiah. They say, and truthfully, that the texts they rely upon 
do not admit of any other interpretation. It is a sad reflection, that while they still, 
under such long-endured tribulation, hold fast to the literal Word of God respecting the 
Sec. Advent as presented in the Old Test., they so persistently close their eyes to the 
plain literal predictions referring to the First Advent of Christ ; and that for the sake of 
consistency in interpretation, some of them introduce two future Messiahs as above. 
Alas ! for such blindness. 

5 Hence some writers, destructive in tendency, reject this entire prophecy as merely an 
expression of Paul’s private opinion, on the ground that it is of ‘‘ Jewish origin,’’ and 
that it favors too much ‘‘ Jewish expectations.” Such a procedure, of course, denies the 
Jewish basis in the Old Test., upon which the whole is founded. ‘The prophets fare no 
better than Paul. 

6 Dr. Bonar (C. and Kingdom, p. 343) justly remarks : ‘‘ Not-one of these others is so 
explicit, yet no one thinks of explaining them away. Why, then, fasten on the strongest 
and insist on spiritualizing it? If the strongest can be explained away so as not to denote 
the Sec. Coming, much more may the others, and then we shall have no passages to 
prove the Advent atall! If the Anti-Millenarian be at liberty to spiritualize the most dis- 
tinct, why may not the Straussian be allowed to rationalize and mythologize the less dis- 
tinct?” Alsosee Taylor’s Voice of the Church, p. 314, Brook’s El. Proph. Inter., p. 129, etc. 

7 Able writers assert that in every instance, excepting perhaps one passage, it means a 
literal Coming. Even this supposed exception is also claimed ; it is found in 2 Pet. 
3:12: ‘ Looking for and hasting unto the Coming of the day of the Lord.” But of this 
it may be said : (1) that it denotes, in view of the invariable usage of the word, the actual 
presence of the day or time spoken of ; (2) that (so Brooks, El. Proph. Inter.) ‘‘ it is evi- 
dently susceptible, agreeable to the rules of Greek Syntax of another reading, by under- 
standing tnc juevac to be in the genitive, as denoting time, by a preposition understood 
(see Parkhurst), and not as governed by rapovoiav. It will then be: ‘‘ Looking for and 
hasting to the presence (of Christ) in the day,’’ etc. Dr. Duffield, On Proph., p. 323, 
says : ‘‘ In every instance where it occurs, which is twenty-four times, it is used literally 
and not metaphorically or analogically.’”’ A multitude of quotations from writers of 
ability in various denominations, of like tenor, could be quoted, but these specimens are 
sufficient. 

8 Olshausen, Com., explains ‘‘ the apparent tautology by referring epiphaneia to the 
subjective, parousia to the objective aspect, i.e. the latter expression to the actuality of 


220 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 123. 


Christ’s appearing, the former one to the contemplation of it on the part of man, the 
consciousness of his presence,” impressed by His splendor, etc. So Lange, Com., that it 
expresses ‘‘ the visibleness—appearing—of His Coming.” Compare Alford and Ellicott. 

® The student can readily add to these the same definitions given by many others. 
Cramer, in Bib. Theol. Lexicon, says : ‘‘ In the New Test. of the appearing or manifesta- 
tion of Jesus Christ on earth, 2 Tim. 1:10. In other New Test. texts of Christ’s See. 
Advent, 2 Thess. 2:8;1 Tim. 6:14; 2 Tim. 4:18; Tit. 2:13.” Comp. Parkhurst, 
Taylor, Robison, etc. 

10 Taylor, to whose investigations in this direction we are indebted, Voice of the Church, 
p. 317, adds: ‘‘ We might farther quote Scapulex, Schleusner, and in fact every Greek 
lexicographer under heaven in support of this signification.” We have ourselves 
noticed many such definitions scattered in ancient and modern Mill. writers, commenta- 
ries, etc., and never yet found the slightest variation so far as the New Test. meaning is 
concerned. 

11 For it makes this personal Coming necessarily a Pre-Mill. one, seeing that (as he 
admits also in other places) Antichrist is destroyed before that age (in which Satan is 
bound, etc.) is usheredin. Itis amazing that he did not see the fallacy and contradiction 
in his reasoning ; others, more shrewd and less candid, perceiving the inevitable conclu- 
sion that must follow if such a concession is made, seek out some other interpretation to 
avoid it. Others make the same concession, but fail to inform us how so fatal an ogni 
sion is to be reconciled with their Whitbyan theory. 

12 The belief of a personal Advent of the Messiah to destroy a wicked contedeniiaa and 
inaugurate his Kingdom, was universally prevalent in the first centuries (see also how in- 
corporated in Sibylline Brooks, quoted by Stuart Apoc. vol. 2, p. 438, etc.). Now the usage 
of language pre-eminentiy adapted to confirm an existing opinion, can only be explained 
by believing that the view is a correct, scriptural one. 

13 We say “ perhaps,” because not having their works at hand to consult, they may, as 
others have done adopting similar views, likewise locate the passage in the future, and 
admit the force of its language. For looking at the Voice of the Church, Taylor quotes Dr. 
Hammond as follows: ‘‘ Dr. Hammond died 1660. An Anti-Millenarian. Though he 
wrests the text from its proper application, yet he renders 2 Thess. 2 : 8 ‘ By the breath 
of His own mouth, and by the appearing of His own presence.’ ’’ The views of Hammond, 
Grotius, Wetstein, etc., in reference to the man of sin are shown to be erroneous, e.g. by 
Bh. Newton, Diss. on Prophecies, vol. 2, pp. 393-402, Olshausen, Com. Thess., and others, 
so that very few, if any, at the present day indorse them. The application of the pas- 
sage to the Romans, or to Nero, or to the Jews, or to the early heretical tendencies of 
the church, in order to force out of it a providential or spiritual Coming, is so far-fetched 
that it needs no refutation. 

14 The student need only be reminded that some of the Popish writers also referred this 
passage to Rome and to a personal Coming of Christ (Prop. 161). It was extremely diffi- 
cult to get rid of the decisive statements of the fathers, as e.g. Cyril, who said: ‘* He 
(Antichrist) will be annihilated by the Second glorious Coming from heaven of the truly 
begotten Son of God, who is our Lord and Saviour, Jesus the true Messiah ; who, having 
destroyed Antichrist by the spirit of His mouth, will deliver him to the fire Gehenna,’’ 
(Comp. The Annals of Roger De Hoveden, vol. 2, pp. 177-187. Von Dollinger’s Fables, 
etc.) To indicate how opposers of the Pope applied it, we give a specimen. The Council 
of Gap, 1603, in Art. 31, expressly affirms that the Bishop of Rome is “‘ the Antichrist— 
the Son of Perdition—pr edicted by the holy Scriptures,’’ and applies the passage as fol- 
lows : ‘‘ And we hope and wait, that the Lord, according to His promise, and as He hath 
already begun, will confound him by the spirit of His mouth and destroy him by the 
brightness « of His Coming.”’ 

18 In reference to the once general opinion that 2 Thess. 2 : 8 denoted a literal Advent, 
Dr. Craven in his reply to Prof. Briggs (N. Y. Evangelist, Feb. 13th, 1879) corroborates by 
decided proof his statement that the men of the Westminster Assembly held ‘‘ that the 
Antichrist and the beast of Rev. 19 are identical ; that the Parousia of 2 Thess. 2 and 
that of Rev. 19 : 11-21 are the same; and that this one Parousia is for the last judg- 
ment.” (Hence, no Mill. age for the Church on earth after the destruction of Antichrist, 
as Pre-Millenarians belonging to that body held.) He proves this conclusively, e.g. by 
quoting Baillie (Dissausive, ch. 11) who wrote against Pre-Millenarians thus; ‘‘ The Mil- 
lenaries lay it for a ground that Antichrist shall be destroyed and fully abolished before 
their thousand years begin ; but Scripture makes Antichrist to continue to the Day of 
Judgment, 2 Thess. 2:8. The brightness of Christ's Coming is not before the last day 
as before is proved. See also Rev, 19 ; 20, ‘ The Beast was taken and with him the false 


PRopP. 123. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. pa 


Prophet ; these both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with brimstone.’ Com- 
pare it with v. 7: ‘ Let us be glad and rejoice, for the marriage of the Lamb is come.’ 
ada is cast alive into the lake at the marriage of the Lamb.” Such concessions 
abound. 

16 This extract contains in itself a complete refutation of hissection onthe Millennium. 
The antidote to .his phrase ‘‘ general judgment,” by which he means “ the last,’’ is also 
found in this sec., thus : “‘ Hence the eccl. name of this transaction, judicium extremum or 
novissimum, the last judgment because it will take place at the end of the world that now 
is. The term, the last judgment, is not used however in the New Test.” etc. Weadd: 
neither is the phrase ‘‘ general judgment,” which is solely of human origin. 

" Tt is unnecessary to attempt a refutation of Whitby’s and Brown’s providential Com- 
ing, as this is already done under the proposition. The student will see, from the strong 
reasons alleged against it drawn from the subject matter discussed by Paul, that this is 
an interpretation sought out to prop up a preconceived theory. No one but a follower 
of Whitby’s ‘* hypothesis,’ or a destructive critic, can deduce such a Coming from the 
passage. The fact is, if this Scripture does not refer to a personal Coming, then we have 
none in the Bible descriptive of the same, for there is none stronger than this one against 
a mere spiritual or providential Coming. Such perversions of interpretation, as those 
alluded to, are gladly seized by many who deny that we are to expect a future personal 
Advent, affirming that all such references are to be understood as spiritual or providen- 
tial. The system is already bearing its logical fruit—not, however, as these writers in- 
tended, but through a consistent application of their mode of interpretation. 

18 Hereafter the order of this passage will be introduced and enforced by a comparison 
of Scripture. Now it may be said that this Antichrist destroyed by the personal Advent 
of Jesus is not, as many have held, the Papacy. The proof is distinctive and clear (how- 
ever, as many Antichrists exist, the term may be applied to the Papacy), (1) the Papacy is 
e.g. delineated in Rev. 17 under the figure of ‘‘ the great whore’’ supported by the kings 
of the earth, but in the same chapter this power is destroyed by other powers before this 
Parousia. (2) The powers that destroy this woman exist afterward at the Sec. Advent, 
and are arrayed against Christ. (3) While the apostasy of 2 Thess. 2 is applicable to the 
Papacy, yet the delineation of the culminated “ Wicked” cannot be applied to. the 
Papacy without violence. Thus e.g. the Antichrist denies that Jesus came in the flesh ; 
the Papacy does not do this, etc. Taking all the Scriptures and comparing them together, 
we are forced by simple consistency to this conclusion, which will be explained in detail. 


Obs. 3. Dr. Warren, in The Parousia, while endeavoring to invalidate 
our views (by making Parousia equivalent to age or dispensation), fully 
admits the literalness of the language expressing the same, as e.g. render- 
ing 2 ‘Thess. 2:1; James 5:7, 8; John 2: 28, etc., by ‘‘ the presence.”’ 
He, indeed, from this very literalness, claims, wrongfully, that the term 
‘Second Coming”’ is unscriptural. The concessions made by him, as we 
have already shown, are amply sufficient to overthrow his position. It is 
too late in the day (but exceedingly suggestive of the predicted denial of 
this truth by the Church) for a Divine to make the Parousia an entire dis- 
pensation—the Christian. And as to the scriptural basis of the term 
‘‘ Second Coming,’’ this is seen (1) in Heb. 9 : 28; (2) in Jesus’ own ref- 
erences to a future personal coming in His address to Jerusalem, Para- 
ble of the Nobleman, etc. ; (3) in the constant teaching that this Parousia 
is something future ; (4) in linking with it certain great events which are 
at the end of this dispensation ; (5) in the reference of the angels, Acts 
1:11; (6) in the uniform teaching of the Primitive Church, etc. 


Let the student consider our argument on this point, and he will find it impregnable. 
So much is this the case that our most unrelenting opponents concede the force of it. 
Thus e.g. a man, Dr. Neander, who probably has done as much as any one to prejudice 
the Church against our doctrine and to lead it astray, concedes, with all his leaning to a 
mystical conception, the full force of the passage. Thus (Pl. and Tr. Oh. Church, vol. 1, 
p. 205) in speaking of its fulfilment he says : ‘‘ Then would Christ appear, in order by His 
victorious divine power to destroy the Kingdom of evil, after it had attained its widest 
extension and to consummate the Kingdom of evil.” The personal appearing of Jesus, 


222 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 128. 


he unites with the consummation, as e.g. vol. 1, p. 529, etc. (The critical student will 
notice how Neander’s admission here that the Kingdom of evil has a wide extension pre- 
vious to the consummation is utterly hostile and unreconcilable with his development 
theory based on the Parable of the Leaven, as against the removal of evil by Jesus’ Ad- 
vent.) Such are the statements found in numerous eminent writers. We may conclude 
by quoting Dr. Brookes (Maranatha, ch. 4): ‘If there is a Greek word whose precise 
sense is established by competent authority beyond room for question, it is the word 
parousia, which is defined in the lexicons to mean ‘ presence, a coming, arrival, advent,’ 
and nothing else. When, therefore, we read of the future parousia of our Lord, it is 
shameful trifling with the Word of God, for those who profess to be its expounders to tell 
us that it means nothing in particular, or something as unlike the presence, the Coming, 
the arrival, the Advent of Christ, as night is unlike day.” ‘‘ Twelve times reference is 
made to the Coming of Christ, and in eleven of these instances, all agree that the Coming 
is literal and personal. It is certainly a dangerous principle of interpretation which leads 
so many to say that, in the twelfth instance, the Coming is not to be taken in this sense ; 
and especially when it has been proved that the word ‘ brightness,’ as elsewhere used in 
the New Test., invariably means appearing, and the word ‘ coming,’ as elsewhere used in 
the New Test., invariably refers to a personal presence.’ (Comp. Nast, Com. Matt. 24 : 3.) 


Obs. 4. It is scarcely necessary to add anything additional to Dan. 7 : 13 
to indicate a personal Advent. All the early Fathers, as well as those who 
followed them, even such a writer as Jerome (Bickersteth’s Gwide, p. 112, 
quotes from, and also shows how Jerome made the little horn of Daniel 7 
synchronize with the man of sin 2 Thess. 2) made it refer to the personal 
Sec. Advent. The earliest apologies, as e.g. Justin’s First Apol., ch. 51, 
apply this to the future, and not to his First Advent. There is, at 
least, consistency in such an interpretation, because the tenor of the 
prophecy describes a coming very different from the First, which, the latter, 
was in humiliation and unto death, while the former is a triwmphant Ad- 
vent resulting in the overthrow of all enemies. It is very different in that 
respect from the amazing and rash exposition, given by many writers, which 
affirms that the coming of the Son of Man is a going or ascension to heaven, 
into which even so excellent a writer as Flavel falls, who (foun. of Life, p. 
500) makes Dan. 7 : 18, 14, ‘‘ accomplished in Christ’s ascension.’’ Even 
Waggoner (Ref. of Age to Come, p. 133) cannot see an Advent here unless 
it is assumed that the Ancient of Days is on the earth.’ The entire scene is 
one here on the earth and not in heaven ; the acts that are performed, as the 
destruction of the beast, etc., are not in heaven but on the earth. What a 
definition such theories involve of the words ‘‘ coming’’ and ‘‘ came.”’ 
What a shrinking from having God or His Son present here on earth, as if 
it embraced a desecration of person. Such views introduce an antagonism 
into the vision irreconcilable both with its simplicity and with its syn- 
chronism with Rev. 19; 2 Thess. 2:8; Rev. 14 : 14-20, etc. Over against 
all such theorizing is set the application of this passage of Daniel by Jesus 
Himself, when before the High Priest, to His future personal Advent—a 
fact which a host of our opponents, overlooking its connection with Dan- 
jel, frankly admit in their expositions of Matt. 26:64. (Thus, e.g. 
Barnes, Com. loci, makes it refer to the future personal Advent.) The 
reader is requested to notice how the personal Advent is sustained and 
proven by the judgment day which, as Mede has shown (Works, p. 762), 
the Jews derived from Daniel 7. (See Prop. 133, on the Judgment Day.) 
Those theories which lead to extravagance in belief are utterly opposed by 
the sober exegesis of the Church Fathers, and a multitude of able divines. 
We can safely adopt the interpretation given by the pious Jews to Daniel 
7 : 13, sustained as it is by Christ Himself.’ 


PRop. 123. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 993 


1 Waggoner’s objection is derived from the parable in Luke 19. But this is far-fetched, 
for receiving a Kingdom does not imply by any means its immediate setting up but in His 
being the recognized, empowered King, etc., since even saints, true believers, are repre- 
sented as receiving a Kingdom, and the surety of it is such, the title to it so valid that 
they are represented as having attained to what they shall in the future only inherit and 
possess. Besides, while parables may assist to illustrate a doctrine already given, a doc- 
trine is itself derived from another class of Scripture (so many of our Introds. to the 
Bible, as Horne’s, etc.). That the Ancient of Days ‘‘ comes’’ and is also on the earth will 
appear under Prop. 166. 

» The Jews understood this *‘ coming in clouds’’ to refer to a personal Coming, and 
hence, as various writers have noticed, named as we have noticed, the Messiah, anticipa- 
tory, ‘*‘ the Son of Clouds.” Jesus, appropriating such language to Himself, confirms the 
belief in a personal Coming. Renan (Life of Jesus, p. 61) gives the Jewish view thus: 
“ He was a Son of Man, coming with the clouds of Heaven, a supernatural being, clothed 
in human appearance, commissioned to judge the world, and to preside over the golden 
age.” Gradually, as stated, this idea was spiritualized and applied to the present. Ten 
thousand perversions are noticeable to the student. Thus e.g. when the Crusaders under 
Peter the Hermit and Walter the Penniless (Milman’s Jis. Jews, vol. 3, p. 250) cruelly 
attacked and massacred the Jews of the city of Treves, those who fled for refuge to the 
citadel were received by the Bishop with reproaches for their disregard of Daniel’s 
prophecy of the Lord’s Coming. Such an interpretation is adopted by many at this day, 
only more grossly perverted. We are satisfied with the early Church application, which 
is reproduced by Sir I. Newton, in a letter to Locke (Brewster’s Life of Newton, p. 246), 
saying : ‘*‘ The Son of Man, Dan. 7, I take to be the same with the Word of God upon the 
white horse in heaven, Apoc. 19, for both are to rule the nations with a rod of iron,” ete. 
Rev. 19, and other Scriptures, will—to avoid repeating—be given under other Proposi- 
tions. 
~ Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 358, note) makes the Coming of the Son of Man a going, say- 
ing : “ If it means any local approach at all, it is His ascent rather than His descent—His 
solemn entry into heaven to receive the reward of His work ;” but prefers to regard it 
- “as a scenic representation of His investiture of the rights of universal dominion.’’ He 
approvingly quotes Maclaurin and Scott, making this an ‘‘ascending to heaven,. the 
throne of God, to receive the Kingdom covenanted to him,’’ “ from His former residence, 
the earth,’’ viz., at His First Advent. So Cowles (Com. on Dan.) makes it refer to the 
ascension. Such theories will not stand the test of criticism, the logical order laid down 
in the predictions, and the general analogy of the Word, being based, as to origination, 
‘upon a misconception of the nature, etc., of the covenanted Messianic Kingdom. So 
Swormstedt’s (The End of the World Near, p. 166) arbitrary and eccentric separation of 
verses 13 and 14 from the context, and interposing a Millennial period previous to their 
fulfilment, cannot be received ; and its inconsistency is shown by his subsequent admis- 
sions e.g. that verses 18, 22, and 27 are to be verified in the Mill, era, 


224 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 124. 


Proposition 124. This Kingdom is delayed several thousand 
years, to raise up a nation or people capable of sustaining tt. 


It has been shown how the Kingdom failed in its Theocratic and 
Theocratic-Davidic establishment through the depravity of man, 
and how its re-establishment at the First Advent was rendered 
hopeless by the wickedness of the nation. Then a new feature in 
the plan of God appears, viz. : to postpone the Kingdom during a 
period called ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles ;’ and during this season 
of delay gather out a@ chosen people to be associated in the re- 
establishment of the Kingdom on a firm and everlasting basis,’ 
beyond the reach, owing to the tested character, etc., of the rulers, 
of depravity (comp. Props. 59-65, 86, 87, 88, etc.). 


Obs. 1. Just as there was a preparatory growth and development of 
Abraham’s seed defore the Theocratic government was instituted, so now - 
there is designed and carried out by the Divine Will a preparatory gather- 
ing of Abraham’s seed until a sufficient, predetermined number is ob- 
tained. ‘These are called the lect. Made like unto Christ, when they ap- 
pear with Him, they are ‘‘ joint heirs’? with Him. The results following 
from such a body incorporated in the Theocratic government can well be 
imagined to be such as the most glowing prophetic delineations portray. 
This inheriting of the saints both of the Kingdom and of the land when 
Christ comes to His inheritance will be presented (Props. 142, 154, etc.), 
after passing over some preliminaries, the object now being to indicate that 
to secure such an inheriting a resurrection, pre-millennial, must be expe- 
rienced. 


Obs. 2. This view of the Kingdom sustains the doctrine of an interme- 
diate state, in which, whatever the condition of the saints, they are waiting 
for the period of redemption, wazting for the crown and promised inheri- 
tance. (See Delitzsch, Sys. of Bib. Psyc., pp. 496, 498, 527-8.) This 
idea of the intermediate state is, however, not peculiar to our system, but 
belongs to various others. (Comp. Prop. 136.) 


Obs. 3. The Kingdom itself is predetermined (Prop. 1) from the founda- 
tion of the world, so also (for all things fall under the Omniscient Will) is 
this preparatory gathering of saints. In Eph. 1: ‘* He hath chosen us in 
Him before the foundation of the world,’’ just as Christ Himself ‘‘ was 
foreordained before the foundation of the world’? (1 Pet. 1:20). In 
noticing the passages bearing on this point, we find (1) that God predeter- 
mined the reign of Christ; (2) and that with Him a certain number 
should be united in this reign ; (3) and this predetermination only includes 
those who believe and are obedient; (4) and this predetermination is 


Prop. 124. ] THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. 295 


openly manifested ‘‘ in the dispensation of the fulness of times,’’ when all 
things are gathered in one in Christ (Eph. 1: 10); (5) and includes the 
obtaining of the inheritance, because ‘‘ being predestinated according to the 

urpose of Him who worketh all things after the counsel of His own 
Will”? (Eph.1:11). It cannot, therefore, fail ; and the constant gathering 
going on through the Gospel reminds us of the continued existence of the 
Divine Purpose and its ultvmate certain result. 


Obs. 4. Until a certain number are gathered out to form the basis of 
rulership, guidance, etc., in this Kingdom, it is vain, owing to natural 
proneness to evil and to this Divine Plan for its correction, to expect its 
establishment under existing circumstances, or in this dispensation. 


Figuier tells us (The To-Morrow of Death, p. 94) that if man could be sustained with- 
out eating, then ‘‘ the age of gold, dreamed of by poets, would be the certain consequence 
of this organic change.’’ Scripture takes different and higher ground, and assures us 
that this is a mistaken notion that such a transformation alone can cause “ hateful pas- 
sions, wars, rivalries, jealousies to vanish from the face of the earth.’’ It looks to the 
heart and not to the desire for sustenance, and bestows glorification only upon those 
whose hearts have become purified, etc., and to whom it can be safely intrusted. With- 
out unchanged hearts, without supreme love to God, evil would only increase, as is seen, 
e.g. from the fact that men in power, wealth, etc., to whom the sustenance of life was the 
easiest, have been among the most cruel and vindictive of men, as e.g. Roman Emperors, 
Popes, etc. God now selects those who shall have a controlling influence and directory 

in the Kingdom out of the nations, but the selection is confined to those who believe 
and obey. 


Obs. 5. We may well imagine the astonishment and joy of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, when this natural and engrafted seed is all gathered 
and occupy their allotted places in the Kingdom. The Prophets seem to 
make allusions to this, as e.g. Isa, 29 : 22, 23 (Alexander’s version) ; 
mea, 49:18; 60: 4, etc. 


Obs. 6. Christ tells us that the Passover shall ‘‘ de fulfilled in the King- 
dom of God,’? Luke 22:16. They who partake of the Paschal Lamb, 
slain for us, shall experience the deliverance afforded by this entrance 
into this Theocratic state. The Prophets have much to say concerning 
the deliverance of God's people and their exaltation at the time of the end. 
What was imperfectly realized in the removal from Egypt under Moses 
will be perfectly experienced under Jesus Christ, when He comes “‘ the 
second time unto salvation,’’ viz., complete, realized redemption, ‘Then, too, 
the order of arrangements, etc., will be committed to a people who are 
better qualified by previous training and present advantages to receive and 
perpetuate them. ‘The costly sacrifice required for them, the observance 
of God’s dealings, the personal experience, etc., all, in connection with 
the wonderful bestowments of glorification and the presence of the Saviour, 
will combine to produce the very qualifications so indispensable to a pure, 
perpetual Theocratic government. It is in view of this future deliverance 
of God’s people from a worse than Egyptian bondage, the bondage and 
darkness of the grave, the last terrible persecution of the Church, that 
Jesus Himself is represented as saying: ‘‘ J will not any more eat thereof, 
until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God,’ and ‘‘ I will not drink of the 
Fruit of the vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come,’’ Luke 22:16, 18. 
Here in these expressions is a wonderful commingling of certainty in the 


226 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | [Prop, 124. 


deliverance, its connection with the Kingdom, its delay for a season, its 
combination with Christ, and even the departure of David’s Son and a cer- 
tain waiting for the Kingdom. ‘This gathering of all of those who eat 
Christ our Passover, must first be experienced, even down to the last one 
(Props. 65 and 86), before the Kingdom of God shall come, and David’s 
Son will drink of the fruit of the vine. 


Comp. Rev. 15 : 3, and observe the triumphant Passover song, that will be sung in 
that day. The interpretations that would spiritualize this eating and drinking are based 
on the notion of a purely spiritual Kingdom. ‘The number of the chosen ones is known 
only to God. Some of the Fathers (Kurtz, Bible and Astron., Sec. 18, note) thought that 
the number of the redeemed would equal that of the fallen angels, basing this on the 
hypothesis that mankind was created to fill the gap made by the fall of angels. Such 
conjectures have no value, and God has not seen proper to give us information on the 
subject. 


Obs. 7. Christ only introduces into His Kingdom those that He chooses, 
and, as Alexander’s version of Isa. 65 : 9, they are ‘‘ chosen ones.’’ This 
has been sufficiently represented in our views of the election, and we refer 
to it here in order to disclaim all fellowship with that exclusive narrow 
spirit characteristic of some professing small bodies of believers, which 
condemn as unchristian and lost all who do not in all things conform to 
their doctrinal belief. Aside from Christ only being the Judge to decide 
in reference to the final status of professions, all, who cordially receive, 
believe and trust in Christ, exhibiting their faith by producing the enuw- 
merated graces of the Spirit, are to be recognized by us as Christians, no 
matter whether, on various points, they differ from us, (Props. 135, 130, 
179, ete. ) 


! 


Prop. 125. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 997 


Proprosrrion 125. Zhe Kingdom to be inherited by these gathered 
saints requires their resurrection from among the dead. 


We have conclusively shown that the covenant necessitates a 
resurrection ; that the description of David’s Son, who is to reign, 
demands a descendant of David possessing, in some way, immor- 
tality, seeing that His rule is everlasting, thus implying a resurrec- 
tion—that a resurrection is predicted of Him, etc.—and now the 
fair inference is that those selected to be His co-heirs, being gath- 
ered out during a long period of time, and having died ‘‘ without 
receiving the promises,’’ mast also experience the power of the res- 
urrection before they can inherit the Kingdom of God. 


Obs. 1. Leaving the proof of this union of resurrection and Kingdom 
for the following Propositions (as we only desire now to introduce the sub- 
ject of the resurrection), every reader, keeping in view that Christ’s ap- 
pearing and Kingdom are united, 2 Tim. 4:1, that a resurrection follows 
His Second Advent, and that an inheriting of the Kingdom succeeds this 
appearing and resurrection, must concede that when the righteous ‘‘ are 
recompensed at the resurrection of the just’’ (Luke 14 : 14), this also in- 
cludes the inheriting of a Kingdom. So that, for the present, we are 
content with the general tenor of the Word, indicating first a resurrection 
and then the reception and enjoyment of a Kingdom. And, as food for 
reflection, it is suggested that if the appearing and Kingdom are synchron- 
ical, then, as Mede observed, ‘‘ The appearing must precede the Millennium, 
for’’ (taking now the doctrine of our opponents for granted) ‘‘ at the 
final resurrection the Kingdom does not commence, but is ‘ delivered up,’ 
then cometh the ‘ end,’ ’’ etc. Refuge indeed may be taken in’a Kingdom 
in the third heaven, but this, as shown, is not the Kingdom of covenant or 
prophecy, which is a Kingdom here on earth. 


Obs. 2. All alony, the position has been taken that, owing to the post- 
ponement of the Kingdom, a preliminary dispensation of grace to us Gen- 
tiles has intervened, and that even the dead saints, whatever their position 
in this interval, are waiting until ‘** the day of Redemption,’’ the time of 
the resurrection for their inheritance, etc. This is confirmed by the lan- 
guage of Paul in 1 Cor. 15 : 32, who lays the greatest stress on the resur- 
rection as the necessary and appointed means by which the blessings that 
are covenanted can be obtained. ‘The memorial, the Abrahamic covenant, 
the Davidic covenant, promise after promise, involve a resurrection from 
the dead, and the resultant reception of blessings ; and hence the emphat- 
i¢ language of Paul, because of this very relationship, ‘‘ what advantageth 
me, if the dead rise not.”? He well knew that inheritance, crown, and 
Kingdom belonged to the period of the resurrection. Auberlen (Div. 


228 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRrop. 125. 


Rev., p. 208) justly argues that one of the doctrinal defects of the Refor- 
mation was, that the resurrection of Christ was not made sufficiently 
prominent as compared with His sacrificial death, while in the apostolic 
preaching the Crucified and the Risen held equal place. And this feature 
extended finally in an undue exaltation of the intermediate state, wnti/ the 
resurrection is almost practically ignored as of comparative little conse- 
quence to the honor, glory, etc., of the deceased saint. ‘To appreciate the 
force and pertinency of the resurrection, there must be a return to the 
scriptural presentation of the matter. 

The Liturgical services for the dead, commonly used among the various denomina- 
tions, being mostly derived from ancient sources, and having a close relationship to 
Scriptural language, are in sympathy with our position. From many sources, also, do 
we receive statements confirming the importance of the resurrection on the ground stated 
by Dr. Nast (Lange’s Com., p. 401), viz., that the intermediate state is ‘‘ something im- 
perfect, abnormal,’ etc. Something may be added respecting the doctrine that death is 
the result of the fall of man. The favorite argument employed by Free Thinkers is 
derived from the geological assertion that it is firmly proven that before man trou this 
earth death raged under the rulership of the mastodon, the dinotherium, etc. Therefore 
it follows that ‘‘ the root doctrine’ that death follows from the fall of man is an error. 
But the Scriptural statements are not in antagonism with the alleged proofs of geology, 
and still consistently make death entailed by the fall. For (1) the Bible only refers to 
the fact that man was created mortal (hence what preceded him, being a lower creation, 
was also mortal), and had life offered to him in virtue of obedience ; (2) that having dis- 
obeyed, the means of life—so that he should not see death—was withdrawn, his mortality 
—conditioned by faithfulness—was entailed. This is the Scripture teaching, and not the 
old theological opinion against which the argument is levelled. Hence death, in view of 
disobedience, is a penal entailment as the Bible represents, because the means of escape 
from it originally present are withdrawn, and now can only be obtained through the 
Saviour provided by God. Hence, being penal and a result of the fall, perfect redemp- 
tion through a perfect Redeemer must recover us from the same. (Comp. Prop. 163.) 


Obs. 3. This resurrection includes a resurrection of dead saints, or, in 
other words, is a corporeal, literal resurrection. The changes or modifica- 
tions that the body may undergo in the process of glorification, or the ques- 
tion whether the whole body or a portion, etc., is raised up, we leave for 
other works (e.g. art. ‘‘ Resurrection,’? McClintock and Strong’s Cyclop.) 
to discuss, the point under consideration being merely that of an un- 
doubted, veritable resurrection of the bodies of dead saints, safficiently dis- 
tinctive to preserve personal identity, and to make it recognizable to 
others as a real restoration from the dead. A line of argument can only 
(owing to lack of space) be indicated. 1. The resurrection necessitated 
by the covenant promises requires the personal resurrection and continued 
identity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. 2. That applied to David’s Son 
demands the same, and the distinctive preservation of His humanity, so as 
to sustain a continued relationship to David as His Son. 3, The belief in 
a literal resurrection of the body, according to numerous writers, was a 
common one among the Jews at the time of Christ (Matt. 22; Luke 20; 
Acts 23 : 6-8; John 11: 24, etc.), and the language of Christ and the 
apostles is pre-eminently calculated to confirm them in their belief. 4. That 
the language of Christ and the apostles taught such a resurrection, is 
confirmed by the fact that all the early churches distinctively proclaimed tt 
as their faith, thus corroborating the views entertained by the Jews. And 
this general belief was not confined to Jewish but was embraced in the 
Gentile churches. 5. Seeing what immediately preceded and followed the 
First Advent in attachment to this doctrine, if an error, it seems reason- 


: 
A 


Prop. 125. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 229 


able to anticipate either from Christ or His apostles a plain and unequiy- 
ocal denial of it. 6. But the Scriptures themselves establish the doctrine. 
This they do, (1) in the usage of words which denote both in classical and 
scriptural writings a revivification of the dead. (2) In applying these words 
to deceased persons in their graves. (3) In representing those ‘‘ asleep in 
the dust of the earth,’’ those ‘‘ whose flesh rests in hope’’ etec., as the ones 
who shall experience it. (4) In speaking of it as something well wnder- 
stood, ase.g. Acts 14:2 and 23:6, etc. (5) In declaring that the unjust 
(Acts 24:15), ‘‘ all in their graves,’’ John 5 : 28, 29, shall undergo its 
power, removing the idea of simple moral regeneration. (6) In appealing 
to us not to think it encredible that God should perform such a work, Acts 
26:8; Heb. 11:19. (7) In the examples of dead persons being restored 
to life (e.g. Matt. 27 : 52, 53), which is a sign of what will be done at the 
Sec. Advent. (8) In the body being specifically mentioned, as e.g. Rom. 
8:23 in “the redemption of the body,’’ Phil. 3:10, 21. (9) In the con- 
trast made between death and the resurrection from the dead (1 Cor. 
15: 21, 22), and in the effects of death and the consequences following the 
resurrection (1 Oor. 15 : 42-54). (10) In the rejection of those who spirit- 
ualized the resurrection, 2 Tim. 2:17, 18. (11) In the removal of it to 
a certain fixed period, Eph. 4:30; 1 Cor. 15 : 23; 1 Thess. 4:14, 17%, 
etc. (12) In the fact that ‘‘ the first begotten of the dead’’ underwent «a 
literal, corporeal resurrection, as the various Gospels prove ; that even in 
the process of glorification following it He retains His personal identity 
sufficiently that when He comes again He comes emphatically as ‘‘ the Son 
of Man,’’ David’s Son, and that His resurrection is represented as a pat- 
tern. for that of His saints, Rom. 8:11; 1 Cor. 4:14; 2 Cor. 4:14; 
Rom. 6:5; Phil. 3: 21;:1 John 3:2. (13) In the mortal, i.e. the part 
subject to death putting on immortality, 1 Cor. 15 : 52-3; Rom. 8 : 11. 
(14) In the effects of Paul’s preaching the doctrine on Athenians, etc., Acts 
17:32; 26:6, 8, etc. (15) In the fact that if the body is not also re- 
deemed, restored to its forfeited condition, then the Redemptive process is 
in so far incomplete. Such considerations, with especially the deeper and 
more significant one that the Davidic-Theocratic arrangement necessarily 
by covenant insists upon it, are amply sufficient to cause us to retain the 
old form of doctrine. 


The ‘‘ changing of our vile bodies,’’ the “ quickening of our mortal. bodies,’’ —completed 
redemption (comp. remarks, Art. 1, Luth. Quart. Review, July, 1874) requiring the raising 
up of the body, etc., ought certainly to influence every one who receives the authority of 
the Word to believe in a corporeal resurrection. It is most reasonable to believe that the 
body which suffers by the fall, which has been honored by the Spirit, which has honored 
God by its labors and toils, will be saved as well as the soul, and will be honored by God 
in a glorious manner. No spiritualizing or prevarication can remove the force of numer- 
ous Scriptures, as e.g. ‘‘ He that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live’’ 
(for the connection shows a direct reference to corporeal resurrection, so Barnes Com., 
etc.). Redemption of the body is something recovered or restored that was alienated in the 
power of evil ; if, therefore, the body itself is not in some way resurrected and restored, 
there is noredemption of it. Redemption cannot be predicated of a body wholly rejected 
(as some believe), or of an entire new body substituted (as others hold) in place of the 
old one. If the reader will but reflect over the Jewish phraseology of 1 Cor. 15 : 20, 
‘* But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept,” 
this naturally and forcibly recalls the first fruits of a coming harvest of the same kind of 
product. In view of the identity of the first representative of the harvest with that of 
the harvest itself, it seems impossible to refuse our assent to a similarity of resurrection. 
If the one is a resurrection of the body, the rest must be the same, or else the illustration 
loses its force. Such passages as Rom. 6:5, and 8:23; Phil. 3:21; 1 Cor. 6:14; 


930 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 125. 


2 Cor. 2 : 14, etc., are decisive, and corroborate the statement of Jesus, John 6 : 39, 40, 
44, that He will lose nothing, but raise it up again at the last day ; that He will raise up ~ 
believers (not at death) at the last day. So decisive is this Scriptural proof that nearly 
all creeds and confessions affirm ‘‘ the resurrection of the body ;” meaning by it an actual 
revivification of the sleeping or dead body, forming again a reunion of soul and body, 
and preserving the personal identity of the believer. In this way alone do they consist- 
ently hold forth the Scriptural promise, that every believer shall be “‘ ransomed from the 
power of the grave,’ and that “God bringeth down to the grave, and He raiseth up’’ (1 Sam. 
2 : 6). 

The Church is rapidly drifting away from the idea of a corporeal resurrection. The 
old-fashioned faith—even evidenced by the Patriarchs—does not suit modern notions, 
Thus e.g. Dr. Nisbet (The Res. of the Body. Does the Bible teach it?) refers to Nelson, 
Hodge, Robinson, and others as declaring that the future body is not derived from the 
present body, or as Robinson (quoted) says : “ Few, if any, intelligent persons can at this 
day, I think, suppose any part of the body laid in the grave is to rise with us at our resur- 
rection.’’ ‘To this we only say that, admitting a change or transformation, it certainly 
then is strange to have a resurrection of the body announced at all, and stranger still to 
connect it at some future time with our decayed bodies, and strangest of all that the 
resurrection of Jesus (our pattern) should be really and truly identified with His deceased 
body. If it is true, as Nesbit quotes Dr. Hodge, that ‘‘ not a particle of one need to be in 
the other,’’ this is due, not to the resurrection of the body, but to the glorification of the 
body afterward. Many writers confound the resurrection and subsequent glorification, 
speaking of the future body as the resultant only of the resurrection, when it is one of 
the resurrection and the subsequent transforming (making the mortal immortal, etc.) 
power of God. If Nesbit, Robinson, and Hodge are right, then the body of Jesus might 
have remained in the sepulchre untouched, and its removal, under the idea of resurrect- 
ing power, was simply a deception. White (The Redeemer and Redeemed, p. 21, etc.) makes 
the resurrection of the dead a re-creation simply out of the dust of the earth without any 
reference to the body itself. His sole Scriptural proof is based on 1 Cor. 15 : 35-38, espe- 
cially the phrase “ thou sowest not that body that shall be.’’ But he presses this beyond 
its connection—for the context proves that while (as we firmly believe) the resurrection 
body (glorified) is something very different from the body sown (owing to the powers 
that it receives), yet the resurrection body is in some way connected with the body that 
has died, as seen e.g. in the phrase, ‘‘ Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, 
except it die.” No wheat, no grain of any kind, is produced unless it sustains an intimate 
connection with the previously sown grain ; so it is with the resurrection, otherwise the 
Apostle’s illustration fails—and this is confirmed by the allusions to ‘‘ the graves,” coming 
up ‘‘ out of the graves,’’ etc. A friend (Prof. Breckenridge, with whom many agree) takes 
the position that the same body is raised only in form, for God preserves the idea of 
form and in the resurrection restores it and revitalizes it, so that not any of the particles 
are raised which composed the original form, but the form itself is restored by the 
' rehabilitation of other particles. This is the resurrection of an idea, and when applied 
to the resurrection of Jesus, and to others, fails in applying the Scripture statements 
respecting the “‘ flesh,’’ ‘‘ the dust,” ‘this vile body,’’ ‘this mortal,” this ‘* seed,’’ etc. Lee, 
indeed, in his Eschatology, admits a literal, corporeal resurrection of Jesus—forced to it 
by the facts, but then contends (p. 198-9), that it was a resurrection only to a mortal life 
for a few days, and that afterward the resurrection to immortal life was accomplished by 
His Spirit leaving the body, (1) for ‘‘ the animal body had answered its purposes, and 
the Spirit might now take its departure into the spiritual world to live forever a Spirit 
without a body.” Hence, according to this theory, Jesus died a second death! and as 
death is the consequence of sin, He endured the penalty of sin twice! There is nothing 
in the Record to support such a view, and it never would have been entertained if it 
were not needed to bolster up a preconceived opinion (comp. next Obs. and note). 
Strange how far men will proceed with the Scriptures in order to establish a favorite 
theory, to which the former must bend. Thus e.g. Rev. Hequembourg (Plan of Creation) 
follows Swedenborg, Bush, Lee, etc., in making the resurrection to be an investiture of 
new bodies immediately or soon after death, and then asserts respecting the impression 
or doctrine of a corporeal resurrection : ‘‘ But if the impression should prove correct, it 
would befatal to the inspiration of the New Test.’’ That is, if the Scriptures do not 
sustain his theory of a purely spiritual resurrection succeeding death, he denies the 
divine inspiration—when the Jews, the early Church, and multitudes have found a cor- 
poreal resurrection in them and held to their inspiration. When men thus affirm them- 
selves, in the light of the teaching exhibited by us concerning this doctrine, as judges to 


PRopP. 125. ] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 931 


decide whether it ought or ought not to be received, and inspiration with it, we instinc- 
tively feel that their views are unscriptural and dangerous. ‘The resurrection of Jesus is 
a stumbling-block to all purely spiritual theories, and hence Clamagerau, Fontanes, and 
others, in some way, against the most positive of Records, make out even a spiritual 
resurrection of Jesus, defining it to be ‘‘ the rising of the soul to a higher life,” ete. 


Obs. 4. ‘The views of the Gnostics relating to matter, and the consequent 
rejection of this doctrine, has influenced many to imitate Hymeneus and 
Philetus. From Manes down to Eckermann, Henke, Ammon, Priestley, Des 
Cotes (Knapp’s Ch. Theol., p. 532), Bush, Owen, etc., men have endeavored 
either to spiritualize the language, or to explain it away as an accommo- 
dation, or to refer it to the bestowment of something new immediately 
after death. Indeed, this leaven has so far worked through the mass, that 
concessions are made by our theologians which virtually vitiate the whole 
doctrine so far as its relationship to the future is concerned. An illustra- 
tion may be in place. Dr. Dwight in expounding (Ser. 64, On. Res.) Matt. 
22 : 31, 32, not seeing how the covenant promises give the key (Prop. 49) 
to its meaning, opens wide the gate of arbitrary exegesis ; and of his ex- 
position Prof. Bush, in his Anastasis (denying the resurrection of the 
body) gladly avails himself. Dwight asserts that the word here translated 
resurrection denotes throughout the New Test., ‘‘ existence beyond the 
grave,’’ or ‘‘a future state or existence.’’ It is a matter of amazement 
that so able a writer, to make out a special case of interpretation, should 
commit himself so erroneously, and thus aid the efforts of those who deny 
a bodily resurrection. This assertion has no weight with himself after- 
ward, as he advocates a literal resurrection, indicates that it is apphed to 
the corporeal resurrection of Jesus, and admits that the Jews, etc., em- 
ployed it (as e.g. John 11 : 24) to denote a revivification of the body.* 
Why, then, make so sweeping a declaration, which is abundantly disproved 
by even the simplest passage relating to the resurrection ; for, if he is cor- 
rect, and Bush is right in indorsing it, then his interpretation is synony- 
mous with the word, anastasis or resurrection. Let it be tested as a 
synonym with John 11 : 25; 1 Cor. 15 : 42, etc., and its absurdity will ap- 
pear. Hence, our ablest critics and most talented theologians, as a matter 
of simple consistency, accept of the word “‘ anastasis’’ or ‘‘ resurrection’”’ 
as legitimately denoting a revivification of the dead, a restoration to life. 
The student need not be reminded that innumerable testimonies derived 
from ancient and modern writers can be adduced to support this meaning. 
To give but a recent illustration: Thompson (Zheol. of Christ, ch. 14), 
following Knapp and others, declares that the word was used by the 
Greeks, by the Grecian-Jews, and by the Scriptures to denote a restoration 
to life of the dead. ‘This leads us again to remind the reader that in the 
following discussion, such candid admissions from those who have no sym- 
pathy with our doctrine possess considerable weight, in view of the fact 
that the selection of such a word which Christ and the apostles well knew 
was thus employed, indicates, that if a spiritual resurrection or existence 
beyond the grave is meant by the resurrection, no word could have been 
selected better calculated to deceive hearers and readers, 


* Dr. Russell’s estimate (Bib. Sac., Oct., 1860, p. 775, given by Hudson, p. 25 Reviewers 
Reviewed) of Dr. Dwight’s definition may be referred to ; when e.g. speaking of those 
who ‘‘ quote the loose and rickety statements of Dr. Dwight in full on the meaning of 
‘anastasis,’ and then blink the whole question of the usus loquendi of the language itself.”’ 


232 TILE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 125. 


It is not surprising that ‘‘ Reformed Judaism’”’ (Art. on, by Felix Adler, in North 
Amer. Review, Sep.—Oct., 1877), ‘‘ inspired by the philosophic (Rationalistic) teachings 
of the day,” should set aside the doctrine of the resurrection in the flesh, 
and with it all kindred doctrines, as e.g. the Advent of a personal Messiah. But 
it is surprising that those who accept the authority of the Word, should virtually 
deny the same. The Unseen Universe, relying simply on the expression that ‘‘ there isa 
natural body and a spiritual body” (overlooking Paul’s statement that the one is a result 
of the other, for the former must first die, etc.), teaches that we now have the frame or 
the rudiments of the frame of the spiritual body, which connects us with the invisible 
world. A writer in the Cin. Enquirer, a Spiritualist, affirms that, at death, mediums have 
seen it coming out of the person dying, thus leaving the body. The Shakers (Art. on, by 
Evans, Appletons’ Cyclop.) make it spiritual, and by way of pre-eminence style themselves 
“*‘ the children of the resurrection,’’ and hence do not marry, as marriage is inconsistent 
with their professed state. Swedenborgianism (Barrett's Lectures, etc.) has no resurrec- 
tion of the body, for ‘‘ continuation of life is what is understood by the resurrection.’ 
With these and others there is no resurrection out of the graves, unless figuratively. 
Over against all these mystical conceptions, aside from other considerations (see previous 
Obs.) it is amply sufficient and conclusive to say that as the natural body of Jesus was 
transformed into a ‘‘ glorious body,” so, says the Apostle, Phil. 3 : 20, 21, ‘‘ shall He 
change our vilé body, that it,’’ the vile body, ‘* may be fashioned like unto His glorious body.’” 
Philosophy, science, spiritualizing may speculate and tender objections, but faith accepts 
the asserted fact that the body itself—like Christ’s—shall undergo this change or transforma- 
tion, just as it is represented that the bodies of the living at the Second Advent, when 
translated, shall also undergo a wonderful transformation. Any other view forbids the 
cordial reception of the promises relating to the resurrection, in their plain grammatical 
sense. Greybeard, in Lay Sermons, No. 104, opposes the resurrection of the body on the 
ground that it is ‘‘ folly” to assume that ‘‘ the same identical particles of matter compos- 
ing the body that is sown ‘in corruption’ are to form the body that is to be ‘ raised in 
incorruption,’ ” basing it on the declaration, ‘‘ thou sowest not that body that shall be,’’ 
etc. But how does he know—for has the modus operandi of the resurrection been revealed 
to any one ?—that some, if not all, the particles will be utilized and form the basis upon 
which is exerted transforming power? Cannot God take, if such is His will, the very 
mortal body and clothe it with transcendent power and refined glory? [If his theory is 
true, then, as no particles of the body of Jesus were needed in the resurrection, the empty 
sepulchre was merely a pious deception, and the proof given to Thomas of a resurrection 
was a mere pious fraud. No! the Record is too explicit. Besides, in reply to Greybeard’s 
proof, it must be observed that Paul speaks of the body (natural) as the basis from which 
springs the incorruptible (just as in the body of Jesus), and holds up the resurrection 
body in its completeness with the positive declaration ‘that the body is as its ‘‘ seed.” 
Hence, while the oak is not the acorn, the same particles, yet the oak proceeds from the 
acorn through the transforming power of nature. So also the natural body —whether 
entire or in part we cannot tell, it being also complex—must form the basis, the ground- 
work of the resurrection body, for it is on the dead bodies in their graves that the transform- 
ing power of resurrection will be exerted, so that the dead ones undergo a transmutation ; 
there being a veritable coming out of the graves, and, therefore, a necessity for the graves, 
the earth, and the sea to give up its dead. When Beecher (The Future Life, sermon, Ch. 
Union, Sep. 5th, 1877) rejects the resurrection of the body because “ flesh and blood can- 
not inherit the Kingdom,’’ he only confuses the wonderful transforming power which 
accompanies the resurrection with the resurrection itself ; because the resultant of resur- 
recting power is the glorification of the body—a conversion by which flesh and blood is 
excluded—in order to qualify it for inheritance in the Kingdom. 

The ‘‘ germ theory, which assumes that the soul at death retains a certain ethereal in- 
vestiture, and that this has by virtue of the vital force the power of accreting to itself @ 
new body for the celestial life,’’ is virtually the Swedenborgian view as advocated by Prof. 
Bush (Anastasis), Universalists (Works), Joseph Cook * (Lectures), Spiritualists, and others. 


* Cook (Lectures on Biology) in his Lecture ‘‘ Ulrici on the Spiritual Body’’ (which con- 
tains highly interesting matter relative to the latest German thought respecting the 
enswathement of the soul in an ethereal, non-atomic fluid, etc.), makes out a present 
spiritual body of which the soul is an occupant, and that immediately after death, or at 
death, the soul continues to exclusively occupy this body, and then jumps to the conelu- 
sion that this is ‘‘ the spiritual body” denoted by “‘ the inspired doctrine of the resurrec- 
tion.’’ But was this all that Jesus experienced? Is it a coming out of the graves, etc. ? 


feROP, 125.1] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 233 


But this makes the resurrection to be at death when the Scriptures make it still future ; it 
is opposed to the contrast in 1 Cor. 15 ; it is not in accord with the figure of the grain 
(change), 1 Cor. 15 ; it makes the future body independent of and not the offshoot of this 
body ; it does not really make the whole body to die, but retains a bodily (ethereal it may 
be) investiture, and is opposed by the plain record of Jesus’ death and resurrection (as 
we have shown), for to be resurrected there must be a real death in order to be made 
alive: thus it was with Jesus, 1 Pet. 3:18, and thus it is with the saints, Rom. 8 : 11. 
(This germ theory probably is a refinement of an old view—see McClintock and Strong’s 
Cyclop., Art. “‘ Mohammedanism”’—for the Jewish Haggadah had a certain bone (‘‘ Bone 
Luz’), and Mohammed the rump bone (“ Bone Al-Ajb”), which would be uncorrupted 
until the last day, from which the whole body would spring forth anew). If the theory 
were true that the resurrection is thus only a continuation of life by virtue of this inherent 
constitution, then a resurrecting Saviour need not be provided, for it would not be true 
that ‘“‘ by man came also the resurrection of the dead,” seeing that, according to this 
opinion, it would be a result already established by the law of creation, and required no 
special divine interposition to be secured. Williamson (Theol. and Moral Science, ch. 28) 
and others of the same class, to make out a purely spiritual resurrection immediately 
after death, with no relation to the body in the grave, lay special stress on 1 Cor. 15, 
“ With what body do they come?” and in the discussion coolly assumes what remains 
unproven, the time of the resurrection, omitting all reference to the passages which relate to 
a resurrection still future. He informs us that the body must die or else there can be no 
rising of the soul from it (how about the translated ones?), and this constitutes the 
resurrection, which the Patriarchs and all others have already experienced, for it is fool- 
ishness to say that the dead come in the same bodies, etc. Now, as there is great mystery 
connected with the modus operandi of resurrecting and transforming power, we are, of 
course, utterly unable to answer the questions and objections that may be alleged against 
the Scriptural idea, but we, unhesitatingly, because declared by God, receive it as follows : 
Paul’s reasoning includes the outcome or the result, and not the mode of operation ; but 
this embraces so much, viz., that the future body sustains some relation to the dead body in 
the grave, although when raised and glorified it is very different from this mortal body, 
having other powers, qualities, attributes, etc., to fit it for its intended glorified use. 
The analogy of the grain clearly teaches such a relationship, and this is sustained by the 
references to a still future resurrection at the Second Advent. Take e.g. such a reference 
as 1 Thess. 4 : 15-17, and the resurrection is predicated, not of those just deceased (imme- 
diate), but of ‘*‘ them who are asleep’ in their graves, who are actually to arise from their 
sleep in the dust of the earth, and which is united with the Second Coming and a con- 
nected translation of living bodies. The question, ‘‘ How are the dead raised up? and 
with what body do they.come ?”’ refers to the future, and the proof is found in the simple 
fact that all the churches established by the Apostles East and West universally held to 
such a reference. How account for so general a belief? Any representation, however 
plausibly put, which disconnects the resurrection from a future second personal Advent 
of Jesus, and which separates it from any relationship to the deceased body (although 
mouldered in the dust), is erroneous. For Paul’s reasoning shows that the very body 
which dies is the one quickened (and not another that is quickened because the body 
dies), but the quickening process (as in grain) gives a body not like that which was 
sown, it having different properties, powers, etc. The contrast, expressive of relation- 
ship, is distinctly and impressively given as follows : ‘‘/¢ (the body) is sown in corrup- 
tion ; it (the same body, with the changes introduced) is raised in incorruption,’’ ete. 
The repeated references to ‘‘ this corruptible, this mortal,” and hence this body as the one 
undergoing a change is so clear that no one, unless prejudiced by preconceived opinions, 
can fail to see and appreciate the force ; thus repelling the notion that our mortal bodies 
experience no real, literal resurrecting power, which is capable of making the mortal im- 


Is it a resurrection limited, as the Scriptures do, to the Sec. Advent? Does it not vir- 
tually make the res. of Jesus a pious fraud, and deny the union of the resurrection with 
the Second Coming of Jesus? Russell (Our Lord’s Return, p. 47), in behalf of his spirit- 
ual theory, remarks : “ A spiritual body coming out of the grave will not make any more 
of a hole in the ground than Christ’s spiritual body made in the door when ‘ He came 
and stood in their midst, the door being shut.’” This, however, is to make resurrection 
(i.e. revivification of the dead) and glorification identical, which they are not. If Russell 
is right, why such a parade over the grave of Jesus, the missing body, etc.? Why ex- 
pressly assert that the graves themselves are opened as e.g. Matt. 27 : 52; Ezek. 37 : 12; 
John 11 : 41, 44, etc. ? 


234 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 125. 


mortal, the vile glorious, etc. A great deal of nonsense is written respecting ‘‘ the spirit- 
ual body,’’ and because the word ‘‘ spiritual” is used, many jump to the conclusion that 
the body is ‘‘ spirit.’’ No one mistakes concerning “ the natural body” as one under the 
influence and control of nature, and no one should misapprehend (after the usage of 
‘* spiritual”’) ‘‘ the spiritual body’ as one under the influence and control of the spirit.* 
But the latter still arises from the former as its basis, being shown by the evident con- 
trast and relationship, thus: ‘‘It (the body) is sown a natural body ; it (the same body 
but now changed) is raised a spiritual body.’’ If death retains the body so that it will 
not be raised and changed, we fail to see how then ‘‘Death is swallowed up in victory.” 
The critical student will observe the force of the Apostolic position in this respect. If 
(e.g, Killen’s Anc. Church, with which comp. Neander’s remarks) the Gnostics resisted 
the notion of a resurrection of the dead because of the principle that evil was inherent in 
matter, it is exceedingly strange that, if there is no resurrection of the mortal body, the 
Apostle should not, to this extent at least, have conciliated and incorporated the view, 
instead of directly affirming against them a resurrection, as e.g. Paul saying to the 
Corinthians (1 Cor. 15 : 12): ‘‘How say some among you that there is no resurrection of the 
dead?” Why compare death to a sleep out of which the dead one should awake and 
directly refer to the bodies themselves? Why give such a decisive rebuke to deniers of a 
future resurrection (2 Tim. 2:18)? Enough has been said on this subject to sustain the 
Pre-Millen. view of the resurrection of dead ones, and the subject may be dismissed with 
two remarks. First, men are too eager to quote as authority for their views others who 
really differ from them. Thuse.g. the Universalist Quarterly, p. 150, Ap., 1877, on Luther 
as a Preacher, quotes him as saying concerning the res. of the body, to make it appear 
that he indorsed the Universalist view of the res. : ‘‘ That the human body after death is 
not that body that shall be.” But this we also receive, and Luther’s view, as repeatedly 
taught, was that of a resurrection of the body, but that the resurrected body was one 
totally changed from the corruptible body buried, and that such a change was only to be 
realized at the future Second Advent. Second: the interpretation of a passage is made 
to fit a preconceived opinion. Thus, to take a favorite one. Augustine, and many 
who follow him, quote John 5 : 25, 26, ‘* The hour is coming and now is when the 
dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall live. For as the 
Father hath life in Himself, so hath He given to the Son to have life in Himself.’’ Be- 
cause the expression is used, ‘‘'The hour is coming and now is,” they suppose that it 
refers only to a spiritual or moral resurrection. But this is opposed to the facts. This 
announcement on the face of it expresses something as unusual, whereas such a resurrec- 
tion as these advocate has, according to their view, always existed. Again: ‘‘ the hour 
1s coming’’ alludes to a future time coming when a bodily resurrection shall be experi- 
enced, and the ‘‘ now is’’ indicates that although the resurrection is promised in general 
as future (at the last day) to those living, yet even now, at that time, a bodily resurrection 
was experienced in those few who were raised from the dead by Jesus, and the many who 
were raised up at His own resurrection, including, as the next phrase shows, the resur- 
rection of Jesus Himself. And then the expression ‘‘ He hath given to the Son to have 
life in Himself,” shows, as the parallel passages evince, that allusion is made to a resur- 
rection of the literal dead, because we are expressly told that it was in view of this self- 
lodged power of life that death could not hold dominion over Him. That the Gentiles 
deemed the doctrine of the resurrection a thing ‘‘incredible” (as many now do, pro- 
nouncing our view ‘‘ foolishness,” etce.), did not influence the inspired men to soften it 
down in order to make it palatable and accommodating to modern notions and unbelief, 
as is now the fashion, following in the lead of Gnosticism, Priscillianism, etc. 


Obs. 5. An important feature that ought to be noticed in this discus- 
sion, is this: Commentators and others quote largely from the writings of 
the Jews, showing that they derived from the Old Testament the beliet 


* Hodge, quoted by Nesbit in another place, has some good, sensible remarks on “‘ the 
spiritual body’’ in his Com. on 1 Cor., in which he does (1) connect the resurrected with 
the dead body, and (2) insist upon a body under the influence of the spirit. Probably 
this influenced Whedon (Com., 1 Cor. 15 : 44) to coin a new word, making ‘‘ spiritual’ 
equivalent to “ soulical,’’ i.e. something combined with, directed and controlled by, the 
soul. Many able writers contend that by ‘‘ natural body’’ is meant one that is influ- 
enced, etc., by nature, and that by “‘ spiritual body’’ is denoted one which is the organ 
of the spirit and the instrument of its operations (thus e.g. comp. Lange’s Com. loci). 


Prop. 125.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 235 


that the pious dead would be raised up at the Coming of the Messiah, and 
that they would remain with Him here on earth in His Kingdom. <A few 
specimens will suffice : Hisenmenger (Bush, Anast., p. 221) states that the 
Jews held that the souls of pious Israelites were in a state of detention 
until the resurrection, awaiting a deliverance which was to be wrought 
for them by the Messiah, the Son of David. Bush quotes (Anast., p. 225), 
as favoring such a resurrection, R. Joshua Ben Levi, who thus applies 
Hos. 13 : 14 and Isa. 35 : 10, and also the Bereshith Rabba ad Gen, thus 
interpreting Micah 2:13. Priest (View, p. 40) says that J. Ben Uziel 
when referring to the prophecies of Hldad and Medad concerning Gog and 
Magog ‘‘ in the last days,’’ adds: ‘‘ All the dead of Israel shall rise again 
to life, and shall enjoy the delights prepared for them from the beginning, 
and shall receive the reward of their works.’? R. Eliezer speaks of a res- 
urrection preceding the Millennial age or thousand years. In the Test. 
of Simeon (Twelve Patriarchs) when ‘‘ the Lord God, the Mighty One of 
Israel, shall appear upon earth as man,’ it is added: ‘‘ Then wiil I 
(Simeon) arise in joy and will bless the Most High for His marvellous 
works, because God hath taken a body, and eaten with men, and saved 
men.’’ In the same work, in the Test. of Zebulun, he is represented as 
saying: ‘‘ And now, my children, grieve not that I am dying, nor be 
troubled in that I am passing away from you. For I shall arise once more 
in the midst of you, as a ruler in the midst of his sons; and I will rejoice 
in the midst of my tribe,’’ etc. Having given Jewish testimony in various 
places, and reserving others for following propositions, this, in connection 
with the collections given by Burnet (Zheory), Lightfoot (Works), Mede 
(Works), Manasse Ben Israel (On es.), Herzog’s Cyclop., Smith’s Bid. 
Dic., and found in our commentaries, is corroborative of the notion enter- 
tained by Jews themselves of a corporeal resurrection, and of its occurrence 
at the appearing of the Messiah. And, what is remarkable, this very ex- 
pectation of a resurrection at the time of the reign of the Messiah, a Pre- 
Millennial resurrection, a resurrection deemed indispensable to fulfil the 
prophets and the covenant itself to Abraham, etc., is so fully incorporated 
in the phraseology of the New Test. that not the shghtest disconnection is 
to be found existing, so that Paul himself, Acts 26 :6, 7 (comp. Acts 23 :6), 
links ‘‘ the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers, unto which 
promise our twelve tribes, instantly serving God day and night, hope to 
come,”’ with the resurrection itself ; and John in the Apocalypse, as many 
writers have admitted, gives a representation of the resurrection 7 full 
accord with Jewish opinions. At least the language chosen in its natural, 
grammatical meaning confirms these hopes not only in Jewish but in Gen- 
tile converts. The latter circumstance is to be considered the stronger in 
our favor, since, as many authors have shown, the doctrine of a resurrec- 
tion from the dead was particularly absurd and offensive to Greeks, 
Romans, etc. Surely this continued reception of ‘‘ Jewish conceptions” 
by Gentile churches must have its significance. This doctrine was taught 
by the apostolic Fathers and their successors as indispensable to their 
system of faith ; and it was regarded as cardinal and exceeding precious, 
owing to the covenanted Kingdom and blessings being identified with it. 
Justin Martyr (Dial. with Trypho, ch. 80) gives the general view held 
when he says : ‘‘ But I and others, who are right-minded Christians on all 
points, are assured that there will be a resurrection of the dead (or as New- 
ton, of the flesh), and a thousand years in Jerusalem, which will then be 


236 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 125. 


built, adorned, and enlarged, as the prophets Ezekiel and Isaiah and 
others declare,’’ quoting Isa. 65 : 17-25; Ps. 90:4; 2 Pet. 3: 8 and the 
Apoc. in confirmation. 


While this doctrine was almost entirely confined to the Jews and the first Christians, 
yet traces of it are to be found in several directions. Thus e.g. a resurrection of the 
body was taught even bya sect of Magians several centuries B.c. A great prophet was to 
arise toward the expiration of this world, who would be *‘ the Conqueror of death and the 
Judge of the world,’’ and after this revival to life the once dead but now “ become im- 
mortal with a fine ethereal body, would lead a life ot bliss upon an earth forever freed 
from the corrupting influence of evil.”” (Quoted by Thompson, Theol. of Christ, p. 182.) 
The Sibylline Oracles, as many have noticed, teach a resurrection preceding a Millennial 
age and reign of a Mighty King. However we may account for the advocacy of the doc- 
trine outside of the Jews and Christians, one thing is certain from the constant appeal 
made to Scripture, that both Jews and Christians derived their belief from the express 
declarations of God’s Word, so that, e.g. Lactantius (Div. Insti.) when adverting to this 
Pre-Millennial resurrection connected with the personal Advent of the Messiah, only ex- 
presses a uniform sentiment when he says (ch. 26) : ° this is the doctrine of the holy prophets 
which we Christians follow ; this is our wisdom.’’ 

For other references to the Jewish and Primitive belief, see Ante-Nicene Library, 
Coms. of Meyer, Gill, Clarke, etc. Arts. on Res. in Kitto, Calmet, writings of Russell, 
Dodwell, Greswell, ete. Observe the language of Clemens Romanus in his &pis. to the 
Corinthians. 'The Apocrypha, as e.g. Mac. 2: 7,14; 12 : 45, ete. The Karaites (the party 
opposed to the Rabbinical) hold to a resurrection of the dead, as seen in their articles of 
belief (Milman’s Jlis. of the Jews, p. 224).. So also the Mohammedans, who (Upham’s 
His. of Mahomet’s Successors, Greenbank’s Period. Library, p. 247, specially honored Pales- 
tine, “as, according to their traditions, it is the place whither all mankind will be sum- 
moned at the resurrection.”’ 


Obs. 6. But in view of. the variety of theory concerning the resurrection, 
something more must be stated. Many writers refine the resurrection by 
using it as a figurative expression, so that it is constituted something 
coeval with the history of the Church ; or as an accommodation denoting 
the unfolding of greater capacities and newer powers; or as indicative 
of an inner body or life continued after death, making death not penal, but 
necessary and friendiy to the development of life ; or, as the reception of 
something exclusively spiritual, either the complete transformation of the 
material into spirit or the union of two spiritual natures into one. There 
is 20 end to the variety and scope of mystical language in this direction, 
and under the guidance of men of learning and genius, it becomes bewil- 
dering. But all such notions, however learnedly and eloquently expressed, 
are opposed to the simple idea of the resurrection as entertained by the 
Jews and early Christians, and as represented in the Scriptures. We 
frankly admit that the subject is one of faith, and thus accept of it ; but, 
at the same time, a solid foundation sustaining such faith is produced. 
Leaving the connection that it has with the body itself in the grave, with 
the corporeal resurrection of Jesus, with the meaning of the word anastasis 
as aptly given by Pearson on the Creed, with the corporeal resurrection of 
some after the crucifixion, etc., we plant ourselves on the ‘‘ redemption of 
the body” (Rom. 8 : 23), which clearly teaches that not another body is 
given and glorified, but the same body, made subject by sin to death and cor- 
ruption, is raised up again and given immortality and renewed (even spirit- 
ualized) powers and capacities. We still have faith to accept of the 
scriptural statements that death is penal in its nature, that it is an 
enemy and not a friendly messenger to introduce a spiritual resurrection, 
or to bestow the inheritance, crown, and Kingdom. We are old-fashioned 


PROP. 125. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 23% 


enough in our belief to cling with hope to that day beyond the interme- 
diate period or state, when the redemption of the body will also be effected, 
And this, because we rest on a perfect, complete Redemption. Our Saviour 
is @ perfect Hedeemer ; and the early Christians evinced not only faith but 
logic when they claimed in and through Him ‘‘ the Redemption of the 
body.’’ verything else that man and the race forfeited by sin is restored 
through Christ, and we can make no exception in favor of the body, given 
over to death and corruption, without making Redemption in so far in- 
complete, and giving in this particular the victory and triumph to Satan. 
We dare not limit the redemption of the believer, seeing that God designs 
and has promised, through Christ, a complete restoration to all forfeited 
blessings ; and even superadds to the same, in virtue of relationship to the 
Redeemer, increased exaltation and glory. Hence, every theory, however 
plausible, and no matter by whom advocated, that proceeds to limit Re- 
demption, the work of Christ, must be rejected as irreconcilable with the 


« 


honor, power, etc. of God in Redemption. 


An editor of a prominent religious periodical, in a recent article on the resurrection, 
complained that some gave it undue prominency in the pulpit, etc., and suggested that 
one sermon a year was amply sufficient to give it all the prominency that it needs. Some 
eminent commentators and theologians of his own denomination correctly take a different 
view from that of the editor, who makes so much of *‘the intermediate state’ that he 
does not see much necessity for a resurrection. Over against such a loose method we 
commend the excellent remarks of one of the editors (either Dr. Brown or Dr. Valentine) 
of the Luang. Quarterly Review, Art. 1, July, 1874, p. 337, insisting upon its fundamental 
importance and necessity (corporeal) for completed redemption. Sir Thomas Browne 
(Relig. Medici, S. 47) quaintly says: “ The life, therefore, and spirit of our actions is the 
resurrection, and a stable apprehension that our ashes shall enjoy the fruit of our pious 
endeavors ; without this all religion is a fallacy, and those impieties of Lucian, Euripides 
and Julian are no blasphemies, but subtle vexities ; and atheists have been the only phi- 
losophers.’’ The critical student will find that by “ the adoption,’’ Rom. 9:4, Paul 
refers to this resurrection (for proof, see the preceding chapter, v. 23), making it equiva- 
lent to ‘‘ the redemption of the body’’ (comp. Judge Jones’ Notes, p. 284, foot-note). But 
it is something distinguished from the general resurrection, being a peculiar and dis- 
tinctive one, belonging to ‘‘ the Sons of God ;’ for by the resurrection of saints is the 
adoption both perfected and manifested. Jesus is declared to be ‘‘ the Son of God” by 
the resurrection from the dead, Rom. 1 : 4, and His Sunship being vindicated and mani- 
fested by that sublime manifestation of power, it is employed, Acts 13 : 33, as proof of 
the resurrection. But the identical principle involved in ‘‘ the manifestation of the Sons of 
God,’ to become such fully and really, they also, like their Head, must be declared such 
by a resurrection from among the dead—-one peculiar to themselves ; and this the Apostle 
declares, Rom. 8, where the formal adoption is linked with the resurrection, for.they are 
born again (as Jesus was born from the dead) as His children. (Query : Can we thus 
apply ‘‘ the Sons of the living God” in Hos. 1:10?) Brown (Com. Matt. 12 : 25), in 
confirmation of what we previously said respecting the memorial (Prop. 49, Obs. 2, note) 
expressing a resurrection, forcibly says: ‘‘ A beautiful clause is added by Luke, ‘ and are 
children of God’—not in respect of character, which is not here spoken of, but of nature— 
‘being the children of the resurrection,’ rising to an unending existence (Rom. 8 : 21, 23), 
being the children of their Father’s immortality’’ (1 Tim. 6:16). (Compare Rom. 1 : 4, 
ete.) It will be profitable for us to ponder in our hearts what this means, viz., that if we 
are so happy as to be “‘ the children of the resurrection’’ we thus are manifested as God’s 
children, He calling us out of the dust of the earth by supernatural power and imparting to us 
God-like powers. The expression in its relationship is so indicative of a new birth with 
added capacities and powers, so full of contemplated glory entirely derived out of the 
ordinary course of nature, that it ought to stimulate our faith and hope to grasp such a 
distinguishing, peculiar resurrection of saints. 

Attention is called to Ps. 16:10: “Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt Thow 
suffer Thy Holy One to see corruption.” The mss. have the plural form ‘‘ holy ones,” and 
Rosenmuiler, De Wette, Gesenius, Bruno, Stange, Fischer, etc., decide that it must be 
retained. Our version and many commentators follow the Keri or marginal reading, and 


238 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 125. 


retain the singular. This has led to some discussion among critics. Some, as Fischer, 
etc., call it a plural of intention having reference only to Christ. Others, as Hengensten- 
berg, conclude that ‘‘ the plural here must have been extremely welcome to the Jews be- 
cause it furnished them with the best means of refuting the Messianic interpretation of 
the Ps.” Some, as Dr. Alexander, contend that even the singular reading in the margin 
** is collective and includes the whole class of God’s chosen and favored ones, of whom 
Christ is the Head and Representative’’ (whereupon a writer in the Bib. Sucra., Oct., 
1851, p. 808, asks the Dr., ‘‘ Is it a fact that God does not suffer His ‘ holy ones’ to see 
corruption ?’’). Now, so far as the plural form is concerned, if insisted on, we are willing 
(gladly, as authoritative) to adopt it, but need not necessarily indorse Hengstenberg’s 
idea. For notice, (1) it is quoted in the New Test. as expressly applicable to a resurrec- 
tion ; (2) Christ being the Head of the brethren or ‘‘ holy ones’’ is necessarily included, 
and therefore the application to Him ; (3) that the suggested question whether His 
brethren, ‘‘ holy ones,’’ do not experience corruption, is not stated in the text if we allow 
due latitude of meaning to the word “see.’’ For it has also the meaning of sufferance or 
enduring, of continued experience or under the possession of, etc., as e.g., “ It was not 
meet for us to see the King’s dishonor,” “ If a man shall keep my saying he shall never 
see death,” ‘‘ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God,’’ etc. Hence it is not 
necessary even to contend that any saint, including Jesus Himself, has not experienced 
corruption, seeing that the text only asserts that they shall not be suffered to endure cor- 
ruption, remain under its power, but shall obtain a resurrection. With either reading it 
is a proof of Christ’s resurrection, and with the plural form it embraces that of His mem- 
bers, and thus makes the resurrection of all a bodily one. 

In reference to the body itself it is sufficient to add, that, being something beyond 
present experience and reason, it is not particularly described, but in general it is 
asserted that being transformed, made like unto the body of Christ, glorified, it becomes 
“a spiritual body,’’ i.e. a body perfectly controlled by Spirit and not dependent any 
longer on nature for its support (although like angels, because of future supping with 
Jesus, etc., food and drink may be partaken of—not as a matter of necessity, but rather 
of pleasure). It is a body freed from weakness, disease, and death, having immortality, 
perpetual youth, angelic and even Christ-like powers. It is a strange notion of Burnet’s 
(Com. State of the Dead, and Res., ch. 7) that this glorified body will have no members or 
organs of sensation. Reason would imply the exact contrary, and even largely increase 
them as.means of enlarged happiness (without e.g. interfering with the power of rapid 
transmission from one point to another), which Scripture supports in that it invariably 
links the unbounded happiness of the righteous with the period of their resurrection, 
and conveys the decided impression that the body itself will form an instrumentality 
through which increased pleasure will be afforded to the soul. We may well imagine, as 
Scripture intimates (Luke 20 : 36, etc.), that the future body in its glorified form will 
vary from the present body in that it is specially fitted for a new and enlarged state or 
ordering. The description of Jesus glorified, the representations of the saints, all evi- 
dence the greatness of the transformation, yet in such a way as to preserve a continued 
personal identity linking it with that which had previously existed. The critical student 
will ponder in this connection that (already intimated) glorification (which qualifies for 
honor and station) follows the resurrection. It is supposed from 1 Cor. 15 that glorifica- 
tion and resurrection are one, but a little reflection and comparison will show that Paul 
in the general subject of the resurrection of the saints, which includes their glorification, 
unites both, giving the result, under the one general head. 'The production of the natu- 
ral body is not instantaneous, and it does not follow that the production of the glorified 
and spiritual body is a sudden, instantaneous one. Let the reader consider that the 
resurrection of the saints leads to a speedy, determined incorruptibility, etc., because a 
resurrection, same word, is also predicted of the unjust, who certainly are not trans- 
formed because resurrected, thus showing that the act of resurrecting or vivifying the 
dead is one thing and that of glorifying quite another. Men are to be judged for the 
deeds done in the body, and it would be an incongruity to judge them when already, as 
evidence of previous judgment, in possession of their reward in a transformed body. The 
resurrection of Jesus is in point, for we have no evidence that He assumed the glorified 
form until at His ascension, thus showing a resurrected one can exist restored to life, for 
some time independent of glorification. The rewarding being at the res. of the just, and 
as the future position, station, etc., of the believer in the Theocratic Kingdom is then 
assigned to them, and as differences exist, etc., we have every reason to believe that 
while all glorified bodies are fashioned after Christ's, some are more like Christ’s than 
others, or in other words, that a diversity will thus exist even in the glory of the body as 
in the glory of tue soul. 


E ROP. 125. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 239 


Obs. 7. If charged with credulity in our belief, we answer, that it re- 
quires far more to spiritualize away the plainest of facts. Thus, e.g. if 
the resurrection consists merely in a continued spiritual or future life, why 
is so much said of the burial of Christ, of the grave, the sealing, the stone 
rolled away, the rising on the third day (and not after death), the visita- 
tion to indicate no absence of the body, etc. ? How can these facts be rec- 
onciled with such a theory? Again: the precise idea is conveyed of a 
resurrection ‘‘ from among or out of the dead,”’ as all critics admit (as e.g. 
Phil. 3:11, etc.). Prof. Bush (Anasé., p. 189), noticing this peculiarity 
in Luke 20 : 25, says : ‘‘ This usage is very remarkable, and must be founded 
upon some sufficient reason.’’ ‘lhe reason he assigns is, that it denotes a 
moral or spiritual resurrection from among or out of the dead in sin, or a 
future state. But the facts in reference to this usage are decidedly against 
such a view, for the identical language is employed to denote Christ’s res- 
urreciion from among or out of the dead as is seen in Acts 4 : 2, comp. 
Acts 17:31; and hence, if the pleading is valid, it denotes in Christ’s 
casé a moral or spiritual regeneration or acontinued future life. How, too, 
reconcile this usage of language with precisely the same employed by the 


Jews to signify, as the words indicate, a separate and distinct resurrection 
of some of the dead ? 


Compare Prop. 128. We are satisfied with the charge of credulity, so long as the 
same is supported by the plain statements of God. The difficulties alleged in the scatter- 
ing of the dust, in the assimilation of the flesh of martyrs by beasts, etc., have no force 
to him who believes in the unlimited Omnipotence of God. The question simply is, has 
God declared that He will raise the dead? If He has, then He will perform it, no matter 
how incredible, how impossible it may be to man. We are not concerned in replying to 
objections at length, simply because not knowing how it is accomplished, how the trans- 
formation is performed, we might readily be led in our short-sightedness, into error. It 
is sufficient that a cause efficient enough to produce it is assigned, even Jesus, David’s 
Son and Son of God, and that the efficiency was practically demonstrated in His own 
dead body. The illustrations generally employed, however favorites, to show forth the 
resurrection, apt as they may be in one respect, failin others. Thus e.g. the change of 
the ugly caterpillar in its silken cocoon into the beautiful butterfly, lacks the analogy of 
death and the sudden exertion of power in its behalf; it is simply the product of 
nature’s laws, while the other is the glorious resultant of supernatural power. ‘The silver 
cup dissolved by acid and mixed in a large quantity of liquid in an invisible state, so 
that even the microscope cannot perceive it, and then again by science reduced to visi- 
bility, to a compact mass, and formed into another silver cup of greater shapeliness and 
beauty, this may indeed teach us to have faith in the ability of the great Chemist and 
Scientist who established and organized the vast laboratory of nature, but its analogy 
utterly fails because it does not touch the problem of death and life. The only light and 
illustration that has the requisite force and beauty is that found in Him who is “ the 
resurrection and the life.’’ It is such that childlike faith can grasp, appreciate and apply 
with comfort and hope. It preserves, however accomplished and whatever modifications 
exist, the personal identity of the believer, even as respects his body, as implied by the dead 
ones being called forth from their graves, etc. Bh. Butler (Analogy) may go too far, as 
Tyndall (Pop. Science Monthly, Oct., 1874) accuses him, when he says, ‘‘ Our organized 
bodies are no more a part of ourselves than any other matter around us” (urged to the 
statement by his eulogy of the soul and illustrating it by limbs removed, body diseased, 
and yet the mind active, etc.) ; but Tyndall goes to the opposite extreme when, retaliating 
with his Lucretian theory, he makes matter supreme (illustrated by the brain, vital 
organs, etc., being requisite to sustain a person), for the truth seems to be in a medium, 
both being essential to constitute the personal identity of a believer, and consequently, 
as we have shown, there is a redemption which includes soul and body. As to the phi- 
losophical and scientific questions that this may suggest, it is again sufficient to say, 
that this whole matter being beyond our experience and knowledge, we must be content 
with the general statements which include both, making it satisfactory and comforting 

(just what we need) at the mouth of the grave, when it receives the mortal remains of a 
loved one. Simple faith in God’s Word imparts hope and joy, when supposed superior 


240 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 125. 


wisdom gives only despair and anguish, or, at least, painful doubt and perplexing sus. 
pense diminishing happiness. When we see Christ’s body, the body itself, raised up so 
that it should not experience corruption ; when we consider this requisite to prove His 
resurrecting power over death itself ; when we contemplate the assurance that His resur- 
rection is a pledge, the first fruits, of our own, then we are satisfied, and willing to remain 
in ignorance of its modus operandi, awaiting its glorious power. 


Obs. 8. Candor requires the brief examination of the only passage 
which can, by careless concessions, be adduced as favorable to this notion 
of a purely spiritual resurrection immediately after death, viz., that of 
2 Cor. 5:1-8. If we entertain the opinion, given by various writers, that 
this change of body is experienced at death, we are at once plunged into 
difficulties, for then, (1) we make Paul contradict himself in his teaching 
concerning the resurrection. For he not only in other places teaches a 
corporeal resurrection, but he precisely locates this resurrection and trans- 
formation at the future Coming of Christ (e.g. 1 Cor. 15, and 1 Thess. 4), 
when ‘‘ the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven,”’ etc. (2) In consol- 
ing those who lost friends and endured tribulations (1 Thess. 4 :13 ; 
2 Thess. 1 : 4-10, etc.), he refers them to an experience of ‘the power of the 
resurrection at the same period, and professes the same respecting himself 
(Rom. 8 : 23). (3) That none of the churches established by him, or their 
immediate successors, believed, so far as we have any knowledge, that 
believers experienced such a change immediately after death, which omis- 
sion of faith is corroborative evidence that the passage was apprehended 
without such an interpretation. If we concede that the change is after the 
death of the believer, then the concession is seized by Swedenborgians, 
Universalists, etc., as proof of the non-resurrection of the bodies of the 
saints. Is this concession necessary, or is it demanded by the passage ? 
The reasons just assigned have already sufficient weight to urge us to avoid 
it for the sake of consistency ; and the solution, if we allow fhe general 
analogy of Scripture to speak, is not difficult. It is only a forced com- 
ment to say, as some do (e.g. MacKnight, Hodge, etc.), that the resurrec- 
tion body is not denoted, but only ‘‘ the heavenly mansions’’ or places in 
the third heaven, for then the contrast is not preserved. It is contradic- 
tory to profess a belief in a bodily resurrection at the end of the age, and 
yet when we come to this passage, give the saints (as Barnes) in this inter- 
mediate state a body and even ‘‘a glorified body.’’ ‘To say that Paul de- 
sired to be with Christ in a disembodied state does violence to the desire 
as expressed, or to say that a temporary body is given until the day of resur- 
rection is opposed to its being ‘‘ eternal.’’ The explanation of Locke that 
Paul expected the speedy coming of Christ, and desired a transformation, 
without dying, although plausible, as Barnes admits, is not necessary to rec- 
oncile the passage with other statements of Paul. The opinion of that 
class of commentators who advocate that the resurrection body is denoted, is 
the only one that accords with the tenor of the resurrection doctrine. Paul 
is accustomed, owing to the inheritance, etc., being linked with the Second 
Coming, to pass over the intermediate state, examples of which are found 
(e.g. Rom. 8 : 30; Heb. 12 : 22, 23, etc.) in several epistles. Before enter- 
ing upon the words of the passage, he expresses his strong faith in the 
things not seen, in the things eternal, and among those things he had just 
enumerated (ch. 4:14), “‘ knowing that He which raised up the Lord Jesus 
shall raise us up also by Jesus,and shall present us with you.’’ Hence, 
grasping by faith the blessings connected with the resurrection by Jesus, 


ae =F 


Prop. 125.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 241 


he, passing by the intermediate state as not worthy of comparison with 
what follows it, makes a general affirmation of the resurrection, his desire 
to experience it, and his safety and blessedness whether he presently, or 
not, experience it. ‘That his mind was impressed by the desire for a 
bodily resurrection appears, (1) that this body is ‘‘ eternal in the heaven- 

lies’’ (see Prop. 107), which accords with the position and rank of the 
- Rulers after the resurrection ; (2) it occurs here on earth for ‘‘ the house is 
from heaven,’’ i.e. the change, etc., is made by God through His Son 
Jesus (for our “‘ resurrection’’ even is in heaven) ; (3) this change is made 
“‘ that mortality might be swallowed up of life,’’ i.e., the body itself, the 
mortal part, is endued with immortality, otherwise it is not correct to say 
that the mortal receives or attains to life, but it should be (if spiritualized) 
that the mortal body gives place to another and different body never suscep- 
tible to mortality ; (4) the ‘* earnest of the Spirit,’’ given as a pledge for 
the performance of this, indicates it, as a comparison with Rom. 8 : 23 ; 
Eph. 1:14; Eph. 4 : 30, etc., will show. Such considerations, to say the 
least, are ample enough, whatever view we may entertain respecting par- 
ticular parts of the passage or concerning it as a whole, to prove that we 
need not indorse a spiritual endowment or resurrection immediately after 
death, making the resurrection of the body unnecessary and redundant ; 
for, admitting the apostleship of Paul, the writer does not contradict him- 
self, which he inevitably does if we force such an interpretation upon his 
words. ; 


Rev. Wilson (Proph. Times, N.S., 1875, vol. 1, p. 223) and others simply make the 
body reserved in heaven to be the body of Christ, the pattern of ours, after whose body 
ours is to be fashioned, just as He is now in heaven our life. We shall be clothed with 
this body at His Coming, etc., and as Paul saw this very body, hence his intense longing 
for it, thus nervously expressed. Lange’s Com. loci refers the reception of this body to 
the resurrection at the Parousia of Jesus, and Dr. Wing (foot-note) indorses and enforces 
(over against Hodge’s view) the opinion expressed by Dr. Kling. The passage, too, as 
numerous writers observe, distinguishes between the soul and the body, so that the latter 
is not pure spirit, but an organized vehicle under perfect control of the spirit. Comp. 
the excellent remarks of Fausset (Com. loci), who heads his comments with ‘‘ The Hope 
of Eternal Glory in the Resurrection Body.” 


Obs. 9. Attention is called to the circumstance that many of our op- 
posers frankly acknowledge that a literal Pre-Millennial resurrection 1s 
taught in the Scriptures. Of these we have several classes, (1) such as re- 
ceive the inspired Word, and profess themselves forced by philological and 
exegetical reasons to receive the doctrine, but very carefully have these 
resurrected saints removed to the third heaven. Such are Prof. M. Stuart, 
Priest, etc.; and the Com. of Stuart and his Zxcursus on Rev. 20 are com- 
mended to the special consideration of the reader, because his candid 
admissions are particularly valuable both on account of his known hostility 
to our doctrine, and by reason of this concession of a literal resurrection 
being antagonistic in spirit and principle to his own theological system.’ 
(2) Then there are some hard to understand and contradictory ; admitting 
in one place a literal Pre-Millennial resurrection, without the Advent of 
Christ, and in another place rejecting it. Thus, e.g. Kurtz (Sacred His- 
tory) admits, s. 196, a literal resurrection to precede the Millennium, as his 
reference to Matt. 27 : 52, 53 indicates, and yet in sections 198 and 199 he 
speaks as if all the Scriptures pertaining to the dead of Christ were only 
fulfilled at the close of that age. He, too, is guarded in placing those resur- 


242 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 125. 


rected ones preceding the Millennial age in an “‘ invisible and celestial ”’ 
reign, just as if the predicted Kingdom of the prophets was an invisible 
one. ‘The concession, however feebly given, is worthy of notice, as in so 
far it coincides with ‘‘ the ignorance and folly’’ of Jewish expectations.? 
(3) Another class are those who, imitating some ancient opponents of 
Chiliasm, reject the Apocalypse mainly on the ground that it teaches a two- 
fold resurrection, the first of the saints at the beginning of the Millennial 
age, the second atits close. So Licke and others, see Prof. Stuart’s Jntrod. 
to Apoc. (4) Some, as Prof. Bush (Mill. and Anast.), Neander (Works), 
admit that the language 7s well adapted to teach a Pre-Millennial corporeal 
resurrection, that such an opinion was entertained by the early Church, 
that it was well suited to sustain the martyrs, etc., but that its true spirit- 
ual conception was Zo be developed by the growth of the Church. (5) Rejec- 
tors of Revelation, as Gibbon (fistory, vol. 1, p. 534, etc.), admit it, and in 
various works and periodicals it is presented and derided as decidedly too 
‘¢ Jewish.”? <A writer, e.g. in Westm. Review, Oct., 1861, p. 261, speaking 
of this doctrine, portrays it thus : ‘‘ The subjects of this long-desired the- 
ocracy are primarily the decapitated martyrs, and then all the true adhe- 
rents of the now triumphant Messiah. Their restoration to a happy and 
sinless corporeal existence constitutes the first resurrection,’’ but pro- 
nounces it after all only a splendid idea derived from Jewish Messianic 
expectations, unworthy of credence. Very recent attacks on the Apoc. b 
talented men correspond with this in tone and spirit. (6) Still others fully 
admit the literalness of the Pre-Millennial resurrection, but injure its force, 
and materially affect the harmony of prophecy, by linking with it, and re- 
garding as identical in time, events which are separated by the Millennial 
era. ‘Thus, e.g. Keith in his Harmony of Prophecy. 'Thus from various 
sources, antagonistic, and some even hostile, to us, we have the important 
admission made, so requisite to our system of faith, that a literal Pre-Mil- 
lennial resurrection is taught in the Scriptures.* 


1 Among these may be classed those who express themselves in a hesitating, undecided 
manner. As e.g. Henry’s comment in the Compreh. Com. loci, which says: ‘‘ They were 
raised from the dead and restored to life, either literally or figuratively,’’ but then proceeds, 
owing to preconceived views of judgment, Kingdom, etc., to favor the figurative sense. 
Among such may also be reckoned those who occasionally give a most decided utterance 
in our favor, but are largely given to spiritualizing. Thus e.g. Dr. Tomlinson, in his 
Sermon on the Millennium, is forced to acknowledge a literal res. After mentioning the 
view of ares. of a mere spirit of the martyrs, he adds: ‘‘ Others contend, and, in my 
opinion, with much more propriety, that it should be interpreted according to its obvious 
import , and that the martyrs will literally rise from the dead at the beginning of the Mil- 
lennium, and continue on the earth throughout the whole of that period,’’ and then 
approvingly quotes Bh. Newton. ‘To these may be added such writers as Spurgeon, Tal- 
mage, and others, who in one place utter the most emphatic Pre-Millenarian views (some 
we quote in this work), and then weaken the same in other places by indecisive, hesitat- 
ing, or spiritualistic utterances, showing that a clear, uniform system of Eschatology is 
lacking. 

* To this class Dr, Chalmers may be added (having occasion to quote him occasion- 
ally), who at times is hard to understand, unless we allow him a Millenarian bias (comp. 
his letter to Dr. Bonar, Memoirs, vol. 5). Thus e.g. on Ps. 50 : 1-6 (Posth. Works, vol. 3, 
p. 51) he remarks upon its being in ‘‘ the domain of unfulfilled prophecy,’’ and adds : 
‘* And Iam far more inclined to the literal interpretation of this Psalm than to that 
which would restrict it to the mere preaching of the Gospel in the days of the apostles. 
It looks far more like the descent of the Son of Man on the Mount of Olives, with all the 
accompaniments of a Jewish conversion, and a first resurrection, and a destruction of the 
assembled hosts of Antichrist.’’ Even Origen could not entirely rid himself of the Primi- 
tive view, and occasionally utters sentiments in accord with Chiliastic views, as e.g. in 


PRopP. 125.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 243 


his 13th Homily on Jeremiah, he says: ‘‘ If any man shall preserve the washing of the 
Holy Spirit, etc., he shall have part in the First Resurrection ; but if any man be saved in 
the Sec. Resurrection only, it is the sinner that needeth the baptism by fire. Wherefore, 
seeing these things are so, let us lay the Scriptures to heart, and make them the rule of 
our lives ; that so being cleansed from the defilement of sin before we depart, we may be 
raised wp with the saints and have our lot with Christ Jesus.” (The student will observe 
that Barbour’s system is Origen’s revived, viz., future salvation of sinners.) 

° Dr. Keith, in many respects an instructive and valuable writer, connects passages 
(Har. of Proph.) as descriptive of the same period of time which the Spirit applies to 
different eras of time. Thus e.g., overlooking the plain fact that the judgments of God 
fall upon living nations and not upon the dead at the Sec. Advent (comp. Prop. 134), 
and the additional fact that the dead in Christ only experience a resurrection at the be- 
ginning of the Mill. age and the rest of the dead are not raised until its close (comp. next 
Prop.), he unites with Rev. 20 : 5, 6, etc., such passages as Rev. 20 : 12, 18, 14, 15. His 
objection that we nowhere find “ a second” resurrection spoken of, is irrelevant, for two 
reasons, (1) the term “‘ first,” as shown in next Prop., has not so much reference to time 
as to privilege ; and (2) the resurrection of allisasserted, but a certain precedence given to 
the righteous, which necessarily involves precedence in time, etc. 


Obs. 10. An objection, urged by Barnes and others, may as well be 
noticed here. It is to the effect that in more detailed descriptions of the 
Resurrection, as in 1 Thess. 4, and 1 Cor. 15, Paul does not connect the 
personal reign and Kingdom of Christ as following here on earth. But if 
this proves anything, it proves too much, for it would exclude other things 
also mentioned as occurring, such as the creation of new heavens, etc., the 
resurrection of the unjust, the last judgment, etc. The omission is de- 
cidedly in our favor, for (while Paul in other places unites “‘ the appearing 
and Kingdom’’), he here takes it for granted, from the universally enter- 
tained views that the Kingdom is joined to the appearing of this Son of 
Man, that the parties addressed will supply the order of events omitted, 
and discusses only that part of it, viz., the resurrection of the dead, which 
to Gentiles, like the Thessalonians and Corinthians, was the most incredi- 
ble, etc. If the objection is appropriate, then we might frame another in 
the same spirit, and ask, Why then, seeing that these Thessalonians are 
charged by Neander und others as holding to ‘* Jewish forms’’ of the King- 
dom, did not the apostle, when on the subject of the resurrection, refute 
their Jewish notions of the Kingdom? The one objection is as pertinent 
as the other. 


244 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


Proposition 126. Ln confirmation of our position, the Old Test. 
clearly teaches a Pre-Millennial resurrection of the saints. 


Our entire argument, step by step, leads to this as a necessity, 
otherwise the Kingdom as covenanted and predicted cannot appear, 
and cannot be inherited. Leaving the reasons already assigned 
(under the discussion of the covenant and memorial, see. Prop. 49), 
we now appeal to others which show that before the Messianic 
Kingdom can be realized the righteous dead must first be raised up 
from among the dead. 


Obs. 1. No one doubts that Isa. 25 : 6-8 is descriptive of the Messiah’s 
Kingdom. If we regard it, as it ought to be, representative of a state here 
on earth to be witnessed during an appointed time, and if we do not take 
the unwarranted liberty of dividing and subdividing it, allotting portions of 
it to one time and other portions to another time, or, ascribing parts of 16 
to earth and others to the third heaven, ¢hen it will be very easy to locate 
the period of its verification or realization on the authority of the Apostle 
Paul. In turning to 1 Cor. 15 : 54, after a description only of the resur- 
rection of the righteous, the apostle emphatically adds, ‘‘ then’’ (i.e. at this 
very time of this resurrection) ‘‘ shall be brought to pass the saying that is 
written ‘Death is swallowed up in victory.’ ’’ Isaiah’s Millennial description, 
which all agree is a delineation of Christ’s Kingdom, is, according to this 


testimony, to be fulfilled or brought to pass when a resurrection is experi-- 


enced by the saints. ‘This is corroborated by the statements given in 
Isaiah, corresponding with such, that we know are only to be realized after 
death is abolished. But Paul adds another saying which is also ‘‘ then,”’ 
at that time to be brought to pass, viz., the one given by Hos. 13 : 14 
(gives the spirit of it), ‘‘ O death, where is thy sting ? O grave, where ts thy 
victory?’ ‘The question that arises here is this: Paul well knew that 
Hosea 13 : 14 (as well as Isa. 25 : 8) was a favorite passage of the Jews to 
support a resurrection of righteous Jews at the inauguration of the King- 
dom by the coming of the Messiah—how, then, could he locate its fulfilment 
at a resurrection of saints, conjointly with the Kingdom description of 
Isaiah, unless he fully and freely indorsed such a Jewish view? ‘This testi- 
mony is plain and convincing, unless we charge Paul with prevarication. 
As an inspired man, as a follower of Gamaliel, as a preacher of the King- 
dom, knowing the Jewish views, he cowld not give them such an indorse- 
ment wnless it was true. 

If Paul had not in 1 Cor. 15 explained the phrase, ‘‘ He has swallowed up death in 


victory,’’ then spiritualizers would undoubtedly have explained it away as denoting, 
probably, comfort or hope in death, etc. Indeed, some not satisfied with Paul’s refer- 


ence think that ‘‘ death” in Isaiah denotes the woes or calamities of the Jewish nation, 


and this is done by Vitringa, Rosenmuller, Bush, etc., in order to make the Millennial 
predictions to correspond with the present state of the church. Against the express inter- 


\ 


PROP. 126. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 245 


pretation and application of Paul, they assert that ‘‘ death” here is only ‘‘ another term 
for all manner of grievous afflictions, persecutions, wars, pestilences, sicknesses, every- 
thing, in fact, of a deadly or desolating nature, everything which causes grief, mourning, 
and tribulation. A specimen worthy of Origen! But the multitude of our opposers do 
justice to Paul’s quotation, and insist that a bodily resurrection is denoted. Barnes (Com. 
loci) only expresses the sentiments of these when he makes it refer to “ death in its 
proper signification,’’ to the fact ‘‘ that He will abolish death,’’ and that Paul’s quoting 
it “ is sufficient proof that it refers to the resurrection,’’ etc. The context of Isa. 25 : 6-9, 
as will be shown hereafter, forbids its application to the present existing dispensation, 
because the events connected therewith can only be realized at the Sec. Advent. We cer- 
tainly cannot be censured for our application of Hos. when even our bitter opponent 
Jerome (Art. ‘‘ Jerome,” Hncy. Brit.) employs it (Hos. 6 : 2, 3) as referring to the res. of 
Jesus, and then to the regeneration of the human race through the same. Now the plural 
form ‘‘ us’’ cannot refer to Jesus as an individual (unless we conceive Him as one of the 
brethren), but to the saints. He also applies Hos. 13 : 14 to the death and res. of Jesus. 


Obs. 2. In Daniel 12, we have, according to the early Church and many 
eminent writers, a literal, twofold, and Pre-Millennial resurrection fore- 
told. The English version gives, v. 2, ‘‘ And many of them that sleep in 
the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame 
and everlasting contempt.’? That the language indicates a literal resurrec- 
tion is fully admitted even by those who spiritualize it, or who apply it to 
the time of the Maccabees ; that it is expressive of or drawn from the doc- 
trine of a literal resurrection all critics confess.’ ‘‘ Sleep’’ used for death ; 
*‘ sleeping in the dust of the earth ;”’ ‘‘ awake’’ employed to denote res- 
toration to life ; this awaking of such sleepers to “‘ everlasting life,’’ all in 
the phraseology and contrast enforce swch a meaning. ‘T'o avoid the charge 
of forcing an interpretation, we shall rely on the renderings given by our 
opponents. Prof. Bush, a critical scholar, gives the following: ‘* And 
many of the sleepers of the dust of the ground shall awake—these to ever- 
lasting life, and ¢hose to shame and everlasting contempt.’’ He contends 
that the words in their precise meaning demand @ twofold resurrection, 
one class being raised up to life while another are not then awakened. As 
to the latter part of the verse and the controversy originated by it, we may 
in this discussion pass it by, only saying, (1) if it has the meaning given by 
Bush, then it forms an additional argument in our favor; (2) but if the 
contrary, as Barnes and others, is to be received, viz., that the just and 
unjust are both raised at the same time, then it may be referred, as many 
do, to the resurrection of professed believers good and bad. The first part 
of the verse is sufficient to sustain our position, viz., that of a partial 
resurrection of the dead—a resurrection of some out of or from among all 
the sleepers in the dust of the earth. The awaking is predicated alone of 
the ‘‘ many of’? and not of all men. Those who resort to making “ the 
many’’ consist of ‘‘all’’ are restricted by the peculiar, significant, and 
conclusive *‘ many of.’’ Hence we find the candid confession of Dr. Hody 
(Res. of the Body, p. 230) : ‘* I fully acknowledge that the word ‘ many’ 
makes this text extremely difficult. I know what expositors say, but I am 
not satisfied with anything I have hitherto met with. Some tell us that 


“many’ is sometimes used in the Scriptures to signify ‘ all,’ but this does 


not clear the difficulty ; for there is a great difference between ‘ many’ and 
‘many of.’ All that sleep in the dust are many ; but many of them that 
sleep in the dust cannot be said to be all they that sleep in the dust. 
‘Many of’ does plainly except some.’’? In the examination of various 
writers, all, without exception, acknowledge this restricted import, declar- 


A 


246 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


ing that its removal does violence to the passage. The language then ex- 
presses a literal, partial resurrection. Now in its connection it describes a 
Pre-Millennial one, briefly, for the following reasons : (1) It is placed at 
the end of certain prophetic periods, which, as nearly all commentators 
agree, precede, or run down to, the commencement of the Millennial pe- 
riod ; (2) it is connected with a deliverance of the people of God, pre-emi- 
nently characteristic of the beginning of the Millennial era ; (3) it is identi- 
fied with a period of great trouble, distress, etc., which, as many prophecies 
declare, precedes the ushering in of that age ; (4) it is related to the period 
when the wicked shall be rooted out, etc., which is descriptive of the com- 
mencement of this age ; (5) and the identifying of the promise annexed by 
Jesus Himself to the time immediately after the harvest, ‘‘ then shall the 
righteous shine forth as the sun,”’ for, as Joel and John show, the har- 
vest immediately precedes the Millennial glory.’ 


1 Surely we are correct when such men as Prof. Bush, who make a hteral resurrection 
adumbrate ‘‘a moral quickening” and ‘‘ future life,” apply this to the “‘ resuscitation of 
the dead mentioned in the Gospels,” and especially to ‘‘ that remarkable display of res- 
urrection power put forth upon the many bodies of the saints that slept, which arose, 
and came out of their graves after his resurrection.’’ Or, when Grotius, Amner, etc., 
following the interpretation of the heathen Porphyry, yet admit that the language is such 
as ‘‘to hint at the mystery of the resurrection.’’ Besides this, the student well knows that 
a leading objection against the Book of Daniel by destructive critics is, that a literal resur- 
rection is taught. 

2 Prof. Bush on “‘ these” and ‘‘ those”’ says : ‘‘ The awaking is evidently predicted of the 
many and not of the whole; consequently the ‘ these’ in the one case must be understood 
of the class that awake, and the ‘ those’ in the other of that which remains asleep.” 
Manv others coincide in this opinion. Barnes (Com. loci) forcibly says: “ The natural 
and obvious meaning of the word ‘many’ here is, that a large portion of the persons 
referred to would thus awake, but not all. So we should understand it, if applied to 
other things, as in such expressions as these: ‘many of the people,’ ‘many of the 
houses in a city,’ etc. Gesenius states that the word ‘ designates a part taken out of the 
whole.’ ’’ Hence we strongly object to some renderings which do not thus distinguish, 
us e.g. Knapp’s (Ch. Theol., p. 529), who concedes a literal resurrection, but renders : 
‘¢ Those who lie asleep under the earth will awake ; some to eternal life, others to ever- 
lasting shame and contempt.” Such a version is evidently shaped by the opinion of a 
simultaneous resurrection of all the dead at the same time, and does manifest violence 
to the original, as urged by the best and most reliable of critics, and conceded (as shown) 
by the candid concessions of opponents. Prof. Whiting has: ‘‘ And many from the 
sleepers of the dust of the ground shall awake, these to everlasting life, and those to 
reproaches and everlasting abhorrence.” Winthrop, and others, “ And many from out of 
the sleepers of the dust,” etc. Brookes (Essays, p. 12, note), ‘‘ And many of them that 
sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake ; these (the many raised ones) are destined to 
everlasting life—those (who remain in the graves) to shame and everlasting contempt ;” 
so also Carlton and others. Many renderings give the same sense, the only change being 
in substituting ‘‘ some’ and ‘‘ others’’ for “ these”’ and “ those,’’ excepting Augustine's 
(City of God, b. 20, c. 23), who translates : © And many of them-that sleep in the mound of 
the earth shall arise, some to everlasting life and some to shame and everlasting confu- 
sion.’’ In the Jsraelite Indeed, vol. 11, p. 210, Chaplin gives the following : ‘‘ Many apart 
from those sleeping in the dust of the earth shall be awakened; these (the many 
awakened) shall have eternal life ; and those (the remainder left sleeping) shall have the 
reproaches of eternity ;’ and Lederer (the editor) suggests : ‘‘ And many from those who 
sleep in the earth-dust— or dust of the ground—shall be awakened ; some to lives everlast- 
ing and some to shame and everlasting abhorrence.” The reader can readily verify such 
renderings in various leading commentaries given by others, and therefore we only 
append, as an illustration, another given by Tregelles (On Dan., p. 156): ‘* Many from 
among the sleepers of the dust of the earth shall awake ; these shall be unto everlasting 
life ; but these (the rest of the sleepers) shall be unto shame and everlasting contempt” 
(comp. Smith’s Thoughts on Dan.), and observes : ‘‘ I have given, I believe, the most liter- 
al rendering of the verse ; it speaks of a resurrection, not the general when all shall be 
called forth, but of an eclectic character, ‘ many from among the sleepers.’’’ ‘‘ This pas- 


PROP. 126. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 247 


sage has been understood by the Jewish commentators in the sense that I have stated.” 
Fausset (Com. loci) indorses Tregelles, saying, ‘‘ the Jewish commentators support Tre- 
gelles,” and remarks : ‘‘ Not the general resurrection, but that of these who share in the 
first resurrection , the rest ot the dead being not to rise till the end of the thousand years 
(Rev. 20 : 3, 5, 6, ef. 1 Cor. 15 : 23 ; 1 Thess. 4:16). Israel’s national resurrection and 
the first resurrection of the elect Church, are similarly connected with the Lord’s Coming 
forth out of His place to punish the earth in Isa. 26 : 19, 21, and 27:6; ef. Isa. 25 : 6-9” 
(Tregelles, p. 162, adds: ‘‘ This translation is given as undoubtedly correct in Gerard 
Kerkherdere’s Prodromus Danielicus,” for ‘‘it is clearly not a general resurrection ; it 
is ‘many from among ;’ and it is only by taking the words in this sense that we gain any 
information as to what becomes of those who continue to sleep in the dust of the earth,” 
and quotes in confirmation of such a twofold resurrection Jewish authorities, R. Saadiah 
Haggaon and Aben Ezra.) 

We are only concerned in insisting that a resurrection, and a twofold one, is clearly 
taught. That a resurrection is asserted is so plain that many (comp. Art. on ‘‘ Resur- 
rection” in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop.) emphatically declare that it presents us “a 
clear and unequivocal declaration,” and even such commentators as Scott (loci), ready 
to spiritualize predictions and promises, unhesitatingly teach that a resurrection of the 
dead is most obviously taught, but over against the impregnable ‘‘ many of ” refers it to 
*‘the general resurrection.” The student will see for himself that any rendering ap- 
proaching faithfulness to the original necessarily makes the resurrection of an eclectic 
nature. Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 200) indeed makes ‘‘ many of” to be ‘‘ the multi- 
tude of,’’ and insists that two classes are included in these ‘‘ many,”’’ viz., ‘‘ the good and 
the bed,” which is then transformed into “ all,” and a simultaneous resurrection. Some 
writers take the position that this resurrection relates either to the Jewish nation or to 
the professing Church, or to both, and has the righteous and the mere professor raised at 
the same time, excluding the rest of the dead ; others again think that a small moiety of 
the wicked are then raised up, as e.g. these who crucified Jesus, etc., while the vast body 
of the wicked dead remain until the close of the 1000 years ; others again, the large 
majority, hold, as intimated, that only the saints are raised and the rest, who shall be 
awakened at some future time, remain in the dust of the earth. Still others, over against 
the implied awakening of both classes, make out that the last class never rise from the 
dead. Now the concise, abrupt language makes it requisite to interpret the passage 
according to the general analogy on the subject, which decidedly favors a partial, eclectic 
resurrection ; the first clause referring exclusively to the righteous and their awakening 
as something separate and distinct from that of the wicked, while the last clause asserts 
the same fact given in Rev. 20:5. Should, however, the last part include mere profes- 
sors, or some noted wicked (as some think), yet the eclectic character of the resurrection 
is unmistakably indicated, and a distinctive precedence of the righteous. The special at- 
tention of the student is called to the Jewish view (Bickersteth’s Guide, p. 185, Brookes’s 
Essays, p. 12, etc.) which restricts the resurrection. Thus Aben Ezra in his Com., as 
quoted by various writers, says : ‘‘ Those who awake shall be (appointed) to everlasting 
life, and those who awake not shall be (doomed) to shame and everlasting contempt.’’ 
Gaon says, ‘‘ This is the resuscitation of the dead of Israel, whose lot is to eternal life, and 
those who shall nol awake are the forsaken of Jehovah.” So also the Sohar, Midrash 
Mishle, 4 Esdras 2, Torath Adam, etc. Pococke, Lightfoot, Mede, and others, have pro- 
duced Rabbinical statements showing the Jewish belief in a limited corporeal resurrec- 
tion when the Kingdom of the Messiah shall be instituted, and Lightfoot and others 
(under the misapprehension that the Christian Church was this Kingdom, and overlook- 
ing the Jewish restoration, etc., linked with this resurrection) have actually pointed to 
the cases of resurrection recorded in the Gospels as ‘ parallel to the expectations of the 
Jews,’ and therefore a proof that Jesus was the Messiah. Bertholdt, Kranichfeld, Filler, 
Késtlin (Lange’s Vom. Dan. loci) and others refer these raised ones solely to the Jewish 
nation. While there is force in this exclusive notion (because Daniel’s predictions 
- relate to the destiny of the Jewish nation), yet in it we must also (as hitherto shown in 
detail) include the engrafted, adopted sons and daughters of Abraham, accounted worthy 
of so high an honor. 


Obs. 3. But we have stronger evidence than this even in the chapter, 
for the resurrection of the righteous being mentioned ; God graciously as- 
sures Daniel himself that he shall be among those many thus favored. In 
verse 12, we read: ‘*‘ But go thou thy way till the end be ; for thow shalt rest 


248 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


and stand in thy lot, at the end of the days.’’ It being foreign to our de- 
sign to discuss prophetic periods, it is only necessary to say that, taking the 
admissions of a host of Anti-Millenarians and others, these prophetical 
days being, in accord with prophetical usage, years, no matter what period 
is assigned to their commencement, they require many centuries before their 
close. And hence the promise to Daniel at ‘‘ the end of the days’’ is to 
be witnessed, after along series of years has passed, even, as many contend, 
extending down to the Millennial age. At least, if we hmit these periods 
to literal days, there is not a particle of proof that the promise was real- 
ized in Daniel’s case.’ Down to the present day Daniel has not yet stood 
up in his lot, and, if we leave due weight to one pregnant expression, we 
can plainly see the reason why it is not yet fulfilled—‘‘ when He shall have 
accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things shall be 
jinished.’’ Then the end of these days has come, and then God’s promise 
1s verified ; not sooner and not later. But look at history and the facts as 
they exist to-day. Are not the Jewish people still dispersed and their 
power scattered among the nations of the earth? Is not Jerusalem itself 
still trodden down by Gentiles? How, then, can it be said that God’s pur- 
pose in reference to this people has been accomplished in this respect, when 
we see it going on before our eyes? No! the end has not yet come, but as 
God’s promises are sure, and now Yea and Amen in Christ, when the end 
of Jewish tribulation and dispersion comes a glorious resurrection also 
comes in which Daniel will] participate. In noticing the promise, it is legit- 
imate to avail ourselves of the admissions of those who oppose our Mil- 
lenarian views, and it ought to be accepted as impartial evidence. 
Barnes (Com. Dan. loci), after showing that Daniel could not possibly have 
lived during the entire period of the events previously enumerated without 
experiencing death, advocates the standing up at the end of the days to 
mean a literal resurrection, saying: ‘‘ This is admitted by Lengerke, by 
Maurer, and even by Bertholdt, to be the meaning, although he applies it 
to the reign of the Messiah. No other interpretation, therefore, can be 
affixed to this, than that 7 implies the doctrine of the resurrection of the 
dead, and that the mind of Daniel was directed onward to that. With this 
great and glorious doctrine the book appropriately closes.’’? The death of 
Daniel, before the events predicted come to pass, 1s announced in the “‘ for 
thou shalt rest.’”? This is appropriate language in view of the previous 
‘sleep in the dust.’’ But we again leave Barnes explain: “‘ During that 
long interval Daniel would ‘ rest.” He would quietly and calmly ‘ sleep in 
the dust of the earth,’ in the grave.’’ ‘‘ I do not see that 7¢ is possible to 
explain the language on any other supposition than this. The word ren- 
dered ‘ shalt rest’ would be well applied to the rest in the grave. So it is 
used in Job 3 : 13 ‘then had I been at rest,’ Job 3 : 17, ‘ there the weary 
be at rest.’’’ The language of the promise, too, implies ¢he personal pres- 
ence of Daniel at the time the end shall be. More than this, it is requisite, 
for then he is to obtain his ‘‘ lot.”” Now, whatever meaning is attached to 
‘* the lot,’’ whether of station, rank, degree, etc., it is certain from numer- 
ous promises that Christians are represented as receiving their “‘ lot’’ after 
the resurrection is experienced, Daniel receives his portion or reward 
ulotted to him by God. But when? Turning to Rey. 11 : 15-18, under 
the last trumpet, preceding the Millennial era, we find ‘‘ the time of the 
dead that they should be judged and that Thou shouldest give reward unto 


=: 


; 


ae: iy ten: at 


a 


PROP. 126, | THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. 249 


Thy servants, the prophets.’’ Such is the striking harmony of the utter- 
ances of the divine Spirit, indicating a Pre- Millennial resurrection.’ 


1 This is attempted by a class of interpreters who may be justly styled Antiochus Epi- 
phanites, since they find nothing in these predictions (concluding part of 11th ch. and 
the 12th) but what relates to Antiochus. They sustain about the same relation to us that 
Porphyry did to many in the third century. But they utlerly fail to show such a fulfil- 
ment as the prophecy demands, both as to time and matter. It is to be regretted that 
some able writers have, more or less, received of their leaven. Even Auberlen (On Dan.) 
thinks that the mention in verse 2 of the resurrection was merely to incite to faithful 
perseverance in the persecutions of Antiochus, because the phrase ‘‘ at that time’’ is 
omitted, and hence that there is no chronological connection. But this certainly can 
only be adduced in support of the Antiochan theory, seeing that the emphasis being 
twice given in verse 1, it would have been mere redundancy to repeat ; that Daniel’s 
resurrection stands related to the same period ; that the resurrection is associated in 
Scripture with the time of deliverance of the nation ; that the general complexion of the 
prediction, as well as the unity of Scripture, demands a fulfilment in chronological con- 
nection. Some take the dates given as referring to days, but Jink them with the same 
periods in Rey. pertaining to Antichrist’s career (with good reasons), but there is one 
serious antagonism, viz., Daniel’s resurrection follows the end of these in Daniel, but 
(Apoc. 11 : 18) precedes those of Rev. 

* Even Augustine (City of God, b. 20, ce. 23) interprets Dan. 12 :13 as referring to 
Daniel's literal resurrection. Daniel is among ‘“ the prophets’’ who are rewarded when 
the Millennial period commences. The happiness of the one class is mentioned, giving 
them a certain precedence, and is linked with the restoration of the Jews. The original 
division of the holy land by lot, led to all portions, appointments being called lots, and 
this has been introduced into the New Test., as many critics have noticed. Daniel’s lot 
which he receives may be seen, e.g. in Acts 26:18; Eph. 1:15, 16, etc., where the 
Greek word is either ‘‘ lot” or “‘ allotted portion,” as noticed by commentators. The 
resurrection of Daniel, it may be added, utterly disproves the theory of Universalists, 
Swedenborgians, and others, and recently advocated, as the teaching of Jesus, by Reuss 
(His. Ch. Theol., p. 221), ‘‘ that there can be no interval between the present life and the 
future, between death and the resurrection,’ for Daniel was to be raised up, not at or 
immediately after his death, but at the end of the days, i.e. after the interval of a certain, 
well-defined period of time. The same is confirmed by the resurrection of Jesus, the 
resurrection of saints at the resurrection of Jesus, the saints under the altar, which also 
had an interval. Faber (Diss. on Proph., p. 97, foot-note), when he comes to this pas- 
sage, is forced to admit that ‘‘ it gives some warrant to Mr. Mede’s opinion, that the first 
resurrection, which precedes the Millennium, . . . will be a literal resurrection of the 
saints and martyrs.” Fausset (Com. loci) comments on the ‘‘rest” in the grave. He, 
like his people Israel, was to wait patiently and confidently for the blessing till God’s 
time. He“ received not the promise,’’ but had to wait until the Christian elect saints 
should be brought in, at the first resurrection, that he and the other Old Test. saints 
“without us should not be made perfect’? (Heb. 11:46). Barbour (Three Worlds) 
endeavors to make the resurrection of Dan. 12, because the expression ‘‘thy people’’ is 
used, to refer exclusively to Jewish people according to the flesh and not to the Gospel 
Church (the book being ‘‘ the writing of the house of Israel,’’ Ezek. 13:9). It is true 
that the resurrection refers to ‘‘ the house of Israel,” Daniel’s people, but it is equally 
true (as our line of argument has proven step by step) that true members of the Christian 
Church are connected by virtue of engrafting and adoption with this house, being regarded 
as “‘ the children of Abraham,’ and hence participate in all the blessings of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. We dare not narrow down, as some do, “‘ the first-born’’ to Christian 
believers and exclude the worthies of the Hebrews, when the covenant foundation, in- 
heritance, etc., are the same. The prophets describe the house of Israel as amazed when 
through the power of the resurrection these ‘‘children of Abraham’’ are revealed and 
exalted. Zéchler (Lange’s Com. Dan. loci.) explains this passage relating to Daniel : 


“Thou shalt rest in the grave, in the quiet sleep of death (cf. Isa, 57:2, and supra 


v. 2),” ** that thou mayest receive thy portion of the inheritance at the judgment of eternal 
recompense ; cf. ch. 7 : 18, 27; Rev. 20:6.” He remarks respecting ‘‘ the lot’’ that it 
refers to ‘‘ the inheritance of the saints in light (Col. 1 : 12), which shall be possessed by 
the righteous after the resurrection of the dead in the heavenly Jerusalem.”” He says 
that with this view agree ‘“‘ a majority of interpreters.” 


+ 


250 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


Obs. 4. However ultra it may seem to some,’ we are willing to, and readily 
do, accept of Ezek. 37 : 1-14 as teaching a Pre-Millennial resurrection. This 
view washeldby the Jews (e.g. 2 Esdras 2:16, 23, 31), by the early Church 
(being quoted by Ireneus, /ifth B. Ag. Heresies, Justin, in 1st Apol., 
Tertullian in chs. 29, 30, On the es.of the Flesh, and Greg. Nazianzen, Yuner. 
Oration, e.g. by others), and by different writers from that period to the 
present. Some authors, not entirely satisfied with a figurative application, 
give a twofold fulfilment, one a spiritual or civil, and the other literal, as 
e.g. Dr. Clarke, Com. loci, who also admits that it has an ultimate refer- 
ence to ‘‘ the resurrection of the body.’’ Others, as Rationalists, ete., re- 
ceive it as teaching a literal resurrection, but reject it as a ‘‘ Jewish fig- 
ment.’’ While still others, as Delitzsch (Sys. of Bib. Psyc., p. 485, in re- 
sponse to Hofman, who advocated that Isa. 26:19 and Ezek. 37 : 1-14 
contained figures of restoration), and many Millenarians, hold that such a 
literal resurrection is taught as covenant promises require. ‘The reasons 
which influence us to such a belief are the following : (1) The explanation 
given by God Himself of the vision indicates a literal resurrection. The 
vision of the dry bones extends from vy. 1 to 10, and if this were all, then, 
indeed, we might be at a loss to determine its exact meaning, but God ap- 
pends to it an explanation ; and, like inall explanatory clauses, we have no 
right to spiritualize them away. It is weakness to place the vision and the 
explanation in the same category, and treat the one like the other. We dare 
not, without disrespect to the Divine explanation, make it denote some- 
thing quite different from what the words truly and actually represent. 
Keeping in view the distinction, overlooked by the multitude, between the 
vision and its interpretation by the Spirit, how else can we receive the 
words, unless teaching the doctrine we claim, when it says: ‘‘ J will open 
your graves and cause you to come up out of your graves,’’ etc. (2) It is 
scarcely consistent for the resurrection of the body (whatever may be true 
of the simple word resurrection) to be taken asa figure or symbol of the 
renovation of the soul, seeing that in the Scriptures a moral change of the 
soul is uniformly held to be a prelude to a blessed resurrection of the body 
unto life. This would be reversing the order of events, and involving a 
certain incongruity. It is nowhere done unless this and Rev. 20 form 
exceptions to a general rule. (3) The language, ‘‘ Behold they say, ‘ our 
bones are dried and our hope is lost,’ ’’ shows that a corporeal resurrection 
is meant. For, if we turn to Ps. 141 : 7, this is the expressive complaint 
of the house of Israel, ‘‘ owr bones are scattered at the grave’s mouth as when 
one cutteth and cleaveth wood on the earth,’’ and God here gives the assur- 
ance that these very ‘‘ bones scattered at the grave’s mouth,’’ shall be again 
raised up. In the 89th Ps., where this lost hope is plaintively presented, 
we have the covenant, and the assurance that David’s Son shall gloriousiy 
reign on David’s throne ; then follows, however, the prediction of the casting 
down of David’s crown and throne to the ground, of the cast-off condition 
of the nation and the non-fulfilment of the covenant, and the question is 
asked, ‘‘ How long?’? Then follows: ‘‘ Remember how short my time is; — 
wherefore hast Thou made all men in vain? What man is he that liveth and 
shall not see death? Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? 
Lord, where are Thy former lovingkindnesses which Thou swarest unto 
David in Thy truth??? How is this hope so lost, even absorbed by the all- 
devouring grave, to be realized? The plain, God-yiven answer comes to us 
in this passage of Ezekial, if we will only receive it. Here the question 


PRopP. 126. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 251 


asked in Ps, 35 : 10 is replied to ; and prophet after prophet assures us 
that when this shall occur ‘‘ those bones shall flourish as an herb.”? It is in 
accord with this that David in Ps. 31 affirms that although his ‘‘ bones are 
consumed ’’ and in his ‘‘ haste’ he said, ‘‘ I am cut off from before Thine 
eyes,’’ he will trust in God for deliverance, because the wicked alone shall 
‘“be ashamed ’’ and ‘‘ be silent in the grave.’’ This confidence is again 
and again declared, so that the bones given over into ‘‘ the hand of the 
grave’ shall ‘‘ come up out of the grave.’’ God says that the house of 
Israel declares *‘ our hope is lost and we are cut off.’’ In Lam. 3 : 18, we 
read, *‘ And I said, my strength and my hope is perished from the Lord,’’ 
but farther on the prophet again professes hope ‘* for the Lord will not cast 
off forever... to crush under His feet all the prisoners of the earth.”’ 
No! some of those “‘ prisoners of the earth,’’ which (as we shall hereafter 
show) are the dead that the earth holds in confinement, which are now 
‘dwelling in the dust’’ (Isa. 26:19), ‘* the earth shall cast out.’’ The 
“prisoners of hope,’’ Zech. 9 : 12, shall be delivered according to the 
“hope toward Crod,’’ expressed by Paul, Acts 24:15. The analogy of faith, 
the appeal of God to words connected with corporeal death, and the stub- 
born fact itself that the covenant given by God to Abraham and David can- 
not possibly be realized until the enemy death, which holds its chosen ones, 
is overcome, these things prove, what so many pious have joyfully accepted, 
a literal resurrection, by which the grave is made to surrender those to 
whom precious covenant promises were made. Now, indeed, the enemy 
triumphs ; they are cut off ‘‘ from the land of the living ;’’ faith and hope 
almost falters at the gloomy prospect ; wise men here and there declare it 
is folly to expect its realization ; scientists insist upon its impossibility ; 
even good men think it too much to anticipate, and explain it away; but - 
God, the Almighty, points to this very faltering faith and hope, produced 
by literal death, and in His gracious majesty speaks: ‘‘ Then shall ye know 
that I the Lord have spoken tt and performed it.’’ Wow can we change 
God’s words or challenge His work? (4) The emphatic language here is 
corroborated by other examples. ‘Thus e.g. when we keep in view how the 
Jews understood this vision and explanation, then the language of Jesus 
addressed #o Jews is a confirmation of a literal resurrection. For in John 
5 : 28, 29 the expression of Ezekial is almost repeated ‘‘ all that are in their 
graves’’ shall ‘* come forth,’’ and this, too, in connection with what He said, 
that this raising up shall be (e.g. John 6 : 39, 40, 44) “‘ at the last day’’ as 
the Jews held (comp. John 11 : 24).?. Again, Hos. 13 : 14, °‘ J will ran- 
som them from the power of the grave,’’ etc., contains the same ideas, and 
Paul apples it directly to the resurrection of the righteous. Hence, in 
view of the application of similar language by Jesus and Paul, corroborat- 
ing Jewish views of Ezekiel, we cordially accept of it in the same spirit. 
(5) The expression ‘‘ bring you into the land of IJsrael,’’ which has led so 
many to apply this figuratively to a ‘‘ national restoration,’’ under the sup- 
position that mortal men in this life are only alluded to, is, instead of a 
_ stumbling-block, indispensable in such a resurrection. The covenant, if 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are to personally inherit the land, the cove- 
nant promises, if the meek are ¢o inherit the land, etc., absolutely demands 
just such bringing of the dead ones into the land of Israel, the promised in- 
heritance. Ezekiel only establishes what the Millennial descriptions pre- 
sent, viz., a return of the ransomed of the Lord to this identical land, as 
the most sacred of God’s assurances declare. (6) This description of the 


252 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 126, 


prophet is too sublime and wide-reaching in its sweep to be regarded as 
fulfilled in the weak and partial restoration of the Jews under the Persian 


kings and afterward. The facts are not equal to the representation ; and ~ 


the Jews themselves, who experienced this restoration, had no such idea of 
its performance. It is a belittling of the prophecy to confine it to such an 
event ; it is a dwindling away of God’s appeal in reference to the knowl- 
edge obtained of His Omnipotence when this should occur ; it is a fritter- 
ing away of the promised gathering of ‘‘ the whole house of Israel,’’ of the 
implied continued prosperity, of the union, strength, etc., then granted to 
them. No! greater, inestimable greater blessings than God’s people have 
ever yet realized are embraced in this precious promise, even those con- 
nected with a literal, Pre-Millennial resurrection.*® 


1 Because so many commentators, while admitting that the language is derived from the 
doctrine of the resurrection, yet, interpret it either as a moral or spiritual renovation, or 
an ecclesiastical or civil or national restoration. Jerome was one anong the first who 
applied this vision to the restoration of the Jews, and yet he is forced to admit that it is 
‘‘a similitude drawn from the resurrection.” But as these writers also profess to find 
but little of a resurrection in the Old Test., how could a similitude drawn from such a 
source, if unknown, be of any force if the doctrine of the resurrection were not one 
already familiar ? 

2 Even in verse 25, while we need not discard the idea of a moral renovation yet it is 
not necessary for a consistent interpretation with existing facts, seeing that the “‘ now is’’ 
may be referred to the literal resurrection of the actual dead raised to life by Jesus, and 
the dead raised by Him at His own resurrection, which occurred at this period. It may 
be added: Surely the partial quotation of Ezekiel and the application made of it by 
Jesus, should cause us to receive with caution the idea (Calvin, etc.) that it is a mere 
image or similitude drawn from the resurrection. In reference to the use of the word 
‘* oraves,’’ while we hold this to be literal and for good reasons, we are satisfied with the 
concession and argument of one of our opponents, who by his reasoning on Christ’s 
language entirely demolishes his own interpretation given to Ezekiel. ‘Thus Barnes, 
Com. John 5 : 29, says: ‘‘ He speaks of those who are in their graves, evidently referring 
to the dead. Sinners are sometimes said to be dead in sin, but sinners are not said to be 
ina grave. This is applied in the Scriptures only to those who are deceased.’’ If this is 
true, what becomes of his own spiritualizing of Ezekiel’s vision? Augustine and others 
suppose that in John 5 : 25, 26, because of the phrase ‘‘ now is,’’ there is a reference to a 
spiritual or moral resurrection. But this is opposed to the facts as they took place. 
** The hour is coming’ alludes to the great predicted time coming of a bodily resurrection ; 
‘and now is’’ indicates that even now, at that time, a bodily resurrection was to be 
experienced in the few raised by Jesus, in the resurrection of Himself and of the many 
at His resurrection. The entire connection and parallel passages show a reference to a 
bodily resurrection, for if it is to be limited, as Augustine, etc., it proves too much for 
their own theory, viz., it would confine moral renovation, etc., to the time after the First 
Advent and exclude that experienced previously. 

° 'To give the reader an idea how this passage is interpreted we append two illustra- 
tions. Romaine (Crit. Review, vol. 2) has a sermon on Ezek. 37 : 4, etc., ‘* The Parable of 
the Dry Bones.’’ He frankly tells us that every word applicable to a sensible object con- 
veys an idea of some corresponding spiritual object, or teaches heavenly things under 
the garb of earthly (i.e. at the option of the interpreter). But after all it has two mean- 
ings : (1) That the Jewish Church, led away captive to Babylon, was restored to its civil 
and ecclesiastical life or polity ; (2) that the dry bones indicate deadness in sin, and the 
resurrection a revival to newness of life—dryness is equivalent to exceeding deadness of 
the sinful soul, shaking is a perturbation in the soul of the sinner, coming together 
denotes merely externals and no life until the Spirit comes and converts. Waldegrave in 
his Lectures gives this as the signification : “‘ They (the imagery) signify that the Israel- 
itish people, which had long lain politically and ecclesiastically dead, should be, by the 
mighty hand of their God, recovered from that state, and become once more a flourishing 
church and state.” Strange that men can fritter away this magnificent prophecy in an 
application to the feeble condition and oppressed state of the Jewish nation after the 
Babylonian captivity, Take the spiritualizing method and apply it to any Scripture, and 
see the result. The plainest passages dwindle away before its transforming power. 


™ 


; 
" 


* 


¥ 
ni 
# 
< 


| 


‘ 
va 
= 


Prop. 126. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 253 


Thus e.g. apply it to Matt. 27 : 52, 53, and it may be said ‘“ the graves were opened” 
means delivered from bondage ; ‘‘and many bodies of the saints which slept, arose,’’ 
denotes that ‘‘ sleeping’ they were ignorant, blind, deluded, but “‘ arising’ they were 
morally quickened ; “and came out of their graves,” that is, out of their bondage, ete. 
This is, to say the least, a deceptive way of dealing with Scripture (comp. Prop. 4). The 
utter inconsistency of our opponents’ position is thus made manifest. Coming to Rey. 
20 : 4-6, they tell us that if a literal resurrection is meant, it should be stated that the 
saints come “ out of the graves,” receive their ‘‘ bodies,’’ etc. But that this, even if 
given, would make no material difference, and that it would be explained away like the 
rest, is made apparent from the treatment which Ezekiel’s vision meets with at their 
hands—for here, where the fact of coming ‘‘ out of the graves,” etc., ismentioned, the res- 
urrection is still denied. Many concessions, however, might easily be gathered from our 
opponents which vitiate their own system. Even Barrow ( Works, vol. 2, p. 565), on the 
resurrection of the body, quotes Ezek. 37 as sustaining the notion of a literal resurrec- 
tion. Parallel passages are admitted to refer to a resurrection, as e.g. Augustine (City of 
God, b. 20, ch. 21) explains Isa. 66 : 12-16, to be realized after the Sec. Advent, and that 
** your bones shall rise up as an herb” alludes ‘‘ to the resurrection,’’ ‘‘ a bodily resurrection.” 
The Jews (comp. e.g. Westminster Review, Oct., 1861, p. 246) held that Ezek. 37 taught a 
literal resurrection, and Paul in Acts 26 : 6, 7, evidently alludes to this belief when (as 
Clarke Com. loci.) he speaks of ‘‘the hope of the resurrection of the dead,’’ to which hope 
realized “‘ the tribes’ expect ‘‘ fo come’ (and to which Paul, as Bh. Pearce shows, using the 
same word, also hopes, Phil. 3:11, ‘‘to come’’ or “attain to’’). Incidental proof 
abounds showing that this resurrection is linked with the Kingdom. ‘Thus e.g. Luke 
14:15 affords one. For after Christ had indicated to the Pharisee how to make a feast 
that he might ‘‘ be recompensed at the resurrection of the just,’’ one who sat at meat, associat- 
ing, as the Jews were accustomed to do, this allusion to the resurrection with the King- 
dom, said : ‘‘ Blessed is he that shail eat bread in the Kingdom of God.’’? Christ in His reply 
confirms this association of ideas, for instead of correcting it as erroneous, He virtually 
indorses it by stating that all are invited to such blessedness, but that many reject it, 
ete. Jerome, Scott, Lowth, literally hundreds, while spiritualizing or misapplying the 
prediction, declare that ‘‘ it was also a clear intimation of the resurrection of the dead,’’ 
being ‘* a similitude drawn from the resurrection.’’ But is it asimilitude? And if such 
where then was the doctrine of a resurrection taught ? 

To indicate how the earliest Fathers of the Church interpreted this and other passages, 
we quote Irenzus (Ag. Her., ch. 87) as follows: ‘‘ Isaiah plainly declares (ch. 26 : 19) 
similar happiness at the resurrection of the just: thus saying, ‘ Thy dead men shall arise, 
and those in the tombs shall rise, and they shall rejoice who are in the earth. For thy 
dew is salvation to them. Ezekiel says (ch. 37 : 12, 14) the same, * Behold, I will open 
your graves, and lead you forth from your tombs, in order that I may lead forth from 
their sepulchres my people, and I will put the Spirit in you, and ye shall know that I am 
the Lord.’’’ This he applies to the Pre-Millennial resurrection of the just, in order that 
covenant promises may be verified. Many learned men, under the lofty self-exalting in- 
fluence of spiritualizing, smile at the alleged simplicity and ignorance of such Fathers, 
when the latter evidence a far greater logical consistency than the former. Perhaps the 
most flippant of all objections is that urged by Schréder (Lange’s Com. Hzek., p. 354) in 
declaring: ‘‘ They are, however, not the bones of deceased men, but of slain men, as 
expressly stated in v. 9.’’ A mere tyro need only refer to a concordance under the words 
“* slay,’’ ‘‘ slain,’’ etc., and he will find that all that fall under the enemy death are also 
thus represented. Besides he does not, in his attenuated interpretation, show how such 
slain ones are restored. In reference to ‘‘ the whole house of Israel,” we only now say 
that it includes the dead of Judah and Israel, together with all the engrafted ‘‘ children 
of Abraham.”’ 


Obs. 5. Numerous passages plainly teach a Pre-Millennial resurrection. 
Thus, e.g. Jer. 81 : 15-17, ‘‘ a voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation and 
bitter weeping ; Rachel weeping for her children refused to be comforted 
for her children, because they were not. Thus saith the Lord: Refrain 
thy voice from weeping and thine eyes from tears ; for thy work shall be 
rewarded, saith the Lord ; and they shall come again from the land of the 
enemy. And there is hope in thine end, saith the Lord, that thy children 
shall come again to their own border.’’? This is applied (Matt. 2 : 17, 18) 


254 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 126. 


to a literal slaughter, and the resurrection promised is also literal. But 
this does not fulfil the entire promise ; for it includes not only a raising 
up from the dead, a return from the land of the enemy death, but a re- 
turn, a ‘‘coming again to their own border,’’ to the very land where the 
enemy triumphed over them. The time when this is to take place 1s speci- 
fied in the context, y. 10-14, when Jacob is ‘‘ redeemed and ransomed from 
the hand of him that was stronger than he.’’* The same spirit character- 
izes Hannah’s prayer (1 Sam. 2), which the Chaldee version (Dr. Clarke) 
says, ‘‘ And Hannah prayed in the spirit of prophecy,” in which the resur- 
rection is pointedly predicted, “‘ the Lord killeth and maketh alive; He 
bringeth down to the grave and bringeth up.’’ The Jews (see Targums, 
quoted by Dr. Clarke, Com. loci) so understood it. But this is connected 
even with a period when vengeance comes, the righteous are exalted, and 
the ‘‘ wicked are silent in darkness ;’’ and if reference is made to the par- 
allel passage in Deut. 32 : 39, it is also connected with a time of vengeance, 
deliverance of God’s people, and God’s land.? The faith that David ex- 
pressed in Ps. 142, 116, 27, etc., of finally walking before, or in the pres- 
ence of, the Lord ‘‘ in the land of the living,’’ is one in such a resurrection. 
This is seen by noticing the context, and by comparing of Scripture. 
Thus in Ps. 142 he describes his trouble by which he is brought ‘* very 
low,’’ even into “‘ prison’’ (which a comparison shows is the grave), for his 
enemy is stronger than he. But he expresses the hope that God will be his 
‘* nortion in the land of the living,’’ and that God will ‘‘ bring my soul out 
of prison, that I may praise Thy name ; the righteous shall compass me 
about ; for Thou shalt deal bountifully with me.’’ In Ps. 116, he is 
plainer, telling us that ‘*‘ the sorrows of death compassed me and the pains 
of hell got hold upon me.’’ He then prays that God would ‘‘ deliver my 
soul,’’ adding his trust: “* Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord 
hath dealt bountifully with me. For Thou hast delivered my soul from 
death, mine eyes from tears and my feet from falling. JL will walk before 
the Lord in the land of the living.’’ This faith, in an ultimate happy de- 
liverance from the power of death, causes him to say: ‘‘ Precious in the 
sight of the Lord is the death of His saints ;’’ and, exulting in the hope set 
before him, declares, ‘‘ Zhou hast loosed my bonds,’’ and that he, David, 
shall praise ‘‘in the Lord’s house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.”’ 
Here, then, death is an enemy ; David fell under this enemy and is bound 
by him in a prison ; but he shall yet triumph over this enemy through the 
power of God; he shall return again to the promised rest, praise God, 
associate with all the righteous, and enjoy the blessings of Jerusalem.* The 
detention in the grave is figuratively represented by ‘‘a prison,’’ ‘‘ pris- 
oner,’’ “* captive,’’ “captivity,’’ ete. "In Isa. 42: 75 61 <a 
where it is promised that Christ shall ‘‘ bring owt the prisoners from the 
prison and them that sit in the darkness out of the prison house,’’ that He 
shall bestow “‘ liberty to the captives and the opening of the prison to them 
that are bound,’’ these things primarily describe the resurrection, for the 
simple reason that ‘‘ the year of the Lord ”’ and the restoration and bless- 
ings promised in immediate connection cannot be inaugurated, according 
to the tenor of prophecy, without such a resurrection. The people now 
are given up as a prey to the enemy death, and are forcibly represented as 
‘hid in prison houses,’’ Isa. 42 : 22, as ‘‘ prisoners resting together’? Job 
3:18, as ‘* prisoners of the earth,’ Sam. 3 : 34, as ‘‘ the lawful captives,” 
or (marg. reading) ‘‘ the captivity of the just,’’ Isa. 49 : 24, ete. This 


Prop. 126. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 255 


idea accords with Ps. 79, where, after describing the desolations of Jerusa- 
lem, the fact that ‘‘ the blood ’’ of the saints has been shed and their 
‘* dead bodies’’ have been exposed, the Psalmist significantly asks : ‘‘ How 
long, O Lord?” Then praying for God’s help, he says : ‘‘ Let the sighing 
of the prisoner come before Thee ; according to the greatness of Thy power 
preserve Thou those that are appointed to die.’’ What the Prophet means 
by this is apparent from Ps. 102, where, after complaining that ‘‘ days are 
consumed,’’ that he is ‘‘ cast down’’ and ‘‘ withered like grass,’’ he relies on 
the blessed truths that God ‘‘ endwres forever,’’ that He shall ‘‘ arise and have 
mercy on Zion,’ adding “‘ when the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall ap- 
pear in His glory’’ (not humiliation), ‘‘ He will regard the prayer of the 
destitute and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the gener- 
ation to come; and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord. 
For, He hath looked down from the height of His sanctuary ; from heaven 
did the Lord behold the earth ; to hear the groaning of the prisoner ; to loose 
those that are appointed to death (Heb. the children of death) ; to declare the 
name of the Lord in Zion and His praise in Jerusalem ; when the people 
ore gathered together, and the Kingdoms, to serve the Lord.’’ What eise, if 
the prayer of these prisoners is ever answered, but a Pre-Millennial resur- 
rection is to be anticipated? For, taking such passages together, what 
have we here but a reference by the prophet to his own death and to dead 
saints, to the ability of God to raise them up or deliver them, to ‘‘ the se¢ 
time to favor Zion,’’ which is to come when the Lord shall appear the 
second time unto salvation, and this prayer to be released from death shall 
be answered, to a joyful gathering of the people to praise the Lord in Jeru- 
salem, when ‘‘ the children of death’’ shall be Joosened? If we were only 
prepared to receive it, we would find the Bible full of this Divine Purpose, 
and that the unity of the Spirit teaches it again and again, sometimes 
briefly, or concisely, or even obscurely, and sometimes openly and more 
fully. Even in such a Ps. as the 69th, faith grasps the resurrection, in 
the words: ‘** The Lord heareth the poor and despiseth not His prisoners,”’ 
for death is brought before us in the preceding verses, when suddenly the 
strain is changed into exultation, and we are told that the prisoner shall 
be released, and they shall return with praise to the holy land. 


’ The application made by Matthew of the passage in Jeremiah forbids our receiving 
the common interpretation that the prophecy refers to the captivity of the Jews, etc. 
The phraseology is indicative of death, and deliverance from the same ; a reunion with 
Rachel is implied, and in their own land, thus corresponding with covenant promise. 
Fausset (Com. loci.) correctly declares that this is “ to be fulfilled ultimately, when Rachel 
shall meet her murdered children at the resurrection, at the same time that literal Israel 
is to be restored.’’ This is in agreement with Moses, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Daniel, and 
others. This passage is intensely interesting, because it answers the question whether 
little children (comp. with Matthew) will participate in this resurrection. The answer is 
given by God Himself in the affirmative. Those who apply it to the past restoration 
from captivity belittle the promise. 

? Dr. Etheridge’s Targums gives the following : The Targum of Palestine, ‘‘ When the 
Word of the Lord shall reveal Himself to redeem His people, He will say to all nations : 
Behold now, that I am He who Am and Was, and Will Be, and there is no other God 
beside Me ; I, in my Word, kill and make alive ; I smite the people of the Beth Israel and 
T will heal them at the end of the days; and there will be none who can deliver them 
from my-hand, Gog and his armies whom I have permitted to make war against them.” 
The Jerusalem Targum, ‘“‘ See now that I in my Word am He and there is no other 
God beside Me. I kill the living in this world and make alive the dead in the world that com- 
eth ; 1am He who smiteth and I am He who healeth, and there is none who can deliver 
from my hand.”’ See the context. 


256 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


8 The reader will notice how this was interpreted as relating to the resurrection by the 
early Church and retained as late as a.p. 476, as seen in the extract we have given, Prop. 
7d, taken from Gelasius of Cysicus. If the Psalms, etc., are examined from this cove- 
nanted standpoint many allusions are based on this doctrine of a resurrection assumed. 
Thus e.g., in Ps. 52, we have the wicked ‘‘ rooted out of the land of the living”’ and the 
righteous in safety and exalted, corresponding with the tenor of the Word. Im Ps. 56. 
after asserting that God would ‘‘ deliver my soul from death,” it is “ that I may walk be- 
fore God in the light of the living.’ Ps. 41:8, 10, which even Augustine (City of God, 
b. 17, ch. 18) refers to a resurrection, implies it by ‘‘ the raising up’’ and ‘‘ by this I 
know that Thou favorest me because mine enemy doth not triumph over me.” In the 
Analysis of Ps. 118 Dr. Clarke, Com. loci., refers the day of verse 24 to the day of resurrec- 
tion, but we would rather refer it to the Millennial day, the blessed day of Christ, pre- 
ceded by a reference to the resurrection in the words: ‘‘I shall not die,” i.e. shall not 
always be under the dominion of death (comp. John 6 : 54, 58), ‘* but live and declare the 
words of the Lord. The Lord hath chastened me sore ; but He hath not given me over to death.’’ 
The ** prisoners of hope,’’ Zech. 9 : 11-12, are released out of ‘‘ the pit’’ in virtue of “* the 
blood’’ of the ** covenant.’’ This we have shown, and therefore Christ has power over 
death to deliver His own. The context shows when these prisoners are released, viz., at 
a period of restoration. 

4 If we take the English version of Isa. 53 : 8, Jesus Himself was “‘a prisoner,”’ i.e. as 
many explain it, experienced ‘‘ a detention by death.’ Bush (Anas.) argues at length 
that the passage refers to the resurrection of Jesus. Admit this, and the reader can see 
how much Scripture receives new light and direction from Christ’s death and resurrec- 
tion thus represented. It may be added that Calmet and others think that the phrase 
‘** Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints’’ means that “ the saints 
are too precious in the Lord’s sight, lightly to give them over to death,’’ for “ death 
shall be swallowed up in victory,’’ ete. 


Obs. 6. So interesting is this subject and abundant the material (show- 
ing how the Spirit regards it), that the reader will pardon us, if additional 
illustrations are given. ‘Thus the word ‘‘ hell’’ is used to denote the graye.’ 
If we turn to Ps. 86, the hope is expressed, ‘‘ Thow hast delivered my soul 
from the lowest hell’’ (marg. reading is ‘‘ grave’’), and while praise is ten- 
dered for such deliverance, the wicked shall be ‘‘ ashamed.’’ Other pas- 

sages could be adduced, but let us take a clearer one, the representation of 
the grave by ‘‘ the land of darkness,’ ‘‘ the shadow of death,’’ “* darkness,”’ 
etc. (Job 10 : 21, 22; Ps. 88:18; Eccl. 6:4; Ps. 143.:3, etce.). [nye 
rious pr edictions the saints are to be delivered from this darkness, just as 
the Millennial era is to be ushered in, and this prepares us the better to 
appreciate the force of Col. 1 : 12, 13, ‘* Giving thanks unto the Father 
which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in 
light ; who’’ (at the time the inheritance is given) ‘‘ hath delivered us from 
the power of darkness’’ (the grave or place of the dead), ‘‘ and hath trans- 
lated us into the Kingdom of His dear Son.’’ That this ‘‘ power of dark- 
ness’’ refers to the enemy death or grave is proven by the use made of the 
expression by Jesus, Luke 22 :53, who, when the Jews came with stones and 
swords to take Him, knowing ‘the predetermined result death and the 
grave, said: ‘‘ This is your hour and the power of darkness” (comp. John 
12: 27: Micah 7 : 8, etc.). So the reverse of darkness, viz., ‘‘ light,’’ is 
employed to denote the removal of the darkness of the grave "at the raat 
rection morn, and forms a remarkable feature in the opening, ete., of Mil- 
lennial descriptions. The manner in which the Spirit introduces the 
words ‘* enemy,” ‘‘sleep,’’ ‘‘prey,”’ ‘pit,’ ‘‘awake,’’ *< dust,’ ‘ quick- 
en,’’* ete., shows how prominently the notion of a Pre-Millennial resur- 
rection is incorporated in the Scriptures. Let us e.g. take ‘‘ quicken,” 
which Paul forcibly employs in Rom. 8 to prove that God will fulfil His 
promise to Abraham to be “ heir of the world,’’ and that ‘‘ the promise 


Prop. 126. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. OA7 


might be made sure to all the seed,”’ by saying: ‘‘ God who quickeneth the 


gead.”’ (Comp. Rom. 8:11; 4:17; John 5:21; Ps. 3:18.) Now, 
allow this New Test. confirmatory usage to be adopted as an interpreting 
guide, and we have Ps. 71 pointedly expressing this resurrection : ‘* Thou 
shalt quicken me again and shalt bring me up again from the depths of the 
earth ;’ and then speaks of his ‘‘ greatness’’ being increased here on the 
earth. Comp. Ps. 80:17, 18; Ps. 143 : 11, etc., keeping in view the key 
note given by 1 Pet. 3 : 18, where Christ Himself is raised from the dead, 
being ‘* guickened.’’ This becomes decisive when the fact is observed that 
the resurrection from the dead is represented as ‘‘ a birth,”’ “a begetting,”’ 
“<a regeneration.’’ Notice that Christ’s resurrection is (Heb. 1 : 5, 6, 
comp. with Acts 13 : 33; Rom. 8 : 29, etc.) a begetting or being born 
again, so that He is, in virtue of this second birth, called, Col. 1 : 18, ‘‘ the 
first-born from the dead,’’? and in Rev. 1:5, ‘‘ the first begotten of the 
dead.”’* What a flood of light this phraseology throws on the Pre-Millen- 
nial resurrection ; for surely, if the appropriate figure of a birth is thus ap- 
plied to the resurrection of the Head, designedly too, we are not perverting 
the Word if we accept of the same in reference to the members. Let us see 
what the Spirit says, e.g. in Isa. 66 : 7, 8, 9, ‘‘ Before she travailed, she 
brought forth ; before her pain came, she was delivered of a manchild.* 
Who hath heard such a thing? Shall the earth be made to bring forth in 
one day? Or, shall a nation be born at once? For, as soon as Zion tra- 
vailed, she brought forth her children. Shall I bring to the birth and not 
cause to bring forth? saith the Lord ; shall I cause to bring forth and shut 
the womb? said the Lord,’’ etc. Here we have the earth (not church) 
bringing forth at the appearing of the Lord (v. 5), at a time of vengeance 
(vy. 6), at the ushering in of Millennial glory (v. 10-14), at a time when 
the wicked are to be ashamed and utterly removed (v. 5, 15, etc.), at the 
time new heavens and new earth are created (v. 22), at a gathering and 
overthrow of nations, etc. And, moreover, those thus born are to enjoy 
this very Millennial blessedness, while the wicked are so cut off jas to be- 
come ‘‘an abhorring to all flesh.’’ This corresponds precisely with the 


statements of events preceding the Millennium ; while the suddenness of 


the event, the brevity of time in which it is accomplished, the astounding 
and unexampled nature of the occurrence, all confirms its denoting the 
resurrection. Then Micah 5:3, 4 has a remarkable disclosure on this 
point ; for after describing the smiting of the Judge of Israel, the very 
Ruler of Israel that came to them, the result of that smiting, as witnessed 
by us in the rejection of the Jewish nation during the times of the Gen- 
tiles, is alluded to: ‘‘ Therefore will He give them up wil the time that 
she which travaileth hath brought forth.’’ This birth is delayed during 
the dispersion of the Jews ; it is not to be experienced wntil the time when 


_ their restoration comes ; it is connected with a revelation of the strength 
_ and majesty of Christ’s rule. Hence this being born again, this regenera- 
_ tion is referred by Jesus to the future in Matt. 19 : 28, to the period when 
_ the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of His glory,’’ and the apostles shall 


‘* sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.’’ For the 
word translated ‘‘ regeneration’? means ‘‘ born again,’’ and was anciently 
employed to denote the resurrection.’ Now, the reader is prepared for an 


additional reason for believing Ezekiel’s resurrection to be a literal one, 
_ yiz., the clause, which above all others is supposed to teach a spiritual one, 
| “And shall put My Spirit in you, and ye shall live.’”? This Spirit is put 


258 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 126. 


in these dead ones that are in their graves, and this cerresponds with Rom. 
8:11. Therefore, this Spirit is called in 1 Cor. 15, ‘‘ a quickening Spirit’ 
(Barnes, loci, ‘‘a vivifying Spirit, giving or imparting life’). This 
quickening or birth is performed by Christ (John 5 : 21, 26, etc.), and 
Paul in 2 Cor. 3, in his argument to show that the covenant is to be ful- 
filled by the Spirit giving life, says: ‘‘ Now the Lord is that Spirit ;’’ and 
when this is done we find announced in Phil. 3 : 20, 21, “ from whence 
(heaven) we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change 
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto His glorious body, accord- 
ing to the working whereby He is able to subdue all things unto Himself.” 
It is this resurrection Spirit that God promises in Ezekiel to give, that the 
dead may live, for they, too, are (Eph. 1 : 13) *‘ sealed with the Holy Spirit, 
of promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of 
the purchased possession.’’ This again is confirmed by the use of 
‘* redeemed,’’ *‘ ransomed,’’ etc., and the phraseology of Hos. 13 : 14, “‘J 
will ransom them from the power of the grave; I will redeem them from 
death,’’ and of Paul, Rom. 8 : 23, “ the redemption of the body,’ is amply 
sufficient to illustrate the meaning of the prophet. Thus to apply it to 
Isa. 51: 11, *‘ the redeemed of the Lord shall return and come with singing 
unto Zion ; and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads ; they shall obtain 
gladness and joy ; and sorrow and mourning shall flee away.’’ Preceding 
this we have this people consumed by the worm (y. 8), and following it this 
is said to be done that the captive exile ‘‘ should not die in the pit ;”’ and 
when they return they enjoy what only is to be realized in the Millennial 
period. ‘The parallel in Isa. 35 : 10, ‘* the ransomed of the Lord shall re- 
turn,’’ etc., also teaches that this is performed when ‘‘ God cometh with 
vengeance,’’ to ‘‘ save you,’’ and forms thus what Paul calls ‘‘ the day of 
Redemption’’ for fulfilling the covenant, for as Ps. 111 : 9 forcibly puts it, 


‘* He sent redemption unto His people; He hath commanded His covenant 


forever.’’ ° 

1 Christ was delivered from it, Ps. 16:10, comp. Acts 2 : 27, 31 ; the saints are deliv- 
ered from it, 1 Cor. 15 : 55, marg. reading (German Version, etc.). Any commentary or 
concordance will give examples. Our argument has nothing to do with the question of 
other meanings, but with the simple fact that the words Sheol and Hades are used to 
denote the grave or the place of the dead. Many writers correctly infer that Matt. 
16 : 18, ‘ the gates of hell shall not prevail against it,’’ includes a direct reference to the resur- 
rection, viz., that the power of death, decimating the Church, shall be destroyed—its 
prisoners being released. Lange presents the view of such in the following: ** The 


leading thought in these words, is the triumph of life over death, of the Kingdom of the 


resurrection over the usurped reign of the Kingdom of Hades.”’ 

? Thus e.g. in reference to sleeping and awaking, Knapp (Ch. Theol., 151, 1) remarks : 
** Death was compared with sleep and the dead body with a sleeping person. Hence the 
terms which literally signify to awake, to rise up, to rise out of sleep, are also used to 


a ne _ 


a See eer 


Man « 


denote the resurrection of the lifeless body.’’ This was well understood by the early 


Fathers, so that Justin Martyr (First Apol. c. 38) and Augustine (City of God, b. 17, ¢. 18, 
b. 16, s. 41) thus interpret Ps. 3 : 5 (to death of Christ), and the latter also, in the expres- 
sion ‘‘ who shall awake him.’’ The same is true of Dan. 12 : 2, ete. As to ‘‘ quicken,” 
compare e.g. Barnes Com. on 1 Pet. 3:18. Our opponents, themselves, give us the 
proper interpretation and application, although they cannot logically fit it into their 
system. 


3 The reader will of course notice the reason that such a title is given to Jesus ; be- — 


cause, as some think, while others were raised from death before Him they were again 
subjected to death. He is the first one raised who was never again under the dominion 
of death ; or if, as others think, they were not subjected to death, then it is given be- 
cause He pertains pre-eminently to the firstborn and is the cause of their being included 
among them. 


PRopP. 126. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 259 


4 For the student of prophecy we append two considerations: (1) This pre-eminent 
resurrection takes place before the last tribulation. (2) Has not the “ male child” a 
reference to the priority of the resurrection and the special honor of these resurrection 
saints, because it seems to be foreshadowed by ‘“‘ the male being the Lord's” of the first- 
born (Ex. 13 : 12, etc.) and had to be redeemed. Tertullian (Qn Res., ch. 31) and many 
others refer this passage to a resurrection over against Baldwin’s (Armageddon, p. 87) 
absurdity, who makes the United States to be ‘‘a nation born at once’’ on July 4th, 
1776. Fausset (Com. loci.) and others apply this to the sudden restoration of the Jewish 
nation, but far more is intended. For, in connection with such a restoration (as in Isa. 
26, Dan. 12, Ezek. 37, etc.) a glorious resurrection is related, and there is no reason why 
the same should be ignored here, for Augustine even (City of God, b. 20, ch. 21) quotes 
‘¢and your bones shall rise up as an herb,” as ‘‘alluding to the resurrection” and “‘ a 
bodily one.”’ 

5 The Jews represented a resurrection under the figure of a birth, and Knapp (Ch. 
Theol., 8s. 151, 1) says (referring tu Michaelis’s Com. on Heb. 1 : 5): ‘‘ The Jews were also 
accustomed to speak of the resurrection of the dead under the image of a new or second 
birlh, to which they were led by the passage Isa. 26 : 19, ‘ the earth will again bring forth 
her dead.’’’ The critical student will not fail to see that such a usage leads us to believe 
that much more than a mere moral regeneration is meant in Christ’s conversation with 
Nicodemus, for appeal is made to Nicodemus’s knowledge of the Scriptures respecting 
the mode of Israel’s regeneration, what it included (comp. Art. on ‘‘ The New Birth,” 
vol. 12, p. 116, Nathaniel). Reference to this birth is also made in Isa. 54:1, and “‘ the 
times of restitution” imply it. ‘‘ Regeneration’’ (Matt. 19 : 28) embraces it so clearly 
that it is used by writers as the equivalent of resurrection, as e.g. Eusebius’s His., b. 5, 
ch. 1., Lactantius, vol. 2, p. 181, in the letter of the churches of Vienna and Lyons. 

6 Job 19 : 25, owing to the division of critics respecting its reference to a resurrection 
is passed by ;* so also Augustine’s rendering (b. 18, c. 33) of Zeph. 3 : 8, ‘*‘ Wait ye upon 
me, saith the Lord, in the day of my resurrection in the future,” etc. ; Theodoret’s citing 
Ps. 104 : 29, 30, as a proof text in favor of a resurrection, but which is, perhaps, as 
Knapp observes, too obscure to be thus used ; Dahler and others, referring to Jer. 31 : 26 
(comp. v. 11) as expressive of the prophet’s allusion to his own death and resurrection ; 
the Targum’s explanation of Isa. 57 : 16 as expressive of a restoration, ‘‘ I will restore the 
souls of the dead ;’’ Clement in his first epistle (ch. 27) quoting Ps. 3 : 6 and Job 19 : 25, 
26, as applying to a literal resurrection. ‘The student will observe that as the Pre-Mil- 
lennial resurrection is associated in the Divine Purpose with the introduction of the 
Kingdom, with this key before us many passages are seen to be framed in such a manner 


- that a reference to the resurrection is implied or indirectly intimated, as e.g. in Mal. 


3:18; Ps. 102 : 18-21; Ps. 30; Jer. 31:11. Thus e.g. “ the adoption” being connected 
(Rom. 8 : 23) with “the redemption of the body’’ implies a previous resurrection in order 
to be fitted for the chosen kingship with Christ (comp. Prop. 154). So that even in the 
preceding (v. 21) phrase ‘‘ the glorious liberty of the Sons of God,’ there seems to be an 
allusion to deliverance from ‘‘ the prison house’—the grave. Even Fuller (Strict. on 
Robinson, Lec. 3) says : ‘‘ Probably the apostle alluded especially to the redemption of 
the bodies of believers at the resurrection,’ thus making it accord with the usage of the 
prophets and of the Jews. Such declarations as are contained in John 8 : 36 are not 
merely to be confined to freedom from sin because of the previously announced fact that 
the heir, the Son (and with Him, of course, the co-heirs, i.e. those made free), abideth in 
the house (understanding the covenanted one) forever. We sometimes overlook the 
depth of meaning conveyed in such expressions, by neglecting to take that broad, com- 
prehensive view of Redemption as given by the Spirit—forgetting that the freedom im- 
parted by the Son embraces, as a multitude of passages show, also a deliverance from the 
bondage of the grave. Lange (Com. Matt. 24:31) correctly instances this far-reaching 
implication, when e.g. he finds the same expressed in the phrase “‘ And they shall gather 
together His elect,’’ saying ‘*‘ Here the resurrection of the elect (the first resurrection 
primarily) is declared.’”? Some writers (Fausset, Com. etc.) draw the same inference from 


Phil. 2 : 11, ‘‘ things (i.e. beings, persons) under the earth.” New force and beauty is 


given by this doctrine to various passages. Thus, e.g. in Isa. 40 : 6, 7, 8, the prophet, 


* While we hold with the early Church that it refers to a resurrection, yet after the 
declarations of Barnes (Com. loci.), Knapp’s Theol., p. 528, M’Clintock and Strong’s 
Cyclop., Art. ‘‘ Resurrection,’’ etc., who explain the passage to Job’s confident conviction 
that his distressed body would be restored to soundness, etc., it would be better, perhaps, 
to omit it, although much could be said in favor of a resurrection. 


260 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PrRop. 126. 


after delineating first briefly the realization of covenant promise, suddenly surveys the 
intermediate universality of death and impressively announces the sad fact that all must 
die. How then can the covenant be fulfilled? The answer, which implies a resurrec- 
tion, is: “But the word of our God shall stand forever,’ i.e. death, now triumphant, cannot 
defeat the Divine Purpose—these dead ones shall arise, etc. (comp: 1 Pet. 1 : 24, 25; Ps. 
103 : 15, etc.). In Ps. 9:13, 14, David says that he shall be “‘ lifted up from the gates of 
death, that I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in 
thy salvation,’’ expressing his hope of a resurrection and future glory. It is interesting to 
notice that this psalm is entitled by the Vulgate, Sep. Aithiopic, over a hundred mss. and 
printed editions (and indorsed by Houbigant and many critics), ‘‘ A Psalm of David for 
the end ,; concerning the secrets of the Son;’’ the Syriac, ‘‘ A Psalm of David, concerning 
Christ’s receiving the throne and the Kingdom, and defeating His enemies ;’ Arabic, “ con- 
cerning the mysteries of the Son, as to the glory of Christ,’’ etc., thus referring it, as the de- 
struction of the enemies of God and the reign of Christ indicate, to the period of the 
Millennial age. 

The student, carefully observing this feature in the Divine Purpose, will observe allu- 
sions to this resurrection in various other passages. Thus e.g. the Psalmist evidently 
expresses a well-grounded hope in a resurrection (Pre-Millennial, as the context indicates) 
in Ps. 90. After showing the universality of death, the shortness of life, the certainty of 
its approach, etc., the Psalmist suddenly changes the theme and encourages himself by 
the covenant hope expressed in the words : ‘‘ Return, O God, how long ? and let it repent thee 
concerning thy servants. Oh, satisfy us early with thy mercy ; that we may rejoice and be glad 
all our days,” etc. Now in view of what preceded and the covenant promises, there can 
be no doubt whatever but that the Spirit implies a deliverance from the power of death, 
from the result of God’s wrath, through a resurrection. Jn Ps. 102 the lament is made 


tha: “* iam withered like grass,’’ which is afterward explained as being ‘‘ appointed to — 


death, ‘nt deliverance is anticipated from this sad condition, and this is based (1) on the 
unchangeableness and mercy of God ; (2) His faithfulness to hear prayer ; (3) His fulfil- 
ment of covenant promises, evidenced, (4) in His appearing in glory to build up Zion, (5) 
in the time having arrived when His promises shall be realized, (c) in the gathering of 
His people and the submission of all Kingdoms. In Ps. 30 we have the positive assertion 
that the Psalmist (speaking for believers) was ‘‘ brought up from the grave ;” and he exults 
and rejoices in the greatness of his deliverance, attributing the same (marg. reading) “‘ to 
the memorial’’ (comp. Prop. 49), which necessitates a resurrection in order that God may 
be faithful in His promises. To apply this simply to deliverance from grievous sickness 
is to weaken its sublime power, and to make it untruthful, seeing that David died, 
entered the pit, and became dust. But let it be studied in the light of a glorious Pre- 
Millennial resurrection, and it receives a beauty and force that nothing else can present— 
teaching us how then he will indeed be “ girded with gladness,” praise God in His glory 
and realize in God's favor that His ‘‘ mountain’’ is made ‘‘ to stand strong.’’ We think, 
therefore, that that class of commentators (Fausset, Gill, Alford, Berlinb. Bible, Bengel, 
Nast, Olshausen, Stier, Bonar, Ryle, Jones, Lillie, Lange, and others), who allow such 
references to a Pre-Millennial resurrection, are far more Scriptural and logical than the 
class that ignore or deny them. Even conservative writers allow such decisive applica- 
tions, as e.g. Dr. Nigelsbach, Lange’s Com. Jsa., who interprets Isa. 26 : 5-19 to refer to 
a literal first resurrection, for (p. 289) he justly claims that with the aid of the Apoc. we 
can distinguish between ‘‘ a first and a second resurrection.”’ 


Obs. 7. This doctrine of a literal Pre-Millennial resurrection we admit, is 
‘* Jewish.”’ This term of reproach (given in this sense by man) we cheer- 


fully accept, for it is a distinguishing feature of our faith, seeing that we find — 


it in the covenant given ¢o Jews, in Jewish Prophets, in the teaching of a 
Jewish Saviour and Jewish apostles, and in agreement with Jewish state- 
ments of doctrine ; and that only such who are engrafted into the Abra- 


hamic stock and become members of the Jewish commonwealth, shall par- — 


ticipate in it. It belongs pre-eminently to the introduction of that Theo- 
cratic-Davidic Kingdom promised to the Jewish select nation. Even Rab- 
binical lore is full of intimations respecting it. That, therefore, which 
forms such an objectionable feature to many, is only an additional reason 
for retaining it. (Comp. e.g. Prop. 68.) 


7 


' 
. 
| 


PRop. 126. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 261 


Comp. Props. 69, 116, 123, 126, 127, etc., for the Jewish aspect, but especially Prop. 
49 relating to the covenant. In the first part of this Proposition references have been 
made to the Jewish faith and instances given of expressed belief in a Pre-Millennial 
resurrection—one introductory to the Messianic Kingdom. In the Talmud (quoted by 
Lederer, in Israelite Indeed) the resurrection is found in Moses, for it is said : ‘‘ Every one 
of Israel receives a portion of the world to come ; for it is written : ‘ Thy people also 
shall be all righteous ; they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting ; 
the work of mine hands, that I may be glorified,’ Isa, 60 : 21. But the following have no 
part in the world to come: those who say the resurrection from the dead cannot be 
proved from the book of the law (the Pentateuch),’’ In the German: ‘‘ He who de- 
nies that the resurrection from the dead can be proved from the book of the law 
(though he may admit the fact that a resurrection shall take place), shall have no 
part in the resurrection, because God rewards and punishes measure for meas- 
ure,’ etc. (Comp. references under Prop. 49.) Milman (His, Jews, vol. 1, p. 232) 
refers to the Rabbins (Tract Sanhedrin, 2) as quoting such passages as Deut. 
31:16, and 1:8 in favor of a resurrection. In his His. Christ (vol. 1, p. 75, etc.) he 
speaks of this Jewish belief, and states a well-known fact, viz., that such a faith was 
more clearly and distinctively held after the return from Captivity. Buckle (Mis., vol. 8, 
p. 136) endeavors to take advantage of this fact as an indication of derivation from an 
acquaintance with ‘‘ eastern philosophy” —but how it is derived, when all who hold it 
constantly appeal to the Jewish Scriptures, he (and others who press this matter) have 
not informed us. Let us only add: One reason, apparently, why the resurrection is 
more prominently given by Daniel, Ezekiel, and others is the following : The resurrec- 
tion is allied with a restored Theocracy ; now as long as the Theocratic Kingdom in the 
Davidic line existed, that prominency was not given to it which, as a great source of com- 
fort and encouragement, appertained to it when the Kingdom was overthrown and faith 
and hope were directed to its restoration. Augustine (Cily of God, b. 15, s. 18) finds the 
first intimation of a resurrection even in the name of ‘‘ Seth’”’ signifying ‘‘ resurrection,’’ 
and if one of our opponents can find it so remotely, no one can censure us for our find- 
ings. For the Jewish faith in a resurrection of the dead, compare Prayer 2, in the Nine- 
teen Prayers (Shemoneh Esreh), Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 107. Also articles on the 
resurrection in Bib. Cyclops., and in Commentaries, especially comments on Matt. 22 : 23 
and 31, in Lange, Meyer, etc. 


Obs. 8. We see what estimate to place on Reuss’s assertion (fis. Ch. 
Theol., p. 57) : ‘‘ It is a fact admitted in our day by all unprejudiced exe- 
getes, and which should never have been denied, that the doctrine (of the 
res.) was never taught by the prophets previous to the exile, especially in 
any close association with the idea of a future reward.’”’ This is abun- 
dantly refuted by what we have produced from the Pentateuch, the histori- 
cal books, the Psalms, Isaiah and Ezekiel. Even if this language is to be 
spiritualized (which these men do, and, therefore, cannot find a resurrec- 
tion), critics fully admit that the language is based on, or the figure is de- 
rived from, a doctrine of the resurrection, which must then have been well 
known. But over against Reuss, Jesus Himself told the Sadducees that it 
was taught even by Moses ; so Peter, in proving the resurrection of Jesus, af- 
firms the same respecting David ; and so Paul, Heb. 11 : 35, concerning the 
ancients generally. It was taught doth directly or inferentially, but, of 
course, if the most direct passages are to receive Origenistic interpretation 
and manipulation, then it cannot be found—the doctrine is prejudged. 
The Jews themselves appealed to passages in the writings before the exile 
for their belief, and found it even, where all Scripture places it as neces- 
sarily implied, viz., in the Covenant itself. Even Stanley (His. of Jew. 
Ch., 2 Ser., p. 170) speaks of ‘‘ the defects’ of the Psalms in this particu- 
lar, and adds: ‘‘ Hardly in the silence of the Pentateuch or the gloomy 
despair of Ecclesiastes, is the faintness of immortality more chilling than 
in the 30th, 49th, and 88th Psalms.’’ The ‘‘ defect’’ in this case 1s im 


262 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 126. 


the interpreter, and nof im the Psalms. For what can be more significant 
and cheering than the plain statement in the 30th that he will praise God, 
** for Thou hast lifted meup and hast not mademy foes (death and the grave 
as he afterward explains) ¢o rejoice over me’’—‘* O Lord, Thou hast brought 
up my soul from the grave; Thow hast kept me alive, that I should not go 
down to the pit,’’ v.e., remain there as the wicked. And this comes to pass 
owing (marg. reading) ‘* to the memorial,’’ which we have shown (Prop. 
49) pledges God to a resurrection to insure the fulfilment of the Covenant 
promises. This, too, takes place in ‘‘ the morning,’’ see Prop. 1389. Then 
again he refers to death, to his happy deliverance from it, to the establish- 
ment of his ‘‘ mountain’’ or Kingdom, to the fact that he would ‘‘ not be 
silent ’’ as the wicked then will be. Whether others can see it or not, the 
Psalm is radiant with hope of blessed immortality. The 88th is, as has 
already been shown, jubilant with the same hope, while the 40th, not so 
distinctive, gives, as parallel passages will indicate, evidences of the 
same, 

The efforts made by Amner (On Dan.) to make out—which many now follow—the 
passages referring to a resurrection to denote mere temporal deliverance, have been fully 
exposed by others, as e.g. Brit. Critic, O. Ser, vol. 13. Fiske (7’he Unseen World, p. 105) 
very confidently asserts that the doctrine of a resurrection was devised after the Babylo- 
nish Captivity to meet doctrinal contingencies, and that it was not original with the Jews 
but was ‘‘ borrowed from the Zaratheustian theology of Persia.’’ Clarke (Ten Religions) 
and many others repeat this, as if repetition was proof. It is reasonable to expect such 
statements from unbelievers, but when they come from professed believers they are 
unreasonable. Thus e.g. Beecher (Ser. ‘‘ The Future Life,’’ in Ch. Union, Sept. 5th, 
1877), speaking of the hope of a future life as expressed in the Old Test., says: ‘‘ It (the 
Old Test.) is dumb, and utters not a word on the subject. There is no teaching of a future 
existence in the Old Test., not from the beginning to the end.” He qualifies this after- 
ward by saying that there might have been ‘‘ glimpses,” *‘ speculations,’’ or ‘‘ hopes.” 
Again : in the Art. ‘‘ Resurrection,’’ in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., it is said : ‘‘ It 
is admitted that there are no traces of such a belief in the earlier Hebrew Scriptures. It 
is not to be found in the Pentateuch, in the historical books, or in the Psalms ; for Ps. 
99 : 15 does not relate to the subject ; neither does Ps. 104 : 29, 30, although so cited by 
Theodoret and others.’’ Now over against all these is the simple but positive statement 


of Jesus, and Paul, and Peter, whose declarations are amply supported by the facts 
adduced. 


Obs. 9. From what preceded, it is evident that the unbelief of those is 
inexcusable, who, in a measure, removed from gross Rationalism, still, like 
Liicke in his Jntrod. to the Apoc., and Bleek in his works on Daniel, make 
these prophecies a kind of poetical fiction ; or, hke Reuss in his Analysis 
of the Apoc., speak of them as a résumé of exploded Jewish expectations, 
So rooted are they in the Divine Plan, so entirely embedded in the Plan of 
the Redemption, that to deny their validity is ¢o sacrifice Divine Unity, to 
deal a blow at one of the most vital parts of Salvation. We see, too, in the 
union between Paul, the other writers, and the Apocalypse, how fanciful 
is the opinion of the Bauer school that they are in opposition to each 
other, when, in fact, they mutually sustain each other in ‘‘ the one hope.” 

Many theologians, simply on account of their spiritualizing system, can see no faith 
of a resurrection in the Patriarchs and others (although expressed, e.g. in the case of 
Isaac, in faith in covenant promises, in hope when dying, etc.), and such, of course, can 
find no Pre-Millennia] resurrection, or if, peradventure, found and admitted, dismiss it 
as Jewish superstition. When not immediately concerned in opposing our views, we 
often find the most remarkable concessions, as e.g. Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 290) 
positively asserts that the Antediluvians looked for no other domain than this earth, 
renewed, etc., for an inheritance, and this to be obtained ‘‘ through a resurrection of the 


Prop. 126.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 263 


dead,’’ which hope was afterward confirmed. When opposing us, then the plainest refer- 
ences to the resurrection are all figurative, as e.g. Brown (Christ's Sec. Com., p. 251) 
makes Ezek. 37 : 12-14 ; Hos. 6: 2—Isa. 26 : 19, 14, figurative in order to show that Rey. 
20 :4-6is the same. We may well ask then, if such declarations are figurative, where is 
the resurrection taught? We need not wonder that many writers (e.g. Fowle in “ Science 
and Immortality,” Pop. Science Monthly, May, 1872) can find not ‘‘ a shadow of a trace” in 
the books of Moses concerning a future life, and base it upon the fact that Moses lets his 
aspirations concerning the future relate, not to the third heaven, but to this earth. Precisely 
so, for then Moses in his reference to this earth as the future glorious inheritance is in 
full accord with the truth (comp. Props. 49, 131, 137, 141, 144, 146, 151, 154, etc.). His 
teaching regarding that future life we have already fully expressed. 


Obs. 10. This Pre-Miliennial restoration aids in solving a difficulty 
(unnecessarily such) felt by theologians, viz., that the first books of the 
Bible are only confined to temporal, earthly blessings, or rather, as it 
should be worded to be correct, blessings here on earth. The question de- 
duced is: Why is the hope constantly held up to the Jews of living in their 


promised land and none presented of rewards in the third heaven? The 


substance of the answer given by those who reject the key afforded by the 
Covenant and this resurrection, is this: that the Jews were not then pre- 
pared for other promises, and that the real hope and destiny was to be 
gradually revealed as they could bear it, etc. Learned dissertations are 
filled with just such nonsense, or ‘‘ worldly wisdom.’’? Such reasoning 
places both man and God in a false position. The former, as if he were 
then so intellectually and morally weak as to be disqualified to appreciate 
his own destination, and 2ow, even in the case of heathen or all men, so 
strong as to be able to bear such knowledge; the latter, as if He would 


conceal the true destination of those who trusted in Him and excite their 


hopes, etc., by either false or temporary motives. No! never does God 
thus deal with man. ‘The true reason, and the one underlying the Cove- 
nant and all these promises, is, that the land, the earth, is truly—as always 
afirmed—their inheritance, and that God will raise them up out of their 
graves and fulfil the promises given by bringing them into the land ; 
and, moreover, God never changes from this divine purpose, for the promise 
(Prop. 142) exists to-day, as it ever did, ‘‘ Blessed are the meek, for they 
shall inherit’’ (not the third heaven but), ‘‘ the earth.’’ The language of 
Moses and others is the dest that could be used, for it is the trwth—the 
truth of God which in His own time He will see is realized. We are 
not to come to God’s Word and gauge it by a monkish third heaven theory, 
which makes the third heaven the saint’s inheritance instead of the one 
that God uniformly through every prophet has promised, and then by it 
judge of the propriety and truthfulness of the Divine utterances. Would 
that Abrahamic faith were more characteristic of believers ! (comp. Props. 
144, 151, etc.). 


264 - THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM, [Prop, 127. 


Proposition 127. Ln support of our view, the Apocalypse un- 
mistakably teaches a Pre-Millennial resurrection of the saints. 


It is most reasonable to suppose that ‘‘ the testimony of Jesus,” 
the last words, given expressly to impart information on eschatology, 
should coincide with the Old Test. teaching, and bestow upon us 
additional information. This it does as follows: 


Obs. 1. The reader is directed to Rey. 11:18, and under the last 
trumpet, preceding (as all must admit) the Millennium, we have “‘ ¢he time 
of the dead, that they should be judged, and that thou shouldest give 
reward,’’ ete. Here is a distinctive Pre-Millennial resurrection asserted in 
connection with a time of wrath and rewarding, which the general analogy 
asserts as belonging to the Second Advent of Jesus. ‘To acknowledge a 
resurrection of dead ones to be here announced, and ¢hen to postpone the 
same until after the 1000 years, is a mere subterfuge, seeing that the con- 
nection demands its fulfilment, under the seventh trumpet, or at the period 
of time thus designated. 


The weak and unsatisfactory manner in which this passage is handled by our oppo- 
nents is well illustrated by Barnes, Com. loci. Not knowing what to do with such a resur- 
rection in his system of Eschatology, and unwilling to deny its plain reference to a literal 
one, he, unable to spiritualize it away (or introduce his favorite ‘‘ as if’’), represents this 
occurrence at a specific time as one that is embraced by the events introductory to, con- 
tained in, and concluding the 1000 years, quoting Rev. 20:4, 5, 6, 12-15; Matt. 
25 : 34-40 ; Rev. 21 and 22. How hard pressed and defective a theory must be which is 
forced to such a wholesale application of a chronological prediction. 'The time of reward- 
ing the Prophets e.g. is Pre-Millennial as seen e.g. in the case of Daniel (Prop. 126) : so 
the time of wrath, the time of judgment, the time of rewarding the righteous, the time of 
destroying the enemies of God, the time when the Christ assumes His reign—all, as we 
show in detail under various Propositions, is Pre-Millennial. 


Obs. 2. We now come to Rev. 20 : 1-6 which was so universally held by 
the early Church to teach a literal resurrection, and to be so thoroughly 
consonant with Jewish views, that the Apocalypse narrowly escaped pro- 
scription by the enemies of Chiliasm (comp. e.g. Lardner’s Works, vol. 2, 
p. 643 ; Stuart’s Introd. to Apoc., Barnes’s Introd. respecting Caius and 
Dionysius). The application of the Origenistic system of interpretation, 
as many have noticed, saved and gave it canonical authority.* If we reject 
the early Church belief in this particular, the veracity of Apostolic Fathers, 
who assert that they received their interpretation of it from the Apostles 
and their associates (see Prop. 75) is impeached, and the teaching of the 


* It is a source of gratification that this book is so well fortified by authority, that the 
ablest critics, even of the destructionist school, allow its antiquity and canonical place. 
The Introds., etc., almost invariably ascribe to it the best given historical proof of any of 
the New Test. writings. 


a ae pe 


PROP: (127. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 265 


Apostles themselves which directly led to such a faith in all the churches 
established by them is open to grave suspicion. It is not necessary to 
trace the varied spiritualistic opinions engrafted on this Scripture, denot- 
ing either a spiritual, moral, or ecclesiastic resurrection, or to note in 
detail the varied dating of the thousand years based on such interpretation* 
from the ministry of Christ, conversion of Constantine, etc. Popery 
indeed (Prop. 77) almost crushed the early interpretation of the passage ; 
but others held fast to it, as e.g. Paulikians, Waldenses, and Albigenses. 
Various writers, some men of acknowledged ability and talent, have con- 
tinued from the Reformation (Prop. 78) down to the present, to entertain 
the same, and to-day some of the most able men in nearly all, if not all, 
denominations, accept of this ancient faith.t The prevailing view taken, 
is that of Daniel Whitby (who died 1727), who was the first writer{ who 
advocated what he himself calls ‘‘a new hypothesis,’’ viz., a spiritual 
resurrection and Millennium still future before the Advent of Christ.§ 
Men of the highest ability have adopted this ‘‘ hypothesis,’’ and through 
their influence it is almost generally received. While this is so, it is also 
true that some of our most bitter opponents unhesitatingly yield this 
passage to us as teaching a literal first resurrection. Thus Prof. Stuart 
(Com.), before alluded to, who appeals to Phil. 3 : 8-11; Luke 14:14; 1 
Cor. 15 : 23, 24, etc., as favoring the idea, and even makes this admission, 
‘“ Even the Old Test. contains some passages which may very naturally 
be applied to the Messianic or first resurrection.’’ Prof. Bush, and many 
others, who spiritualize it, frankly acknowledge that the language itself, 
literally understood, unmistakably presents the notion of such a resurrec- 
tion, but regard it as a presentation of truth in the shape of ‘‘ milk,’’ such 
as ‘“the babes’’ in that early period required; forgetting, however, that 
this *‘ milk’’ happens to be just like that which the Jews previously 
received, and hence, if the former is deleterious the latter must be the 
same.|| With these preliminary remarks, let us proceed to give the reasons 
for holding that this Scripture presents the doctrine of a literal Pre- 
Millennium resurrection, aside from the one which might be urged at 
length, viz., that the language and spirit of it accord with the Old Test. 
delineations and confirm the interpretations of the Jews (which latter, even 


* The terror, etc., at the closing of a.p. 1000, and one or two other periods, are falsely 
charged (even by scholars) to our account, when the fact is, that we hold the 1000 years 
to be entirely in the future, while the other view located it in the past. 

t See e.g. the lists given by Brookes, Bickersteth, Seiss, Taylor, etc., and compare 
Props. 75, 76, 77 and 78. 

¢t So Bh. Henshaw, Brookes, Dr. Seiss, Bickersteth, and others. The reader must here 
be guarded. This has been denied by some, but thus far they have failed to produce a 
writer preceding Whitby. Some have sought refuge in Augustine, Jerome, and others, as 
teaching a spiritual resurrection and Millennium, but this we do not deny, but only that 
they taught it as something still future and linked with this passage, as Whitby. ‘This we em- 
phatically deny, as their writings testify. Compare, however, what is said under Props. 
175, 158, and 76-78. 

§ We present Whitby’s testimony under Props. 175 and 78. 

_ || So e.g. Barnes, Com. loci, where the reader will find numerous ‘‘ as ifs” drawn from 
the thus acknowledged plain sense of a literal resurrection. Again and again he admits ~ 
that this resurrection will be ‘‘ as if the martyrs were raised up from the dead oS Sale 
the most eminent saints were raised up from the dead ;” “as if they were raised up from 
the dead, or which might be represented as a resurrection from the dead,” etc. The 
language itself of the passage is admitted to teach a resurrection from the dead, but is to 
be spiritualized to mean moral or spiritual revival, ete. 


266 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (PROP. 1 


as Reuss, His. Ch. Theol., p. 57, the Pharisees made ‘‘ one of the principal 
points of their teaching’’). 


Obs. 3. 1. This describes a resurrection of persons. The word ‘‘ sow]’’ is 


used to denote the person (as e.g. Numb. 31:8; Prov. 6 : 30; Isa. 29:8; 
Lev, 22:11; Jos. 11:11; Jer. 2:34; Acts 3:33; 2:41; 27a 
1 Pet. 3 : 20, etc.). The ‘‘ souls’? are persons because (1) they were ‘‘de- 
headed,’’ which can only apply to such; (2) the language “‘ foreheads,”’ 
‘‘ hands,’’ etc., indicates such; (3) the resurrection of the members is 
appropriately described in terms similar to that of the Head. Thus, 
‘*'Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell (Hades, grave), neither wilt Thou 
suffer Thine Holy One to see corruption,’’ is applied by commentators, 
following Peter, to a literal resurrection ; (4) the word designedly chosen 
is in accord with Jewish usage, so that, e.g. the Targum renders ‘‘ The 
souls which I have made’’ in Isa. 57 : 16, ‘‘ I will restore the souls of the 
dead’’ (Dr. Clarke, Com. loci) ; (5) the early Christians familiar with the 
phrase in a living language had no difficulty unanimously in making such 
an application ; (6) David foreseeing his resurrection from the power of 
death calls it a deliverance of “‘ my soul,’’ Ps. 6: 4, etc. ; (7) a change of 
condition is predicated of these ‘‘souls’’ that had died, implying a previous 
‘*living,’’? which can only be asserted of persons. May we not, therefore, 
ask (Ps. 89 : 48), ‘‘ Shall he (man) deliver Ais soul from the hand of the 
grave?’’? and answer, No! for his soul can only be delivered through the 
power of Christ.' 2. These souls previous to this resurrection were 
‘* beheaded,’’ suffered death because they witnessed for Jesus, remained 
faithful to the truth. It seems absurd to press this passage into.a spiritual 
or moral conversion in the face of the beheading which was endured for 
the Word, since it is virtually affirming that the sinner, previows to his 
conversion, suffers death because of his witnessing for Jesus; that the 
unregenerated man endures a beheading for his unswerving devotion to 
the truth ; and then, after such an exhibition of love, he is resurrected, 
i.e. converted, ete. 3. The beheading itself indicates a literal death. For 


(1) it cannot be asserted, taking our opponents’ views of spirit, that the © 


spirit or soul can be beheaded. (2) The state of a wicked man cannot be 
called a headless stone, for in the case of these souls it would prove too 
much, viz., being beheaded, implies that previously they had them in 
possession. (3) The beheading results from their previous moral action. 
(4) The word translated ‘‘ beheading’’ denotes ‘‘ decapitation by the axe,”’ 
a violent death. This literal death 1s shown in Rev. 13 and fev. 14. 4. 
The persons who have part in this resurrection are such as were converted 


to the truth defore this death. This is proven by (1) the witnessing they 


gave which caused others to put them to death. (2) The ‘** holy’’ only 
have part in it. (3) A distinguishing resurrection is promised to the 
saints. Hence, this is a promise of a resurrection given because they are 
‘“holy,’? and not one to make the wicked “‘holy.’’ 5. This resurrection 
is bestowed as a reward of well-doing. This agrees with Luke 14 : 14, 
‘* Thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just’’ (also Rom. 
8:11, 23; Heb. 11 : 35, etc.). The entire spirit of the prophecy claims 
this as a great, unspeakable blessing. 6. The ‘‘ thrones’’ that were placed, 
is only met by a similar Millennial description of Dan. 7 : 9, 22, 27, the 
promise to the Apostles, Matt. 19 : 28, the enthronement of the saints. 
7. The same is true of the ‘‘ 7wdgment’’ mentioned, and as will, farther 


ee ie a i 


PROP. 127. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 207 


on, be shown in the judgment committed to saints. 8. The reign with 
Christ corresponds with the dominion mentioned by David, with the 
promises of Kingship and Priesthood to risen and glorified saints. The 
passages bearing on the enthronement, judgment, and reign will be given 
under separate Propositions. 9. The meaning of the word ‘ lived,” and 
the use made of the same, fairly teaches a lteral resurrection. Barnes, 
loci, tells us that Robinson (Lez.) gives the primary meaning to be, ‘‘ to 
live, to have life, spoken of physical life and existence,’’ and adds: ‘‘ It 
may be applied to those who were lefore dead, Matt. 9:18; Mark 16:11; 
Luke 24:23; John 5:25; Acts1:3; 9:41,’ etc? Prof. Stuart (Com. 
Rev. loci) says that the word means ‘‘ revived,’’ came to life, i.e. returned 
to a life like the former one, viz., a union of soul and body. So does the 
word signify in Rev. 2:8; 13:14, and in many other passages cited in 
the remarks on Rev. 2:8. In addition to the texts given by Barnes, he 
adduces Acts 25:19; Rom. 6:10, 13; 2 Cor. 13:4. Nothing stronger 
can be given in our favor than the argument of Prof. Stuart: ‘ If, then, 
as it would seem, we must reject all these meanings’’ (viz., those opposed 
to the early Church view), ‘*‘ how can we well avoid coming to the conclu- 
sion that ezesan here must mean a reviving or rising from the dead? The 
use of za0 elsewhere in the Apocalypse shows very plainly that it may mean 
revived, lived again 77 reference to the body which had been dead. Thus 
the Saviour speaks of Himself in Rev. 2:8, as being He who had been 
dead, kai ezese, and had revived, lived again, after the death of the body. 
Thus, too, it is said of the beast (Rev. 13 : 14), which had the deadly wound 
of the sword, that ezese, it revived.’’® Surely, if the Spirit employs the 
word to signify the literal resurrection of Jesus, and that, too, in the same 
book, we are justified in applying it in the same way to the resurrection of 
His brethren, contrasted as it is with a previous death. 10. Those who 
thus ‘‘ lived’’ enjoyed the Millennial period, and those who ‘‘ lived not,’’ 
i.e. the rest of the dead, did not realize it.4 Now, if the word ‘‘ lived’’ 
means (as our opponents declare) conversion, increased Christian zeal, 
etc., 7 proves too much, viz., that not a single soul of ‘‘ the rest of the 
dead’’ will be converted, etc., wxtid the thousand years are finished. Then 
we have a moral resurrection at the beginning of the age, and the other at 


| ~ theend. For, the same word ‘‘ lived”’ is used of doth parties, and con- 


sistency demands the same meaning in both places. 11. But if this mean- 
ing is preserved, then it follows that after an interval of one thousand 
years ‘‘ the rest of the dead’’ are all converted, etc., which is forbidden by 
numerous explicit passages.° 12. Those who have part in the first resur- 
rection are never subjected to ‘‘ the second death,’’ but the implication is 
that ‘‘ the rest of the dead’’ will experience it, and this 1s confirmed by the 
resurrection following after this Millennial period (same chapter), in which 
the second death largely figures. Now, if the living of these two classes is 
the same, it legitimately follows that the one portion will be given over to 
the power of the second death, for having no lot in the first, 1t falls under 
the second resurrection. ‘The reason why they did not have part in the 
first is not removed defore the second takes place, for they remain ‘‘ dead”’ 
until the second occurs after the thousand years. 13. What is asserted, 
* Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection ; on such 
the second death shall have no power,’’ is a bestowal of eternal life by the 
_. power of the resurrection, as is seen at length in 1 Cor. 15, etc. It is the 
bestowal of immortality to that which was mortal, so that as in Luke 


@ 
268 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127. 


20 : 36, ‘* neither can they die any more,”’ or, they become like the Head, 
Rom. 6: 9, **‘ that Christ being raised from the dead dieth no more ; death 
hath no more dominion over Him.’’® 14. This again is confirmed by the 
natural conclusion which the passage impresses, that each one thus raised 
up lives and reigns during, at least, a thousand years, which cannot be 
applied to mortal man. Moral or spiritual advancement does not bestow 
such longevity.’ 15. These resurrected ones ‘‘ reigned with Christ.” 
Jesus then sits on His own throne, and the saints reign with Him (Matt. 
19 : 28; Luke 22:29, 30, etc.). This involves a consideration of the 
period of Christ’s reign, etc., but it is sufficient to point out what even 
our opponents admit, that such a reign of Christ will be witnessed at His 
Coming, and that it is the happy portion of saints to reign with Him. 
Hence, this prediction is in sympathy with such a reign. 16. Martyrs 
(one class) obtain this resurrection, not that the resurrection produces 
martyrs, as some affirm, or revives the martyr spirit, as others say, or 
causes, as others declare, a eulogy of martyrs. And, we may well ask, 
Does the Millennial period here described with Satan bound, Christ and 
the saints reigning, with, as the prophets write, all righteous, with peace, 
safety, prosperity, knowledge, and glory covering the earth, does this 
require martyrs or the spirit of martyrdom? Is the binding of Satan and 
this reign so ineffective that murderers of saints, that dangerous enemies, 
still exist? What, then, becomes of God’s promises, if persecution, sore 
trial, threatened death and violent death itself is the characteristic of the 
Millennium?’ 17. The persecuting beast and prophet are removed before 
this Millennial period begins, as is seen in preceding chapter. ‘The persons 
resurrected are those who had previously refused His worship, mark, ete., 
and as we read (Rev. 13 : 15, etc.) were killed. In this Mill. age they have 
no such power, for the reason given, Rev. 19 : 20. All persecuting power 
(vy. 2, 3) shall be confmed. This exactly corresponds with the prophetic 
delineations of the Millennium (as e.g. Isa. 25, 26, etc.). The very persons 
(not others) killed by the beast are the ones who live and reign during the 
thousand years. 18. This resurrection is accompanied by God’s heavy 
judgment upon His enemies, resulting in their overthrow and destruction, — 
which agrees with what is said of this literal resurrection elsewhere.’ 19. 
Taking the explanation given by our opponents to the word ‘‘ first,’’ it 
cannot denote what they claim. Thus e.g. Barnes, loci, ‘‘ It is called the 
first resurrection in contradistinction from the second and last, the general 
resurrection.’’ Now, if it means conversion, revival of martyr spirit, 
distinguished piety, etc., how can it properly bear such a contrast to the — 
second, seeing the difference in kind?’® The fact that it is called ‘‘ the 
first’’ or ‘‘ better’’ or pre-eminent resurrection implies a second of the same 
kind, but of a lower grade, i.e. not so distinguished, etc. If we make the 
one moral, etc., the other must be the same. 20. The rest of the dead 
only live after the one thousand years are finished, and as this resurrection 
is not included in the first or better one, it must be the second. In the 
same chapter after the thousand years we do read of a second one that 
transpires in which ‘‘ death and the grave delivered up the dead which were 
in them.’’ If the second is literal (as nearly all admit) the first must be 
also the same. 21. the juxtaposition of these two resurrections, the one 
at the beginning and the other at the close of this age, indicates a pecu- 
larity and significance in the use of the word ‘ first.’? This does not 
mean priority of time, as is almost uinversally supposed, for this would not 


merOP. 1272| THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 209 


be true either of the theory of our opponents or of our own."! The word 
“‘first’’ has reference to the privileges of the first-born, which were, Deut., 
21:17, (1) a double portion, i.e. distinguished position, comp. Gen. 25 : 
31-34 ; (2) a right to the priesthood, Numb. 3 : 13; (8) government and 
dominion, Gen. 27:29. God already so early in history develops the idea 
purposed in the Divine Will of a selected number of the first-born, first 
begotten of the dead, of whom Christ is the Head. Hence the peculiarity 
of the language here, ‘“‘ first resurrection’’ is, that these also, the ones subject 
to this great tribulation during the period of Rey. 14 : 9-13, shall come 
forth also having the privileges of the first-born, i.e. they are not of the 
second or future ones, but belong to the first as well as those who may have 
preceded them. (The reader will clearly see the force of this when we 
come to the reign of saints, etc.) The word “ first’? 1s, as Parkhurst 
(Lex.) and others assert, employed to denote ‘‘ dignity of persons’’ in the 
Bence of ‘ chief,’ -““»rincipal,’’ etc.,.as in, Matt. 20:27; Acts 13°: 50.; 


(1 Tim. 1:15; Acts 17:4; 25:2; 28:%,1%, etc. This resurrection is, 


therefore, the chief, principal, pre-eminent one, because it pertains to that 
of the first-born, constitutes the persons embraced in and experiencing its 
power the first-born that belong exclusively-—in a peculiar sense typified by 
the Jewish first-born—o God Himself. ence not time but distinction is 
denoted. Now, this forms a unison with the general tenor of the word 
respecting this very resurrection pertaining to the saints, and the harmony 
is remarkable, being never broken by the slightest discord. 22. The resur- 
rection at the close of this chapter is almost generally acknowledged as 
aliteralone. Now, the same rules of interpretation that make this one 
literal, will, if applied to the first, make it the same. For doth represent a 
visionary spectacle embracing persons, acts, events, and conditions still 
future, which prefigure or symbolize persons, etc. They doth stand or 
fall together. Sound criticism must acknowledge this feature.’? 23. 
‘This is the first resurrection,’’ is an explanatory clause, and, like all 
explanatory language, must be received in the sense that usage, etc., 
affords. 24. These resurrected saints are ‘‘ blessed,’’ which is the condi- 
tion promised to believers raised up at the last day, Luke 14: 14, ete. 


25. In this Millennial period Satan is bound so that he shall not ‘‘ deceive 
the nations’’ during its continuance. But this cannot be realized down to 


\ 


the personal Advent of Christ, for a multitude of passages authoritatively 
teach that wars, wickedness, even so great that it is contrasted with that 
of the days of Noah, nations hostile to Christ, the Church itself a com- 
mingling of tares and wheat, shall exist down to the Advent, which is 
connected with the resurrection of the saints. 26. The ‘‘ harvest’’ (Matt. 
13 : 80, 39), which is identified with the resurrection period, is one that 
precedes this Millennial era, as is seen by reference to Rev. 14 and 19, 
when ‘‘ the harvest of the earth is ripe,’’ and it is gathered, following, too, 
closely on a terrible persecution.” 27. If the Advent recorded in Rev, 19 
can be proven to be a personal Pre-Millennial one, then this resurrection 


as a literal one follows. Leaving this for a separate Proposition (Prop. 


121), we only now say, that the fact of such a special Advent being desig- 
nated as immediately preceding this resurrection, and the acts that He 
performs being similar to those ascribed to Him when He comes to raise 
the dead, is im direct accord with the doctrine of a resurrection. It isa 
resurrection linked directly with a Coming of Jesus for purposes of ven- 
geance and salvation. 28. The thousand years specifically mentioned were 


270 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM.  [PRopP. 197, 


identified by the Jews with a literal resurrection, and the Messianic reign. 
Now, the adoption of the same phraseology, united with a resurrection, 
which—primarily understood—refers to a restoration of life to dead ones, 
is virtually an indorsement of the Jewish idea of a literal resurrection, or 
else it is a most cruel deception, confirming men in error.* 29. 'Lhis 
resurrection is sustained by the ‘‘ lake of fire burning with brimstone,”’ 
Rey. 19 : 20. Almost every one acknowledges that a resurrection of the 
saints either precedes or is connected with Matt. 25 : 31-46. Now, in this 
latter passage, we have the personal Advent, the holy messengers with 
Him, the sitting on His throne, the gathering of the nations (as Joel, 
John, etc., describe), the saints inheriting the Kingdom, and then, notice, 
the wicked cast into the fire preceding the Millennial age ; for ‘‘ Depart 
from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his 
angels.’’ ‘These wicked are cast into the fire which is only prepared 
for the devil, etc. ; for, as the Spirit carefully (Rev. 20) shows, after the 
thousand years, the devil is cast into the lake of fire where the others have 
been during the thousand years (see Prop. 134). 380. The ‘* marriage of the 
Lamb,’’ and ‘‘ the marriage supper,’’ Rev. 19: 7%, 9, sufficiently identify 
the nature of this resurrection with that connected with ‘‘ the manifesta- 
tion of the Son of God,’’ in Rom. 8 : 19-23, with the one related to the 
feast of Isa. 25 : 6-8, etc. 31. A comparison of the expression ‘‘ but the 
rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished,” 
with other Scriptures sustains a literal resurrection. '° 


1 For the usage that we contend for, let the student compare Dr. Etheridge’s Transl. of 
the Targums of Onkelos, etc., vol. 2, p. 687, who remarks that the word ‘ soul”’ is used 
“both in the Bible and Targums for ‘a dead body,’ and in the Jerusalem Talmud for ‘a 
stone or monument which marks the place of the dead.’’’ He also notices the following 
places as indicative of its meaning ‘‘ the person,”’ Gen. 17; Ex. 1:5; Lev. 4:2, 27; 
72203 22:11; Deut. 24:7; 2Sam. 14:14; Ezek. 27:13; Acts 2:43; 2 Pet. 2 siam 
Rev. 18:13; to which may be added Acts 7:14; Gen. 19:20; Ps. 55:18, and 
119 :175; Isa. 38:17; Jos. 11:11, etc. Indeed, so seldom is the word ‘“‘soul ” em- 
ployed to designate the disembodied spirit, that some eminent writers (as e.g. Bh. Law 
in Cons. on Theory of Religion, and others) have called into question the fact whether it is 
employed in such a sense, especially in connection with the intermediate state. This 
only indicates how freely the term is employed in the manner advocated by us. Even 
Barnes palpably contradicts himself on this point. Thus on Rev. 20 he remarks: “ By 
no possible construction can it mean the bodies of the saints,’’ but on Acts 2 : 27 he refutes 
himself when he applies the term soul to Christ, to His person, saying : ‘‘ There is no 
clear instance in which it is applied to the soul in its separate state or disjoined from the 
body.” In reply to Fairbairn and others it is only necessary to say that Rev. 20 is in 
accordance with Scriptural usage. and that there is exquisite propriety in speaking of the 
resurrection of the saints just as Christ’s (Acts 2 : 27) is spoken of, and as that of the be- 
lever is predicted, e.g. Ps. 99 : 15, ‘But God will redeem my soul from the power of the 
grave.” Our interpretation is vindicated by previous usage and by the express promises 
of God. (Comp. also Sep. Version on Lev. 19 : 28; Num. 6:11; Lev. 21:1; Ezek. 
44 : 25, where ‘‘ soul”’ designates the dead.) 

* He adds: “but it does not necessarily imply this, nor does the mere use of the word 
suggest it.’’ But the primary meaning, the use of the word, the conteat, etc., all is calculated ~ 
to suggest it, as it did to the early Church, to Prof. Stuart, etc. Fairbairn (On Proph., 
p. 461) is fairly driven from the old position that only a moral change is denoted, when 
he informs us that it is used as a figure derived from the literal resurrection, because the 
state here delineated partakes more of the final resurrection state than any that had pre- 
ceded. His interpretation is, however, vague. We rest satisfied with his concession 
that there is reference in the language to a literal resurrection. 

3 Prof. Stuart having been unfriendly to the Millenarian view, his testimony, so candid, 
is the more weighty and valuable. We give his conclusion : ‘‘ Putting now all these consid- 
erations together, I do not see how we can, on the ground of exegesis, fairly avoid the con- 
clusion that John has taught, in the passage before us, that there will be a resurrection of 


a 


PROP, 127. | ' THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 271 


the martyr saints at the commencement of the period after Satan shall have been shut up in 
the dungeon of the great abyss.” “I cannot admit any serious doubt, either on the ground 
of general philology, or of the usus loquendi of the Apocalypse.” The critical student 
will do well to observe how our opponents explain this same world ‘“‘lived’’ in Rev. 
2:8; Rom. 14 :9, etc., and then contrast the concessions made with their comments on 
Rey. 20. It greatly confirms our position by exposing their contradictions. 

4 If to avoid this issue the resurrection of the rest of the dead is literal, as some con- 
tend, this ends the discussion, for if literal in the one clause it is literal in the other also, 
the same word being employed. It is a mere shiftless gloss, opposed to the word 
** dead,”’ etc., to make “'the rest of the dead’ ‘‘ weak Christians,’’ ‘‘ sickly portion of 
the flock,’’ etc., afterward devoted in piety. 

° Barnes loci, against the express declaration of the prophecy, has the rest of the dead 
living through the thousand years, but in a lower grade of piety! On the other hand, 
Augustine (Cily of God, b. 20, c. 9) gives them no piety, and, by implication, has no con- 
version during this period, for he says : ‘‘‘In these the second death hath no power.’ 
Therefore it has power in the rest of whom he said above, ‘ The rest of them did not live 
until the thousand years were finished ;’ for in this whole intervening time, called a 
thousand years, however lustily they lived in the body, they were not quickened to life 
out of that death in which their wickedness held them, so that by this revived life they 
should become partakers of the first resurrection and so the second death should have no 
power over them.’’ 

§ This meets the quibble of Barnes, loci, that ‘‘ we do not need the assurance that ‘ on 
such the second death hath no power,’ that is, that they would not perish forever. That 
would be a matter of course and there was no necessity for such a statement.” But the 
necessity exists even in Barnes’ case, for with it appended he still refused credence. 
Beside, such an objection is an impeachment of the language we have just quoted. 
Beside this, the student will observe that this phraseology is intensely Jewish. Thus 
e.g. in Etheridge’s Transl. Targums, we havein Targum of Onkelos: ‘‘ Let Reuben live in 
life eternal and not die the second death ;” the Targum of Palestine and the Jerusalem Tar- 
gums: “ Let Reuben live in this world, nor die the second death which the wicked die 
in the world to come.’’ 

1 It is to be observed that the thousand years does not limit the reign (Prop. 159), and 
hence the objection (so Gipps, etc.), that ‘‘ forever’’ ought to have been added, is futile, 
seeing that the thousand years embrace the incarceration of Satan and the non-resur- 
rection of the rest of the dead. It is sufficient to say that the scope of the prediction 
requires thisreign during the thousand years (whatever may be the result afterward) to 


_be given as a reward to those who have been faithful, and in the promised reign of the 


saints we find that this very reign is identified with a previously experienced glorification 
(Props. 118, 153, and 154), because ‘‘ flesh and blood do not inherit the Kingdom of God.’’ 
Any theory, therefore, that limits this reign to one in mortal bodies or to a succession in 
mortality, is opposed to the promises of God and, hence, defective. The reason why 
Satan is bound the one thousand years, and the saints are said to reign the specific thou- 
sand years, is found in the Sabbatism comp. Prop. 1438). 

8 Reference has already been made to the theory of Gipps (Treat. on First. Res.) of a 
succession of martyrs, making the blessed Millennium a season of blood and death Pot 
Bush (The Millennium), who transposes it into the same, and is forced to say : *‘ This may 
strike the reader as a very revolting conclusion. To represent the Apocalyptic Millennium, 
which he has always conceived as but another name for the golden age of the Church, as 
actually synchronizing with the most calamitous period of her annals will no doubt do vio- 
lence to his most cherished sentiments respecting that distinguished era.” Well may he 
thus describe it. A more recent writer, Waldegrave (New Test. Millenarianism), anxious 
to wrest this passage from us, follows in the same strain, making the Millennium a period 
for the retention and propagation of religious imposture—only not new imposture—for 
actual suffering even unto death while at the same time reigning, so that “ the thousand 
years will prove to be a period in which Christ’s witnesses are witnesses even unto death— 
a period, in short, of martyrdom and not of triumph—a period in which Satan (being pre- 
cluded, indeed, from the invention of fresh delusions) is able, notwithstanding, to wield 
those already in existence with such effect as to make the Church of God to prophesy in 
sackcloth and ashes.’’ A theory that can thus deliberately violate the text and context, the 
general analogy of Scripture on the subject, the ten thousand express declarations to the 
contrary, and give up all hope of ever realizing the precious, glorious predictions of Mil- 
lennial peace, blessedness, and glory, is not only dark, gloomy, and disheartening, but 
dishonoring to God’s Word and faithfulness. Thousands of our opponents justly recoil 
from such saddening interpretation. 


272 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 127, 


® Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 209, note) remarks that the Duke of Manchester holds that 
the judgment of Rey. 20 : 11-15 is a counterpart of Daniel's (ch. 7) vision of the Ancient 
of Days, and is for the destruction of the four monarchies, and hence is Pre-Millennial. 
Lut this is to violate the chronological order of Dan. 7 and of Rev. 19 and 20, as well as 
the general analogy of prediction. The theory is utterly untenable. (Comp. e.g. Props. 
123, 132, 133, 134, etc.) 

10 Prof. Stuart, Com. loci, says: “ Any great change from a degraded and wretched con- 
dition, temporal or spiritual, may indeed be figuratively called a resurrection unto life, 
i.e. to happiness, but it would be out of the question to name it a first resurrection. This 
implies of necessity a comparison with a second in kind, but must precede it in the order 
of time.” Ifthe meaning of the word “ first,” as given by Barnes, etc., is to be observed, 
then the reader will notice the inconsistency (1) in making the last literal and not the 
first, and (2) of calling that “ first” which, according to their own showing, is only a con- 
tinuation (moral, spiritual) of past experienced conversion, piety, etc. 

11 Thus e.g. if this denotes conversion, piety, etc., it would not be true that this was 
the first, seeing that in all ages this has been experienced. So also in reference to mar- 
tyrs or martyr spirit, which was frequently previously manifested. Again : if it denotes 
a literal resurrection, then it is not correct to call it the first, in relation to time, for in- 
stead of being in this sense the first it was preceded by the resurrection of Christ, the res- 
urrection of Lazarus and others, the resurrection of the many saints who arose out of their 
graves after Christ’s crucifixion, and the resurrection of those who precede the last great 
tribulation, the 144,000, the resurrection under the seventh trumpet, Rey. 11, when the 
prophets are mentioned. In regard to the latter we are convinced by careful comparison 
that the resurrection here only includes those who pass through that last tribulation, 
martyrs and others, while a silent, unperceived, but happy resurrection of preceding 
saints, those who come with Jesus, Rev. 19, Zech. 14, and who sit on the thrones, etc., 
has taken place previous to this period. These last having also endured and passed 
through tribulation faithfully are accounted worthy of the same position, rank, ete., with 
the others ; and hence ‘‘ This is the first resurrection,”’ i.e. this too or algo is included, ete. 

12 Hence the warning of Bh. Newton to those who make the first figurative, lest the 
same principles be applied to the last, and the resurrection be entirely ignored ; which 
is fulfilled in many instances. <A very recent writer, Rev. Burdick, in the New York 
Evangelist (Feb. 3d, 1876), says : ‘‘ In the second resurrection, implied from the first, the 
fact described is an uprising of the spiritual forces in the kingdom of Satan.’”’ Strange 
*‘ uprising” indeed, when the whole tenor of the prediction is to describe a crushing out 


of evil. But we must say that here at least is consistency of interpretation ; for if the | 


first resurrection is spiritualized, it is only a fair and legitimate procedure to spiritualize 
the second. 

'S Our opponents, when not directly attacking us, themselves acknowledge that ‘‘ the 
resurrection” is connected with ‘‘ the harvest.’” Thus e.g. Barnes (Vom.) on the Parable 
of the Tares and Wheat. But. as it can be readily shown that the harvest precedes the 
Millennial era, it follows that a resurrection also precedes. 

14 Dr. Meyer (Com. on Matt. 3 : 2) gives the following summary of the Jewish view : 


‘‘ The common idea of the Jews in regard to the Messianic Kingdom was predominantly ° 


politico-national, with the fanatical stamp of an universal dominion, to last a thousand 
years ; the Messiah awakes the descendants of Abraham ; then follow the reign of a thou- 
sand years ; the resurrection and condemnation of the heathen ; the descent of the heavy- 
enly Jerusalem, and the eternal life of the descendants of Abraham on the earth, which 
is to be transformed, along with the universe’ (quoted Bib. Sacra, Jan., 1851). Comp. 
Wetstein on Rey. 20,and commentators generally. Prof. Bush (Mill.) quotes a number 
of Jewish authorities that directly refer to the thousand years. See also Prop. 143. 
‘1 Our opponents are hard pressed with this last phrase respecting the rest of the dead. 
Some, as Bush and others, endeavor to correct our version by late mss. and render it so 
that it shall mean that they never lived again, but as this is antagonistic to the leading 
authoritative Mss., our opponents are forced to yield us the passage as it stands, and seek 
out some interpretation to suit their theory. Simple consistency drives them, of course, 
to give them the same kind of a spiritual life (seeing that the same word expressive of liy- 
ing is given to both), that those entitled to the first resurrection received. Thus e.g. 
Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 463) makes this a resurrection of ‘‘ mongrel characters,” of 
classes of characters lukewarm, polluted, etc., to a renewed Christian life ; Waldegrave 
(Lectures) informs us that it denotes that “the great body of truly living souls should be 
brought to God ;” but Barnes (Com. loci), forgetting his own distinction of ‘‘ spiritually 
dead in sins,’’ etc., actually makes the pious spiritually dead, for he says: “ ‘ The rest 
of the dead ’—the pious dead—would indeed be raised up and rewarded, but they would 


‘ 
a, ah a ae, 


PROP. 12'7..| THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 273 


occupy comparatively humble places,” etc., i.e. at the end of these thousand years these 
** pious dead ” (spiritually dead) would also receive a quickening, etc., and thus distin- 
guishes the living of the one class to be higher than that of the other. Thus with all of 
them ; not one of them can give a consistent interpretation of this clause bearing the test 
of the slightest examination. Hence Bh. Newton (On Proph.) well observes that the 
allegorizing of this text ‘‘ cannot be admitted without the greatest torture and violence. 
For with what propriety can it be said that some of the dead, who were beheaded, ‘ lived 
and reigned with Christ a thousand years ; but the rest of the dead lived not again until 
the thousand years were finished ;’ unless the dying and living again be the same in both 
places, a proper death and resurrection ?” 


Obs. 4. The last reason assigned is so much overlooked that it is worthy 
of more extended notice. Remark (1) the same word ‘“‘ dived’’ is applied 
to both, the saints favored with the first resurrection, and to the:rest of the 
dead, and must mean in both cases the same kind of a resurrection ; i.e. a 
corporeal one ; (2) that ‘‘ the rest of the dead’’ not being raised up from 
_the dead, do not live or exist during this Millennial period, remaining in 
their graves. Is this view that John gives sustained by the analogy of 
faith? ‘The answer from numerous passages and different writers is 
afirmative. But first let us observe that ‘‘ the rest of the dead’’ are the 
wicked or unbelieving, seeing that the reason why they did not obtain the 
resurrection is because they were unholy, did not witness for Jesus, and 
did not reject the worship and mark of the beast. They were regarded as 
unworthy of it, and the reign, etc., is only promised to the righteous. 
Now let us compare what the Spirit, alone capable of indicating the line of 
God’s purpose, says the fate of the wicked dead is during these thousand 
years, and if the general tenor of the Word represents their condition 
similar to the one here portrayed, then we have an ample vindication of 
our position. 1. Even the wise man in Prov. 21:16 intimates their 
fate : ‘‘ The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall 
remain in the congregation of the dead.’’ Now, both righteous and wicked 
are still ‘‘in the congregation of the dead,’’ but this shall not always be 
so, for the ‘‘ set time’’ is coming when the man void of understanding 
** shall remain,’’ among ‘‘ the dead,’’ while the man of understanding shall 
be removed ‘‘out of or from among the dead ones.’’? 2. Hannah in the 
prayer already alluded to, 1 Sam. 2:9, after expressing her faith in a 
resurrection, in God’s bringing up again from the grave, and then in the 
exaltation of saints to be princes, significantly shows her faith in its 
priority : ‘‘ He will keep the feet of His saints, and the wicked shall be 
silent in darkness, for by strength shall no man prevail.’’ How often is 
this repeated, that God will deliver the feet of His saints from the pit or 
- graye, that by strength no man can deliver himself from death, that the 
wicked shall remain in darkness, that ‘‘ they shall be blotted out of the book 
of the living and not be written with the righteous,” etc. 3. Then a large 
class of passages teach that a time is coming when (as Ps. 52 : 5, etc.) the 
wicked shall be utterly ‘‘ rooted out of the land of the living.” The 
righteous shall live and rejoice, while the wicked are removed from the 
face of the earth. To what period can this refer but to this one, seeing 
that down to the very Advent itself a multitude of the wicked do exist. 
This is the more conclusive when we come to examine the passages more 
closely. Thus, e.g. Mal., chs. 3 and 4, gives (a) a day or time when God 
will ‘‘ make up,’’ bring together, His ‘‘ jewels’ ; (0) ‘‘ Then shall ye re- 
turn ;’? (c) For there shall be ‘‘ a discerning between the righteous and the 
wicked ;’’ (d) the wicked shall be utterly rooted out; (¢) the righteous 


274 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127. 


shall in that day find the wicked ‘‘ ashes under the soles of their feet ;”’ (f) 
it is a time for ‘‘ healing’’ the breach of His people and is performed by 
Christ. In the 37th Ps. it is united with the time when ‘‘ the meek shall 
inherit the earth,’’ for ‘* evil-doers shall be cut off ; but those that wait upon 
the Lord they shall inherit the earth. or yet a little while and the wicked 
shall not be; yea thou shalt diligently consider his place and it shall not 
be,”’ etc. (see vs. 20, 22, 28, 34). This inheriting of the earth Christ 
promises to all the meek (Matt. 5 : 5), but to do this they must, of neces- 
sity, arise from the dead, and when they inherit the wicked are ‘‘ cut off,”’ 
‘* perish,’’ ‘‘ are not,’’ etc., thus corresponding with the period under con- 
sideration. 4. In the 140th Ps. is typically presented the last confedera- 
tion of wickedness, under the title of ‘‘ the violent man,’’ who is not ‘ fo 
be established in the earth,’’ but is to be ‘‘ overthrown,’’ for it is said ‘** Let 
burning coals fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire: into deep pits, 
that they rise not up again,’’ while the poor are delivered and ‘‘ the upright 
shall dwellin Thy presence.’’? In Ps. 146 there is (a) the dead, even princes, 
perish ; (4) but he is happy who has God for his help in such an extremity ; 
(c) because ‘‘ the Lord looseth the prisoners, and (d) reigns.’’ Then is 
verified Ps. 147, ‘‘ The Lord lifteth up the meek, He casteth the wicked down 
to the ground ;’’ Prov. 12:17, ‘* The wicked are overthrown and are not, 
but the house of the righteous shall stand.’’? 5. The concealment of the 
wicked in their graves during a certain time is to be verified in the case of 
‘“ every one,’’ and is appealed to as God’s prerogative to perform. In Job 
40 : 13, the Lord Himself is represented as saying: ‘‘ Look on every one 
that 1s proud and bring him low, and tread down the wicked in his place. 
fide them in the dust together and bind their faces (persons, Barnes, loct) 
un secret’’ (‘‘ in prison,’’ so Barnes, ‘‘ darkness,’’ others). The meaning of. 
this may be found in another part of the same book, ch. 27 : 19, where 
they are represented as not among ‘‘ the gathered.’’ For opening with 
vy. 18, ** This is the portion of a wicked man with God and the heritage o 

oppressors, which they shall receive of the Almighty’’ he announces, ** The 
rich man (wicked) shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered ; he openeth 
his eyes and is not.’ 6. A most circumstantial statement indicating the 
Pre-Millenniai resurrection and that the rest of the dead do not participate 
in it, is found in Isa. chs. 24, 25, and 26. (A) In Isa. 24, after delineating 
the fearful ‘‘ day’? when the Lord shall punish the high ones and kings of 
the earth (as in Rev. 19, etc.) just preceding the Millennial glory, the 
prophet, referring to the wicked, adds: ‘‘ And they shall be gathered 
together as prisoners are gathered in the pit (Heb.—with the gathering of 
prisoners), and shall be shut up in the prison, and after many days they 
shall be visited.’’* When this is done, ‘‘ then the moon shall be confounded — 
and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mt. Zion and in- 

Jerusalem and before His ancients gloriously.’’ Were we have (a) a com- 
plete overthrow of God’s enemies ; (2) their confinement to prison or the 
grave at the very time Christ reigns at Jerusalem ; (c) that after ‘“‘ many 
days,’’ corresponding with the thousand years, ‘‘ they shall be visited,” i.e. 
made manifest, released, ‘‘live again.’’® (2B) In the Mill. prediction 
of Isa, 25 : 6-8, we find it preceded and followed by a representation that 
the wicked are destroyed, removed from the face of the earth, a work 


directly attributed to God. In the Millennium death is swallowed up in — 


victory alone in the case of the righteous, as we have already shown, while © 
the enemies of God are removed and the impression is made, nothing being 


Prop. 127.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 275 


said of them but what indicates death and the grave, that they remain 
under the power of the grave, while the people of God are released. If 
both the righteous and the wicked are to be resurrected at the same period, 
how do we then account for the resurrection of the saints being mentioned 
in connection with this period, while the wicked are represented as non- 
resurrected? (C) This is clearly established in the next ch., 26, in “‘ the 


- Song,’’ which is to be ** sung in the land of Judah,’’ *‘ in that day,’’ viz., 


at the time the Millennial age is ushered in. ‘The peace, happiness, pros- 
perity, deliverance from enemiés in that day is alluded to, and of the 
enemies it isemphatically said : ‘* They are dead ; they shall not live ; they 
are deceased, they shall not rise ; therefore hast Thou visited and destroyed 
them, and made all their memory to perish.’?’ And in order that we need 
not misapprehend the meaning, the condition of these wicked is contrasted 
with that of the righteous, as follows: ‘* Thy dead men shall live, together 
with my dead body shall they arise. Awake and sing ye that dwell in 
dust ; for thy dew 18 as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the 
dead.’’ Do we need stronger confirmatory evidence, when it is added that, 
as in Rey., ete., “the Lord cometh out of His place to punish the inhabitants 
of the earth for their iniquity ; the earth also shall disclose her blood, and 
shall no more cover her slain,’’ 1.e. those martyred for the truth, ete.?® 7. 
In Ps. 31, when death is represented as befalling the Psalmist, he expresses 
his hope in redemption from the grave, and says of God, Thou ‘‘ hast not 
shut me up in the hand of the enemy (i.e. death) ; thou hast set my feet in a 
large room’’ (i.e. equivalent to rich deliverance), and repeating his trust, he 
contrasts his hoped-for experience with that of the wicked : ‘‘ let me not be 
ashamed, O Lord ; for I have called upon Thee ; let the wicked be ashamed, 
and let them be silent in the grave (marg. read., let them be cut off for the 
grave.)’’ But this is more definitely given in Ps. 49, where all men are said 
to “‘ see corruption,’ being unable to redeem themselves from death, so 
that ‘‘ like sheep they are laid in the grave ; death shall feed on them,’’ and 
marg. reads, ‘‘ the grave being a habitation to every one of them,’’ but a hope 
is expressed in favor of the righteous ; ‘‘ but God will redeem my soul from 
the power of the grave,’’ etc., while the others remain in their graves, for 
farther on it is said of this class that ‘‘ they shall never see light,’’ comp. 
Ps. 56 : 13, as those who are brought again into the land of the living 
under the Mill. light of the glorious Sun of righteousness. 8. Indeed, on 
all sides we find Scripture which imply or take for granted this detention 
of the wicked dead in their graves and the priority of the res. of the 
righteous. Even in such passages as Luke 20 : 34-36, in addition to the 
argument already based on the preposition ‘‘ out of or from among,”’ the 
use of the phrase ‘‘ they that shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world 
and the resurrection from the dead,”’ implies that some shall 2o¢ be accounted 
worthy, and hence shall not then be raised up. So also the language of 
Ps. 115 : 17, 18, comp. with Ps. 88 : 10, 11, 12, 13, receives increased per- 
tinency if this idea is noticed. ‘To illustrate our meaning, Isa. 42 is selected 


as anexample. Here is (1) the promise of the Messiah ; (2) the work He 


shall perform, including the delivering of ‘‘ the prisoners from the prison, 
and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house ;” (3) the Mull. 


| _ blessedness ; (4) for the Lord cometh as ‘‘ a man of war’’ (comp. Rev. 19) ; 


(5) to the utter overthrow of His enemies ; (6) the release of His own 


_ people ; (7) but while He asserts this release and the blessings that follow, 


Ue declares of the wicked and of those addicted to image-worship (comp. 


276 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127, 


Rey. 19 and 20) : ‘‘ But this is a people robbed and spoiled ; they are all 
of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison houses ; they are for a 
prey, and none delivereth ; for a spoil,and none saith, Restore.” But in 
the redemption promised, as parallel passages show, only the pious portion 
of Israel is restored, which implies that the image-worshippers and other 
wicked remain in their ‘‘ prisons.’’ For the more obscure passages must 
be interpreted by those decisive, as Isa. 26, etc. The connection of this 
doctrine can even be seen in Isa. 48 : 17, for of the Babylonians (we need 
not consider whether typical name or not) it is said, ‘‘ They shall lie down 
together ; they shall no¢ rise ; they are extinct, they are quenched as tow,” 
and the prophet passing rapidly to ‘‘ the new thing’’ which God will perform 
in the Millennial period, speaks of those first-born of the dead who shall 
arise : ‘‘ This people have I formed for myself ; they shall show forth my 
praise’ (comp. Ps. 102 :18, etc.; Eph. 1 : 10-12, etc.). 9. But there is 
still another class of passages which confirm the rising of the rest of the 
dead at the end of the thousand years, as in Isa. 24 : 22, when after ‘* many 
days’’ those detained by death shall be released. Thus in Ps. 6 : 10, there 
is an evident allusion to the return of the wicked dead after an interval of 
time. Observe that the Psalm describes (1) the death of the saint; (2) — 
prays for a release from death and the grave ; (3) asks ‘‘ how long,”’ as the 
martyrs do, before the release comes ; (4) expresses the fact that God has 
heard and granted his supplication and prayer, which implies, of course, 
his resurrection ; (5) but while this prayer is answered in his own experi- 
ence, the enemies, the wicked, are to ‘‘ be ashamed and sore vexed ; let 
them return and be ashamed suddenly ;’’ (6) he declares that the Lord will 
‘‘return’’ (implying, as the facts in the history of Christ prove, that He is 
removed for a while), that ‘‘ the workers of iniquity’’ shall be removed, but 
finally ‘‘return’’ and realize a sudden shame, such as a second res. will 
produce ; (7) and the earnest praying, longing, and even weeping, for such 
a res. shows it to be a significant one, very different in order and allotments 
from that of the wicked. In Ps. 109 we have the wicked, v. 15, ‘* cut off 
from the earth,’ but the poor and needy shall be delivered, and then 
follows again, in reference to the adversaries, “‘ when they arise, let them be 
ashamed.’’ Ps. 59, so difficult of explanation by commentators, receives 
new light and consistency when viewed from this standpoint. For (1) ‘‘ the 
mighty,’ the wicked are described as arrayed against God, just as predicted 
(Rev. 19, etc.) before the Millennial period ; (2) the God of Israel is to 
consume them with His wrath, just as then happens ; (3) they are removed, 
‘< that. they may not be,’’ i.e. cease to exist on earth; (4) but they shall 
return again ; for, as we shall abundantly show hereafter, the Millennial 
day has its morning and its evening, they return in the evening of the day, — 
“they return at evening,’ i.e. the same enemies destroyed shall come 
back again at the close of the Millennial day ; (5) when they return then 
shall ‘* they make a noise like a dog and go round about the city,’’ which 
encompassing the city is precisely what follows the ending of the thousand 
years, Rev. 20:9; (6) for “‘a city’? pre-eminent for dignity and glory 
shall characterize the Millennial era; (7) and this is done when ‘* God 
ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth,”’ i.e. when the predicted The- 
ocratic Kingdom is firmly and universally established. 

Now, taking all these considerations together, and how they so accurately 
correspond with the general tenor of the Word, with the Covenant and the 
promises based on the Covenant, it seems that the early Church faith was 


Prop. 127. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 277 


eminently logical, scriptural, and necessary, «nd that we have a literal Pre- 
Millennial resurrection of saints unmistakably presented.’ 


1 Tertullian (On the Res. of the Flesh, ch. 31) renders Mal. 4 : 2, 3, “ Ye shall go forth 
from your sepulchres as young calves let loose from their bonds, and ye shall tread down 
your enemies,”’ 

2 To indicate how this was understood anciently, we refer to the version given by the 
Chaldee Paraphrase to the phrase ‘‘ that they rise not up again,” which (Clarke’s Com. 
loci) is as follows : ‘‘ From which they shall not have a resurrection to eternal life.” 

3 The interpretation usually given to the latter clause, that it denotes sudden destruc- 
tion (Barnes, loci) may be correct, but that given to the gathering, meaning that he shall 
not meet an honorable burial, is evidently a gloss, for ‘‘ the portion” of multitudes of 
wicked rich men is an honorable burial, while many a believer has had a dishonorable 
one. Other Scriptures do teach a gathering from which the wicked are excluded. The 
death being once admitted, the not being gathered is naturally to be referred to his being 
left when a gathering of the dead takes place. For of the wicked it may be truly said, 
Proy. 20 : 20, “his lamp shall be put out in obscure darkness.” To this may be added 
(although some render it differently, as if it referred solely to this life or to the funeral 
pomp) Job 21 : 30, “ Do ye not know their tokens, that the wicked is reserved to the day 
of destruction ? they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath.’’ 

4 As a specimen of early free rendering we give that of Gildas (a.p. 546, Works, s. 45) : 

*‘ And it shall be that our Lord in the same day shall look . . . on the kings of the 
earth, who are upon the earth, and they shall be gathered together in the bundle of one 
burden into the lake and shall be shut up in prison, and after many days shall they be 
visited.” 
5 Delitzsch’s réndering is: “ And it cometh to pass in that day, Jehovah will visit the 
army of the high place, in the high place, and the kings of the earth on the earth. And 
they are imprisoned, as one imprisons captives in the pit, and shut up in prison, and in 
the course of many days they are visited.” The exact parallel to this is found in Rev. 
19 : 20, although Nagelsbach justly includes the binding of Satan and his loosening out 
of prison after many days (one thousand years after), Rev. 20:3, 7. Nagelsbach’s ren- 
dering is : ‘‘ And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall punish (visit upon) 
the host of the high ones that are on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth. 
And they shall be gathered together, as prisoners are gathered in the pit (with the gather- 
ing of prisoners), and shall be shut in the prison, and after many days shall they be 
visited.” 

6 The passage, ‘‘ Thy dead men shall live,” etc., is interesting in view of Luther’s read- 
ing it to his dying duughter Margaret, sustaining his own heart by the hope of a resurrec- 
tion. Calvin (Insti, c. 25, s. 4) also quotes it as proving a resurrection. Thus a multi- 
tude of writers. The Jews also held to the same, for e g. Kimchi remarks on it “‘ then 
many of the saints shall rise from the dead,” and for confirmation quotes Dan. 12 : 2. 
Even Rosenmiiller and Hitzig (Alexander’s Isa. loci) understand the last clause of Isa. 
26 : 21 as a prediction that the dead should actually come out of the graves ; while such 
writers as Barnes (Com. loci), following the rationalistic lead, make all figurative of a resto- 
ration to their own land, thus frittering away a magnificent promise as if it had been ful- 
filled in that weak and still oppressed condition after the return from Babylon. Strange, 
when some men can see no resurrection in the plainest passages, others find it even in 
Isa. 26 : 20, as e.g. Clement (First Epis., ch. 50, a.p. 97) renders it :‘‘ Enter into thy secret 
chambers for a little time, until my wrath and fury pass away ; and I will remember a 
propitious day and will raise you up out of your graves’’ (comp. Tertullian, On tne Res. of 
the Flesh, ch. 27). We append a few renderings of v. 19: Tertullian (On the Res., ch. 31) 
gives : ‘“* The dead shall arise and come forth from their graves; for the dew which 
cometh from Thee is medicine to their bones.” Augustine (City of God, b. 20, ec. 21), 
** The dead shall rise again, and all who were in the graves shall rise again ; and all who 
are in the earth shall rejoice ; for the dew which is of Thee is their health, and the earth 
of the wicked shall fall.” Dr. Tregelles (On Dan., p. 156) : ‘‘ Thy dead men shall live ; 
they shall arise, my dead body,’’ and adds: ‘‘ such are the words literally. Identified 
with Christ, as being His members.’’ Nagelsbach (Lange’s Isa.) heads this portion of 
prophecy : “The resurrection of the dead and the concluding acts of the judgment of the 
world.” He gives: ‘“‘ Thy dead men shall live ; together with my dead shall they arise 
(or, my dead body shall arise). Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust, for thy dew is as 
the dew of herbs (lights), and the earth shal] cast out the dead.’’ Delitzsch: “ Thy dead 
will live, my corpses rise again. Awake and rejoice, ye that lie in the dust ! for thy dew 


278 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 127. 


is dew of the lights, and the earth will bring shades to the day.’’ Prof. Bush renders 
v. 14: ‘* They are dead men, they shall not live ; they are deceased tyrants, they shall not 
rise, therefore,’ etc., and he adopts Bh. Lowth’s of v.19: ** Thy dead shall live, my 
deceased, they shall arise ; awake and sing, ye that dwell in the dust! For thy dew is 
as the dew of the dawn; but the earth shall cast forth, as an abortion, the deceased 
tyrants.’’ (He undoubtedly mistakes in the last member, in his reference to ‘* the de. 
ceased tyrants.’’), Compare Fausset and commentators generally. 

7 This subject might be extended. The allusion in Hab. 1 : 12 seems to refer to this 
period of resurrection, for in the second chapter those just who live by faith are repre- 
sented, when the vision shall be realized in its ‘‘ appointed time,’’ as finally triumphing 
over the culminated Antichrist, the “ proud man’’ “ who enlargeth his desire as hell and 
as death (persecutes to the grave) and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto him all 
nations (Rey. 19, etc.) and heapeth unto him all people.” But how is this triumph 
brought about, just as John here describes : ‘‘ Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite 
thee and awake that shall vex thee?’ etc. So Ps, 118: this gathering of nations foretold 
their overthrow and destruction, a deliverance of the righteous from death, while the 
others are not thus delivered. Some (Kimchi) render Ps. 1: 5, ‘‘ The wicked shall not 
rise in judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the just,’’ which, with the Scriptural 
idea of the saints’ judgeship, would be in harmony with our view. But these instances 
are amply sufficient, and refute the opinion of Curry (Bible Examiner, vol. 14, p. 519, 


etc.) that ‘‘ the doctrine of the resurrection of the wicked is not contained in the Old — 


Testament.’’ To sustain this position only two passages of the Old Test. (Job 21 : 30 
and Dan. 12 : 2) are brought forward and disposed of—all others being ignored. Job is 
removed by another rendering, which may or may not be correct. Daniel is corrected as 
follows : ‘‘ And many of the sleepers in the dust of the earth shall awake, these to ever- 
lasting life, but those to shame, to everlasting abhorrence,’’ and the inference is made 
that ‘‘ those who do not awake’”’ are given to shame. But is the inference a just one? 
To decide this question it is requisite to let the general analogy of Scripture speak, and 
this leads us to another inference, viz., that ‘‘ those’’ who also ultimately “awake,’’ but 
not in the order of ‘‘ these’’ (i.e. the former ones), are given to shame. For no clearer 
truth is taught in God’s Word than this : that there are two resurrections (as e.g. in John 
5 : 28, 29 —the parabolic objection has no force, seeing that actual real resurrections were 
** now” (i.e. then) witnessed—Acts 24 : 15, etc.), one for the righteous unto life, and the 
other for the wicked unto condemnation. We see no necessity for this modern departure 
from the primitive church view, especially when antagonistic to so much Scripture that 
can only be bent to its purpose by special pleading. 

Dr. Thomas, as in his Works, rejects an ultimate resurrection of the wicked, and in 
Eureka advocates that “ the rest of the dead ” refers to those who die during the Millen. 
nial period, thus foisting on the passage a meaning which is not contained init. Other 
Christadelphians, more logically, endeavor to get rid of the passage by questioning its 
Scriptural authority. So also Russell and Barbour endeavor to get rid of the phrase in 
order to make out their peculiar (Rellyite) restoration of “ the rest of the dead ” during 
the Millennial age. As the passage stands, it is utterly and positively antagonistic to 
their view. Hence as the Sinaitic mss, has it omitted, they conclude (in behalf of their 
theory) thatit isaninterpolation. They forget (1) that Tischendorf (The New Test.) pro- 
nounces this, in view of the ancient evidence, “ a mere error ;’’ (2) that the Alexandrian, 
Vatican, and numerous other authoritative mss. contain it ; (3) that so decided is this 
that it is found in the ancient and modern versions recognized by the ablest critics, 
retained in the Variorum, New Revision, ete. ; (4) it is quoted or alluded to by men who 
lived even before these mss. as an authoritative reading ; (5) that the opponents of Pre- 
Millenarianism, who would gladly rid themselves of it (as not in harmony with their 
views) if they could, concede it as Scriptural ; (6) the retention of the passage is, as we 
have shown, in full accord with the general teaching on the subject. So noted, in the 
estimation of opposers, is this Scripture, that e.g. Lindsay (Art. ‘‘ Mill.”” in Ancy. Brit.) 
by this living or “ resurrection is intended the temporary restoration of the reign of evil 
after the Mill.” 


‘ 


Obs. 5. Some might regard our work imperfect if we did not notice the 
objections alleged against our interpretation of Rey. 20. For this passage 
is wrongfully supposed to be the citadel (when merely an outpost) of our 
doctrine, and hence is the chief object of attack. Let us therefore briefly 


pass them in review.’ 1. That it is presumptive evidence against us that 


PROP. t27.|° ' THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. 279 


a literal Pre-Millennial res., if taught at all, is only found in this place, so 
Barnes, etc. Reply: We leave the student to judge for himself, in view 
of the Jewish belief and that of the early Church based on Old Test. 
passages.” 2. It ought, if teaching such a res., to be less ambiguous, so 
Barnes, etc. Reply: It is sufficient, distinctive for the wise and prudent, 


even for Prof. Stuart, etc., for God’s expressed purpose is that it shall 


6 


come as “‘a snare’’ upon the wicked.*® 3. The objection grounded on the 
use of the word “‘ souls,’’ urged by Witsius, Brown, Barnes, Fairbairn, etc., 
has been sufficiently met.* 4. That nothing is mentioned of ‘‘ books being 
opened,’’ so Barnes and others. Reply : Thisis done by the Spirit in Dan. 
7:11 and12:1, both Pre-Millennial. 5. That Millenarians differ in the 
details, so Waldegrave and others. Reply : This is a double-edged weapon 
that can be turned with damaging force against themselves, for while we 
are a unit in the grand outlines of our doctrine, our opponents have 
fundamental diversities.and antagonistic theories based on the passage.® 


_ Besides, diversity of opinion among themselves is not urged by us as proof 


of the falsity of a doctrine, our appeal is to the Word itself. 6. Nothing is 
said of their employments, so Barnes. Reply: It is said that they shall 
reign. 7% No “‘reason”’ is assigned ‘‘ why they are raised,’’ Barnes. Re- 
ply: It is given in their reigning. 8. Nothing is stated ‘“‘of the new 
circumstances of their being,’’ Barnes. Reply : It is given in their immor- 
tality and reigning. 9. Nothing is said ‘‘of their condition when the 
thousand years shall have ended,”’ Barnes. Reply : That is done in other 
places, for the thousand years do not limit their reign (Prop. 159). 10. 
But various writers urge that reigning during these thousand years limits it 
only to that period, so Barnes, etc. Reply: This is a mere quibble, for the 
thousand years are expressly referred to as intended to denote the period 
of the binding of Satan, and that also during this period of binding the 
reign of the saints is established. ‘The duration of the reign must be 
sought for in passages which describe it. 11. No mention is made of 
* bodies,’’ so Ralston, Barnes. Reply : Not necessary, as we have shown, 
according to usage of language. Besides, this is spoken of dead ones who 
have been beheaded, etc. See Barnes, Com. Acts 2 : 27, and compare with 
his Com. Rev. 20 : 4 for a complete answer. 12. It is alleged that if this 
is a lit. res., then all the righteous must be included, but only two classes 
are referred to, viz., the martyrs and those who did not worship the beast, so 
Barnes and many others. Reply: If it were necessary, the concessions of 
numerous critics, Stuart, etc., might be used to embrace others also, but 
we, with the meaning of “‘ first resurrection”’ before us, cordially accept of 
these two classes alone, believing as we do that the resurrection of the 
others preceded this one. The line of argument adopted by our opponents 
proves too much, for it would exclude the res. of the saints after Christ’s 
crucifixion (Matt. 27 : 51-53), etc.° 13. No res. of the unjust is men- 
tioned, so Brown, Barnes. Reply: This is a mistake, it is to take place 
after the thousand years. This objection is based on the supposition 
(Popish) of a general universal resurrection, simply because both resurrec- 
tions, without specifying order or time, are mentioned together. This has 
been sufficiently answered. 14. That such a reign of Christ as we hold, 
with ‘‘a splendid capital at Jerusalem,”’ etc., is not mentioned in the 
passage, so Barnes. Reply: If we are to adopt such a criterion to test 
the truth of any portion of Scripture, then we must yield up many a valu- 
able proof of our Christianity. Our answer is, a comparison of Scripture 


280 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM, [Prop. 127, 


must indicate what belongs to the period. The Spirit to test faith, ete., 
gives us truths in a disconnected form, often isolated, which we are to 
bring together. 15. That if this is a lit. res., saints do not need the 
assurance ‘‘ on such the second death hath no power,’’ so Barnes. Reply : 
This has been already answered. Weadd: It is not for us to prescribe 
what is needed. LBesides, a res. of dead ones being mentioned, it appears 
exceedingly appropriate, since so many desire to doubt it, to declare it to 
be a res. unto immortality. 16. That there are two classes only, one who 
are resurrected, and another who are under the power of the second death ; 
‘* into which of these classes are we to put the myriads of men having flesh 
and blood who are to people the world during the Millennium ?’’ so Barnes. 
Reply : Into neither of them, for this passage only describes the dead, and 
not the living. Who the rest are can easily be ascertained. 17. If a lit. 
res., then the rest of the dead must also literally arise ‘“‘ immediately after 
the thousand years are finished, but that is not stated,’? so Barnes and 
Brown. Reply : The concession is made that if the first is literal the other 
must be the same ; this at least indicates our consistency. But the rest 
does not follow, for the phrase ‘‘ immediately after’? is not in the text. 
If we can show, as we have done, that ‘‘ after’’ the thousand years, even 
if some time after (for the text only alludes to their non-resurrection 
during the thousand years), a second res., also literal (as Barnes himself 
admits), takes place, that is amply sufficient to sustain our position. 18, It 
is a symbolic representation, so Barnes, etc. Reply: Precisely so, and 
real, actual occurrences are symbolized, not figurative ones. Besides, the 
symmetry of symbolism must be observed, for e.g. 1t would be incongruous 
to make a violent death received, and dead ones, made so /or the truth’s 
sake symbolize sin, evil, etc.” 19. All the dead, vs. 1-15, will be raised up 
at Christ’s Coming, so Brown, Barnes, etc. Reply : This proves too much, 
for some of the dead have been previously raised’ Besides, concise pas- 
sages which state in general terms and in juxtaposition the res. of both just 
and unjust must be interpreted by those in which the order is laid down ; 
while in Rev. 20 : 11-15 the dead then mentioned are those found in that 
condition at that period, for in no shape or form is it intimated that it is 
the only res.*° 20. There is no Advent of Christ connected with this res., 
so Barnes. Reply: There is ; see preceding chapter. 21. ‘‘ All the right- 
eous and wicked will be judged together, and both at the Coming of 
Christ,’? so Barnes, Brown, etc. Reply : Notwithstanding the assertion 
that ‘‘it is utterly impossible to explain these passages,’’ etc., given as 
proof, we unhesitatingly pronounce this doctrine pure assumption, a virtual 
adoption of old monkish views, irreconcilable with the facts stated in 
those very Scriptures, and antagonistic to the statements of the Divine 
Spirit. For full proof we refer the reader to the Propositions on Judgment 
(Props. 132 and 133), to the analysis (Prop. 134) of Matt. 25 : 31-46 (the 
main proof text relied on), and to the order of Judgment which follows 
that of the resurrection (as e.g. Props 161-164). Many of the proofs 
alleged simply refer to judgment of ali men, which we receive ; or to the 
judgment of the righteous and of the wicked at Christ’s Advent, which we 
also believe, and not one of them asserts that at the Coming of Christ both 
the righteous and the wicked dead shall be raised up, and a general judg- 
ment of these two classes will then be held. This is simply inferred, as we 
shall conclusively show hereafter. If the modern notion is correct, then 
the pious Jews and early Church groped in worse than Egyptian darkness.’ 


. 
¢ 
L 
i 


PROP. 127. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 281 


22. The rise of Gog and Magog is against the idea of a literal resurrection, 
so Brown and others. Reply: We fail to see it; for if God intends to 
raise up certain of the dead previously to Gog and Magog (whatever these 
names may denote), it will be performed. 23. That if the res. be literal, 
then some of the Apostles and other good Christians would be excluded, so 
Fairbairn. Reply : This has been answered, but we may add : This objec- 
tion overlooks the fact that not all martyrs, but only those at a particular 
period of time (during the time of the beast and prophet) are specified, viz., 
those under the last persecution. Again, it reads this res. isolated, whereas 
to obtain the whole doctrine all the passages (as e.g. in ch. 11; 1 Cor. 15; 
Isa. 25, etc.) bearing on the subject are to be recognized in their proper 
order, which, of course, includes the Prophets, Apostles, all saints. 24. 
‘The rest of the dead neither awake nor live during the thousand years, 
nor at any other time,’’ so Bush and Pareus. Reply: This is directly 
opposed by the text, as admitted by many—nearly all—of our opponents. 
The effort to sustain this objection by altering the text from ‘‘ lived not 
again’’ to ‘‘ lived not,’’ on the authority of a few Mss., is a failure, since all 
the MSs. more ancient are opposed to it, fully sustaining our version. Even 
if the change were allowed, it would still favor our doctrine. These are 
the leading objections urged against our interpretation, and the student 
can readily see that many of them are merely captious, i.e. seeking for 
difficulties and manufacturing them ; others, nearly all, are inferential ; 
while not one of them is based on a direct, positive, scriptural statement, 
unless obj. 21 forms an exception. ‘The value of the latter will appear as 
we proceed. Recent writers (as Hodge, Sys. Div., in part relating to 
Eschatology) have presented no new objections, but simply reiterate what 
have been repeatedly answered, without observing and replying to our line 
of argument founded in the covenant itself.” 

' These objections have been met by Rev. Carleton’s articles in the Theol. and Lit. 
Journal for 1853-4 on “ The Rev. Al. Barnes’s Notes on Rev. 20 : 4-6, by Dr. Lord’s 
criticism of Dr. Brown’s work in same journal, and by numerous Millenarian writers, 
such as Noel, Brookes, Seiss, etc. An excellent Treatise is Rev. Sirr’s First Res. In 
these the objections are answered at length. 

* It certainly is unjust to ignore the Jewish and early Church belief, that the covenant 
would be fulfilled in the restored Davidic throne and Kingdom, which was to be accom- 
plished by a resurrection of saints, and the numerous passages alleged to sustain this 
view as found in the Old Test. Rev. 20 was adduced by the Primitive Christians in con- 


firmation of this doctrine. The foundation of the Milenarian system is the covenant, 
and Rev. 20 only illustrates how a certain feature pertaining to it is to be realized. 


“Hence any attack upon us which leaves untouched the covenant and covenant promises 


is one-sided and unavailing. For the Jewish belief, we may e.g. refer to the works of 
Lightfoot, Mede, Bush, etc., as well as to the articles in the Bib. Cyclops. ; and for the 
Primitive Church view we may alone cite the Ante-Nicene Library. 

8 The plea of ambiguity does not exist when a moral, or spiritual, or ecclesiastical in- 
terpretation is urged. Yet our opponents frankly admit that the language is expressive 
of a literal resurrection, for (1) they inform us that the figure is derived from the doc- 
trine of the resurrection, and (2) they confess (as Dr. Hodge, Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 841) ‘* it 


‘must be admitted that that passage (viz., Rev. 20 : 4-6), taken by itself, does seem to teach 


the doctrine (i.e. literal resurrection) founded upon it’ (but still shields himself behind 
its obscurity, overlooking the previous usage of its language both in the Scriptures and 
among the Jews). On this point the reader will be pleased to observe the emphatic testi- 
mony of Dean Alford (Gr. Test., on Rev. 20 : 4-6). Comp. Obs. 11. 

4 How Barnes (Vom. loci) can say, ‘‘ By no possible construction can it (souls) mean the 
bodies of the saints,’’ how Lindsay (Art. ‘‘ Mill.’’ in Ency. Brit.) can remark that our In- 
terpretation “would outrage all propriety of language,” how a multitude reiterate such 
statements in the face of Scriptural and Jewish usage, must undoubtedly be attributed 
lo preudice. The vision simply represents by ‘‘ the souls” certain persons, which in- 


282 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 127. 


cludes, as usage demonstrates, the bodies who experienced this resurrection. A theory 
that must sustain itself by such extravagant assertions is palpably defective. The 
answering feature is that these same critics when they come to the “ beheading” (for these 
souls were beheaded), suddenly forget their own objections, and then speak of them as per- 
sons, including the bodies which were decapitated. 

5 Some in spiritualizing make it past, others present, and others still future ; some in. 
terpret it as a continued representation of martyrdom and suffering, others of triumph 
and peace, and still others a kind of combination of the two, etc. Bush (Mill.), Gipps 
(First Res.), make martyrdom its prominent feature; Barnes (Com.- loci), Whately | 
(Essays) gives us the revival of martyr spirit and energy ; Ralston (The Rev. of John) and 
others constitute it an era of missions ; Hazard (Rev. Revealed) and others make it a res- 
toration of the Church to civil and religious power ; many Augustineans constitute it a 
representation of this dispensation ; others again unite several of these features. 

6 The confinement of the resurrection to particular classes at a specified time does not 
invalidate its literalness or exclude previous ones, just as Christ’s assertions did not that 
of “‘ the many who arose.” Winthrop (Lec. 132) advocates two cases as mentioned in this 
passage, viz., the martyrs and those who did not worship the beast, saying that such *‘ is 
the general opinion of critical commentators.’’ The author of The Kingdom of Grace 
calls this into question and (overlooking Barnes, Stuart, etc.) stigmatizes these critical 
commentators to be “ of course’”’ Millenarian, asserting ‘‘ that there is not a single rule 
of grammar in the world which will justify the use of this ellipsis.’’ This writer thus 
exhibits his lack of knowledge of what frequently occurs in Greek, and which is frankly 
acknowledged by the ablest of our opponents. Thus e.g. Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 456) 
translates : ‘* And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them ; and (I saw) the souls of them 
that were beheaded for the witness (testimony) of Jesus and for the Word of God ; and 
such as had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark 
upon their foreheads, or in their hands ; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thou- 
sand years.’? Compare Roe’s Analyt. Arrange. of Apoc., who also makes (a) of “ the souls,’’ 
those who had been beheaded, “and (b) whoever had not worshipped the beast,”’ ete. 
So Witsius (Hxer. Sacra, p. 516), and many after him explain it. Our view of the passage 
confines it exclusively to the persons who suffer and die under the last terrible persecu- 
tion of the Antichrist, and that they also pertain to the rights and privileges of *‘ the first- 
born’’ as already explained. The first resurrection, for aught we know, may embrace 
Matt. 26 : 52, 53; 1 Thess. 4 : 16, 17; Rev. 7 : 9-17, and chs. 12 and 14—this, at least, is 
the opinion of many (see e.g. an editorial, Proph. Times, vol. 8, p. 31, etc.) ; for as Sel- 
necker (quoted by Seiss) remarks: ‘‘ To this resurrection belongs everything that is 
raised to immortality before the last day.’’ One thing is self-evident, however we may 
consider the different stages (as Baxter and others), less or more, this resurrection does 
not prevent preceding, but identifies it as belonging to that of the righteous by the 
emphasis placed on the word ‘* first.’’ 

7 Lord (Theol. and Lit. Journal, vol. 6, p. 453) concisely states this as follows : “‘ As the 
apostasy of the soul to sin is the antecedent and cause of the death of the body, so the 
renovation of the soul is a necessary antecedent and prerequisite of the resurrection of 
the body to a glorious life. A resurrection of the body cannot therefore be used asa 
symbol of the renovation of the soul. It were to reverse the order of nature and of 
grace, and make a consequent the representative of an antecedent, an effect the symbols of 
an indispensable condition of its own existence, which were absurd.’’ Besides this, the 
objection is futile, for the simple reason that these same objectors interpret the conclud- 
ing portion of the chapter, also largely symbolic, as denoting a literal resurrection. Lord 
falls into an inadvertency when in the context he asserts that no other symbol could be 
found to indicate the saints, for he overlooks the fact that he in another place makes 
** the stone’ of Dan. 2 to symbolize the same (which latter statement we cannot receive, 
for the reasons assigned under another Prop.). 

8 Professor Sanborn (Essay on Millenarianism) makes even the extravagant assertion 
that ‘‘ the Church has believed in all ages that there would be a simullaneous resurrection 
of the dead, both of the just and of the unjust.’’ A scholar acquainted with the history 
of the doctrine could not make sucha declaration, so utterly opposed by the Jewish faith, 
the early Church belief for several centuries, and the expressed views of many eminent 
men in the Church. The passages alluded to by Prof. Sanborn merely assert the fact 
that both shall be raised, but says nothing of the order or of a simultaneous resurrection, 
leaving the order to be evolved by other passages relating to the subject, just as the Jews 
and primitive believers did in their teaching. It will not answer (as Dr. Hodge) to con- 
fine ourselves to one class of passages which, as all admit, can be referred to a resurrec- — 
tion of dead ones, both just and unjust, and ignore another class which teach a particular 


ROP. 127. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 283 


resurrection out of or from among dead ones, or which speak of the resurrection of the 
righteous as something separate and distinct from that of the wicked. If the resurrection 
is simultaneous, as our opponents claim, then we certainly see no propriety or force in 
Paul’s wish as expressed Phil. 3 : 11, viz., expressing undue anxiety about that which is 
inevitable. Perhaps the greatest inadvertency to be met with in a serious controversial 
article is that found in the Presby. Quarterly Review for 1853, where the writer in one 
piace makes even Rev. 20 : 12-14 ‘‘ aresurrection or reappearance on earth of the old spirit 
of persecution,’’ and then in another place, a literal resurrection of the dead, arguing as 
if we did not also hold that the resurrection and judgment of Rev. 20: 12-14 was post- 
millennial. Some of our opponents, in charity, we trust, misapprehend our doctrinal 
position and ascribe views and interpretations to us that we do not hold. 

® The critical reader will observe that this resurrection is already based on a previous 
judgment. To insure a first resurrection there must be a corresponding fitness, and the 
resurrection itself is evidence of the divine acceptance of the person experiencing its 
power. In the nature of the case there must be an antecedent estimate and judgment of 
character, worthiness, etc. The Popish notion of judgment, so largely entertained by 
Protestants, is one that is simply inferred from a few passages considered isolated from 


_ the general analogy of Scripture on the subject (comp. Props. 132, 183, 134, 135, etc.). 


Sometimes we are unjustly charged (as by Prof. Sanborn and others) as if we did not 
associate a final judgment of the quick and the dead with the Sec. Advent of Christ. 
But our entire argument shows that we thus connect them, observing an order in the 
judgment as well as in the resurrection. Indeed, in one sense, it might even be desig- 
nated ‘* simultaneous,” seeing that the non-resurrection of the rest of the dead until the 
thousand years are ended, implies already a judgment passed upon them by which they 
are accounted unworthy of the position and blessings entailed by the first resurrection. 
10 We have presented and replied to the objections urged by Brown in Christ’s Sec. 
Coming, and in addition show how utterly erroneous is the declaration made by him, 
that if a first resurrection is taught at all, it can only be found in Rey. 20. The general 
analogy of Scripture on the subject speaks for itself. The plea that if taught it ought to 
be “‘a clear and unambiguous revelation,’’ is decidedly ambiguous after the clear state- 
ments of the Old Test., which we have shown, God Himself’condescending to explain. 
The concessions coming from such a source are worthy of notice. Thus he concedes that 
the word ‘‘ souls” does not forbid in connection the idea of ‘‘ a bodily resurrection,” for 
*** they lived,’ not their souls, but themselves.” Again he fully admits that while there 
is no specific mention of “ the earth,” yet that it is sufficiently “ clear’’ ‘‘ that the earth 
is the theatre of the Millennial reign,’’ thus rejecting the notion of Ash, Piscator, Moore, 
etc., of locating this reign in heaven above. He confidently remarks (p. 226) in reference 
to the second resurrection of Rev. 20 : 12-15, that it is ‘‘a clear and unambiguous 
prophecy of the resurrection of all the righteous and wicked at once, and in proof of this 
Lappeal to the all but universal voice of the Church. Has there ever been any testimony 
approaching to this, either in amount or harmony, in favor of the literal sense of the 
Millennial prophecy? No! there has not.’’ We refer the reader to the history of the 


_ doctrine (Props. 74, 75, 76, 77, and 78), which indisputably shows that in the first period 


of the Church Dr. Brown’s “ aJl but universal voice’’ did not exist, but was brought into 
existence through the Alexandrian and Popish influence. Smith (Key to Rev.) spiritual- 
izes the resurrection of the martyrs so that it ‘‘ means the revival of the cause in which 
they lived and died,” but the weight to be attached to such an opinion is self-evident 
from the annexed assertion that none of the saints resurrected are ‘‘ to be raised to dwell 
again on the earth,” so Gnostic is his feeling and so hostile to covenant promises. The 
spiritualizing and objections of Scott, Doddridge, etc., are sufficiently answered in our 
brief review of Barnes. Ralston (Apoc., p. 163) explains, ‘‘ This is the first resurrection, 
or resuscitation of characters, resembling the ancient worthies ; for John saw, not the 


‘bodies, but the souls of those martyrs, which must imply a resuscitation of spiritual 


powers.’ And this is the.only reason given for spiritualizing the resurrection, based on 
the passage itself. According to his system (to show how arbitrary) Rev. 11 : 15-19 ; 
Rey. 14 : 14-20 ; and Rev. 20 : 11-15 are synchronous, and descriptive of ‘‘ the general 
resurrection and final judgment.’’ We asserted the danger of making the second resur- 
rection of Rev. 20 to be also spiritual, and thus to find no real resurrection in the Apoc., 
whatever. This is done by many writers. Thus, e.g. Rev. Burdick in the N. Y. Evang., 
Feb. 3, 1876, says: ‘‘In the second resurrection, implied from the first, the fact de- 
scribed is an uprising of the spiritual forces in the Kingdom of Satan.’’ Strange and 
unscriptural as this view is, it at least is consistent with the interpretation of the first 
resurrection, for it makes the second one in kind to the first. To indicate how little the 
whole subject is understood, and yet how rashly and confidently some write concerning 


284 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127. 


it, Lord (Theol. and Lit. Jour., Oct., 1853, p. 270) points out how a writer in the Presby- 
Quart. Review against Millenarianism positively asserts that the resurrection of Rev- 
20 : 12-14 denotes ‘‘ a resurrection or reappearance on earth of the old spirit of persecu- 
tion, which had slumbered or been kept in abeyance during the long and prosperous 
period of the Millennium ;” and then on a succeeding page, forgetting his own interpre- 
tation thus given, the same author, to make out a general, universal resurrection, as posi- 
tively makes it a real resurrection, saying that it means the following: ‘‘ The dead 
observe, not the living, but the race whose probation is ended, and on whom death has 
already set his seal, are judged.” Some, as Butler (Lec. Apoc.), endeavor to patch up a 
kind of compromise, declaring this resurrection to be a raising up of disembodied saints 
to positions of honor and glory, without receiving a body—which is opposed to the cove- 
nant promises, the proper conception of a resurrection, the relation that the saints sustain 
to the Christ in the coming Kingdom, etc. Such views with but unimportant variations 
might be extensively quoted, but this is amply sufficient for illustration. And yet that 
the reader may have before him all that the most respectable and able writers opposed to 
us can produce, we select two of the most noted. Martensen (Ch, Dog., s. 281), in giving 
his ‘‘ spiritual” conception of the meaning of Rev. 20, refers to the first resurrection as 
follows: ‘‘ A general historical resurrection will take place in the Church ; the graves of 
Church History will be opened, and all the past will rise again in an all-embracing, living, 
and spiritual remembrance ; and under the influence of this great consciousness the 
Church will display a universal activity, a universal development of her various gifts.”’ 
His entire exegesis is based on the preconceived idea, expressed by himself, that the 
Kingdom of God is to be established by and under ‘‘ the conditions of historical develop- 
ment,’’ i.e. by existing agencies extending themselves in the way of progress. On the 
other hand, we hold, with Scripture and Early Church tradition, that it 1s to be estab- 
lished by Christ Himself at His personal Coming, not by man or through the present 
agency of man. When reading Martensen, one wonders how he would have spiritualized 
the promises relating to the First Advent, had he lived before its realization. Pressense 
(The Early Days of Christianity, p. 439) mixes concessions and inconsistencies as follows : 
‘* The triumph of the Church is connected in the Apoc. as in the first Gospel, with the 
return of Christ. To proclaim that triumphant return and to describe its glorious results 
is the great object of the Book of Revelation, as to wait for it is the highest consolation 
left by the Master to His disciples. In the Apoc. two distinct periods are marked in this 
final triumph of Christianity over Antichrist. The first victory is brought about by the 
direct and visible intervention of the Saviour, taking up the cause of His people, and glo- 
riously establishing the reign of His Church upon earth.” In reading this one would be 
led to suppose that Pressense was a pronounced Pre-Millenarian, being so directly 
opposed to Brown, Barnes, Hodge, etc., and so in unison with a cardinal doctrine of ours 
bitterly resisted by the great majority of our opposers. But ina foot-note he vitiates his 
concession by the following : “'The idea of a Millennium preceded by a first resurrection 
is suggested by Rev. 20; but we must not forget the symbolical character of the book. 
The glorious triumph of the Church is in itself a judgment of the world. The world is 
judged by the saints whom it had made its victims ; their victory is its condemnation. 
The writer of the Rey., when he shows us the saints raised from the dead and sitting 
upon thrones, employs an image analogous to that used by him to describe the triumph 
of the two faithful witnesses in the Church, Rev. 11:11. We may observe that at the 
close of ch. 20 : 12-15 mention is made of a general resurrection of the dead in which all 
are to be judged according to their works. The judgment had then yet to take place, 
and the Christians appointed to salvation were not yet raised.’’ The preconceived ideas 
of judgment, resurrection, the nature of the Kingdom, etc., are self-evident. It is strange 
that “‘ the symbolical character” of the prediction does not forbid him to accept of the 


greater doctrine (viz., a personal Pre-Mill. Advent), while it urges him to reject the lesser — 


(viz., a literal Pre-Mill. resurrection). It is also strange that he did not observe the fact 
that the general analogy of Scripture associates the resurrection of the saints with the 
future personal Advent of Jesus, His Second Advent, so that when He comes—whenever 
that is—those that sleep in Jesus shall experience His resurrecting power. Having care- 
fully met all the objections urged, it is unnecessary to repeat. 


Obs. 6. The subject of the res. is frequently referred to and implied 
in the Apoc., but it would be foreign to our design to enter into a detailed 
statement respecting each allusion. A’ few remarks respecting the more 
prominent will answer, and we can only specify, leaving the student to 


oe eee or a Se, 


PROP. 127) | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 8D 


investigate. The res. of Rev. 11:18, occurring under the last trumpet, 
and thus Pre-Millennial, has been sufficiently noticed (Obs. 1, with which 
compare the concessions of many of our opponents, e.g. Barnes, etc.). 
Rey. 14 : 1-5, embracing the first-fruits preceding the harvest, includes 
necessarily a res., and will be treated under the subject of the translation. 
The ‘* man-child ”’ of Rev. 12 : 5 is by many able prophetical writers inter- 
preted as symbolic or representative of the resurrected saints, ‘Those who 
(ike Dr. Seiss and others) hold to a literal day fulfilment, still future, 
of the Apoc., find the res. implied in the 4th and 5th chaps. of Rey. and in 
ch. 7, etc. The passages which obscurely refer to it or imply it are to be 
interpreted by the plain and decided teaching on the subject (comp. Prop. 
130). 


Obs. 7. Two things connected with Rev. 20 : 4-6 may be noticed—the 
persons raised and the time when raised. 1. The persons raised are 
martyrs, and only martyrs. Mede was so strongly in favor to apply this to 
the martyrs and “‘ confessors equipollent to martyrs’’ as ‘‘ a prerogative to 
their sufferings above the rest of the dead,”’ that he inclined to the opinion 
‘* that all the righteous will rise during the course of the Millennial King- 
dom.’’ Burgh, and many others, insist that martyrs only are designated. 
Brown and others make two classes, viz., martyrs and those who did not 
worship (although others, in our estimation, more correctly apply the latter 
as a characteristic of the martyrs and the reason assigned why they were 
martyred). Pre-Millenarians and Post-Millenarians make two classes or 
bodies, the former to include all saints in the first res., and the latter as a 
mere exegetical addition, baving more (so Barnes) than the martyrs in- 
tended.. Even Witsius (Hzer. Sac., p. 516) has a class beside the martyrs. 
Khiefoth (Offenbarung Johannes, p. 260) advocates a literal res., and has, 
like Bengel, two bodies announced (not of the dead, but) one of the dead 
(martyrs) who are raised up, and another of the living (confessors), who are 
translated. But this evidently is designed to make it fit with 1 Thess. 
4:17 and 1 Cor. 15 : 51-53 ; comp. also Sirr on The First Res., and works 
advocating the same view, and it will be found that under the impression 
that all the righteous are raised simultaneously, and in order to make Rev. 
20 to correspond with other passages supposed to teach the same, two 
classes are introduced into the passage, and into the last body (confessors) 
the remaining righteous are crowded. We are not forced to this procedure, 
which is an evident violation of the passage, because it refers exclusively to 
*‘ the dead,’’ as the phrase ‘‘ the rest of the dead ’’ plainly shows, and to a 
body of men who suffered martyrdom in view of their confession of faith 
and rejection of the still future Antichrist. Hven if it were admitted, on 
exegetical grounds, that two bodies are included, these bodies could not pos- 
sibly, by any legitimate reasoning, be made to include all the saints of this, 
and past centuries, seeing that it is entirely descriptive of those who pass 
through the yet future tribulation under the culminated Antichrist.’ A mis- 
conception of the meaning of ‘“‘ first’? (comp. Obs. 2) has a weighty influ- 
ence in its application. The res. and translation of a select portion occurs 
previous to the fulfilment of this prediction, as seen e.g. in Rev. 14, as the 
first-fruits are similar in nature to the succeeding harvest, and precedes the 
rise and persecution of.the culminated Antichrist. All these resurrections 
occur under the Second Advent in its secret or thief-like stage. But this will 
appear plainer by looking at the second subject. 2. The time when these 


286 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ~ [PRop. 127. 


martyrs are raised up is of course associated by all Pre-Millenarians with 
the Second Advent, but many, by not distinguishing between the stages, 
and by being exclusively wedded to some favorite year-day interpretation of 
the Apocalypse, apply its fulfilment to the period immediately after the 
open Parousia of ch. 19. Now while, as against our opponents who deny 
a literal personal Sec. Advent, we can properly use (as we have done) this 
passage as one associated with the res. of the saints (for without a personal 
Sec. Advent there is no res.), yet when we come to consider the exact time 
in the period of the Sec. Advent when this res. of the martyrs is experi- 
enced, we find the most conclusive evidence that it also takes place during 
the secret stage, and previous to the open Parousia of ch. 19. Let the 
reader consider, as introductory, two facts proven in detail in other places 
(Prop. 130 and Prop. 166, etc.), the two stages in the Sec. Advent, and 

the still future Advent of the last Antichrist (Props. 161-164), who causes 
the death of these martyrs and is overthrown at the open manifestation of 
King Jesus and His saints. Now turn to Rev. 15, and we find that before 
the seven last plagues, which fill up the wrath of God, are poured out, the 
identical persons described in Rev. 20 : 4, who resisted the beast and his 
image and mark, are already exultant in acquired salvation, and this follows 
the gathering of the first-fruits as the enforced worship of the beast, image, 
and mark (Rev. 14 : 9) also follows it. It precedes the open Parousia, as 
these victorious ones witness (Rey. 16 : 2) the vials poured out upon ‘“‘ the 
men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped 
his image.’’ It precedes the open Parousia, because they, with all saints, 
shall be connected with the announced “‘ marriage of the Lamb,’’ and they 
belong (as a portion due to them ‘‘ to execute the judgment written’’) to 
the armies that accompany the King of kings. In view, therefore, of the 
deliverance of these martyrs before the vials are poured out and their 
coming with Jesus at His open Advent, Rev. 20 : 4-6 is retrospective. If 
the student carefully ponders the construction of the passage he will find 
(1) the binding of Satan and its duration announced ; (2) then follows the — 
reign of the saints in place of Satan’s previous dominion, and this is 
portrayed (a) by the ‘‘ thrones’? and ‘‘ judgment,’’ a general announce- 
ment ; (2) by a particular specification (as an encouragement, and to lead 
us not to limit these reigning ones) of the martyrs; (c) by expressions 
indicative of the nature of the reign, and that all who participate in it 
have the privileges and honors of the first-born.’ 

1 Hence we cannot fully receive Dr. Schmucker’s (xp. of Rev.) interpretation of Rey. 
20 :4-6. He correctly makes it teach a literal resurrection, and one pertaining to mar- 
tyrs, who “‘ in their immortal bodies shall live again and reign with Christ as His associ- 
ates in His uniyersal Monarchy on earth,” but, overlooking that these martyrs designated 
are those only who fall under a still future tribulation, he includes among them all mar- 
tyrs, of every age, ancient and modern. Martyrs before this period have already risen, 
and these follow them —both having part in the preéminent resurrection pertaining to 
the first-born. 

* These martyrs have part in ‘ the first resurrection,’’ and this implies that others also 
have part init. Indeed, ‘‘this is the first resurrection’’ includes not merely the martyrs, 
but all to whom are given thrones and judgment or rulership. This may reconcile a his- 
torical difficulty in relation to the doctrine. The Primitive Church always associated the 
resurrection with the Sec. Advent, and held that (as we do) all saints, together with those 
martyrs, had a part in the first resurrection. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 224) objects to 
Burgh’s statement of a limited resurrection of believers being ‘‘ generally held in the 
early ages of Christianity,” and says: ‘‘ I have not been able to verify this statement by 
reference to the early Chiliastic Fathers. Probably Mr. Burgh gives as their actual belief 
the impression merely which their language conveys as a whole, But this is hardly fair, 


Prop. 127.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 287 


in opposition to pretty plain statements extending the first resurrection to believers gen- 
erally, which may be adduced, for example, from Justin Martyr, Ireneus, and Tertullian, 
high authority certainly on this point.’”’ Dr. Brown is correct as to the historical fact 
that all believers have part in a first resurrection at the Sec. Advent, and Burgh as to the 
special-reference to the martyrs, which, however, must, as the context and other passages 
show, be associated with that of other believers who preceded them. ‘The evident dis- 
tinction as to exact time, the decided reference to martyrs, and yet the associated nature 
and honor of the same kind of a resurrection, and the inability to explain and apply the 
same, has led to a confusion of ideas and contradictory statements, which our position 
avoids. 

The critical student will observe that if we are to receive the renderings (e.g. Fair- 
bairn’s and others) and interpretations (e.g. Brown’s and others) which emphasize two 
classes, viz., the martyrs ‘‘and such as had not worshipped the beast’’ (so Fairbairn), or 
martyrs *‘ and of them who worshipped not the beast” (so Wordsworth), etc. (and we do 
not by any means discard them, for such a meaning may be intended), still our position 
as to exact time and the persons denoted remains the same. For then we have—not the 
saints of past ages, but—the martyrs and those associated with them under the last great 
tribidation of the culminated Antichrist. All that we contend for is, that the persons 
designated are persons who at a time still future experience this persecution and martyr- 
dom, and that the rest of the saints are included in the ‘‘thrones,’’ ‘‘ judgment,” and 
general affirmation respecting the first resurrection and the reign. 

It may be well to notice, briefly, an effort to bend this passage against us by Prof. 
Bush (Anastasis, p. 309, with which comp. Gipp’s first Res., p. 133), who proposes to 
change the verbs into the present tense, in order to make out—according to his theory— 
a succession of persons who suffered and reigned, and to prevent the beheading and not 
worshipping to be antecedent to the reign. But such a change would not help their 
cause, for the reasons that the vision is described as passing before the seer, that the 
future is frequently spoken of as present, that each one having part in the resurrection 
is represented as reigning the thousand years, and that the passage itself must be inter- 
preted by the general analogy on the subject. 


Obs. 8. If Mede’s argument is once admitted, viz., that Rev. 20 : 4-6 
and Dan. 7 are synchronous, then it is tmpossible, without direct violation 
of the order laid down, to avoid a Pre-Mill. resurrection. Bush, in his 
Anastasis, admits Mede’s position, owing to the parallelism of the two 
prophecies, but endeavors to avoid our conclusion by making both to 
describe the Gospel dispensation. But in doing this, he not only makes 
a fearful Millennium of suffering and martyrdom (against all prophecy), 
but he reverses the facts of history. or, instead of such a removal of 
antagonistic powers—a sealing, binding, and detention of Satan so as not 
to deceive—the history of the Church and of the kingdoms clearly proclaim, 
in the persecutions endured, the tyranny exercised, the murders committed, 
the crimes and wars indulged, etc., that neither Dan. nor John have yet 
been fulfilled. It matters not whether we make the dragon a symbol of 
tyrannical dominion or of a personal devil ; in either case the predictions of 
the Prophets have not been realized ; and what is more to the pojnt, in 
the order laid down by themselves, if followed in the evolution of history, it 
was impracticable, for the simple reason that before this exaltation, etc., of 
the saints, certain events, running down to the present and still extending 
in the future, must first be fulfilled. Any other position makes the Bible 
contradictory both to itself and to history. 


Obs. 9. Those who deny a literal res. in Rev. 20 generally have much to 
say concerning the indefiniteness and obscurity of figurative and symbolic 
prophecy—the difficulty of understanding it until the fulfilment shows its 
Intended meaning, being upheld by some—but when ¢hey come to explain 
it themselves, then all difficulties vanish, and mo other interpretation can 


283 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 127. 


possibly be allowed. This, to say the least, is indicative that they have no 
confidence in their assumptions against us, and that, when necessity re- 
quires it, they esteem themselves fully competent to elucidate, with the 
utmost charming confidence, even ‘‘ obscure’’ predictions. ‘The reader may 
draw his own conclusions. 


The careful reader must have noticed with what assurance this has been carried out 
in Ch. Theologies, Bib. Dictionaries, Relig. Cyclopedias, etc. The subject of the resur- 
rection is at length introduced, and notwithstanding our scriptural argument, the early 
Church belief, the Jewish view, the concessions of opponents, the subject of a literal first 
resurrection is either entirely ignored or merely hinted at, just as if the popular inter- 
pretation of Rev. 20 was beyond all contradiction the correct one. Some who slightly 
advert to it claim the indefiniteness of prophecy, which disappears in favor of their own 
view. The truth is, that any work or intended complete article, on the resurrection 
which refuses to recognize our doctrine, and in some measure discuss it, is certainly un- 
scholarly and defective, seeing that it passes over that which the ablest men in the Church 
profess to be solidly based in Scripture and antiquity. 

Another peculiarity may here be noticed. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com.) and others endeavor 
to make the impression that our opponents are in perfect accord in the interpretation 
and application of Rev. 20 : 1-6, while Pre-Millenarians differ. And they carefully point 
out our differences, but with greater carefulness conceal their own differences. Now the 
fact, as the slightest comparison shows, is that far less unity exists among them than 
among us. While Pre-Millenarians differ as to the exact order, the persons resurrected, 
the duration and nature of the reign, and a few minor details, they are a unit on the 
grand outlines, respecting its being a literal resurrection, its eclectic nature, its realiza- 
tion at the Sec. Advent, its connection with a glorious following Millennium, etce., 
whereas our opponents differ on all these points. Some make the resurrection spiritual, 
others make it literal ; some make it civil, others civil and religious ; some make it illus- 
trative of persecution, others a poetical effusion, and others a Jewish superstition ; some 
make it past, others past and present, and others future. Surely our opponents ought to 
be the last to speak of differences of opinion. 


Obs. 10. There is a res. of the wicked dead, Obs. 4. It will not answer, 


as many do, to assert a res. of just and unjust at the beginning of this age ~ 


and none after; or to affirm, as others do, that there is no res. of the 
wicked whatever. Without discussing the destiny of the wicked, the pas- 
sages that we have presented distinctly show that after the thousand years 
are ended the rest of the dead ‘‘ lived again,’’ i.e. were raised up from the 
dead ; that they, ‘‘ after many days shall be visited ;’ that they shall 
““ return,’’ and return at evening time; that they shall be made subject to 
the endurance of ‘‘ the second death ;’ that those dead whose names are 
not found in the book of life are also raised up and judged ; that there is 
ares. of some wrto shame and contempt, which those that return in the 


evening experience ; that the res. of the dead is affirmed in their order of — 


all men, both just and unjust ; that a prior, pre-eminent res., etc., cnvolves 
another of a lower class, which must include the wicked ; and that the res. 
of the dead and a judgment to follow is held up as a motive of repentance to 
men. ‘These considerations are sufficient to sustain the position of John 
in Rey. 20. To quote the passages which speak of the wicked as “‘ silent 
in the grave’’ as ‘‘ not being,’’ ‘‘ remaining in the congregation of the 
dead,’’ etc., to prove a non-resurrection, is only bringing forth part of the 
truth, viz., that there is a non-resurrection of the wicked for a certain 
period of time, and this is thus strongly, by way of contrast to the blessed 
condition of the righteous, presented. But the whole truth as given by the 
Spirit demands their ‘‘ return,’’ their also ‘‘ living again.’? Any other 
interpretation flatly contradicts divine statements.' Let us receive ad/ that 


$ 
PROP. 127: | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. » N 2So 


is written, observing the same order laid down by the Spirit. If it be 
asked, Of what practical use or benefit can such a res. unto condemnation 
and shame be? the answers are various; such as, to vindicate the justice 
of God ; to prove the truthfulness and reality of His representations and 
mercy ; to apportion ‘‘ the few or many stripes’? that the guilty merit ; to 
fulfil His declaration that ail the wicked shall see and acknowledge the 
Divine power ; to show that death itself, as many fondly hope, is no refuge 
for the sinner; that a res. unto eternal life is the special gift of God 
through Jesus Christ ; to contrast the condition of the res. saints with 
their own ; to root out in the most effectual manner every remnant of 
evil; to give to the creatures of God, the universe itself, a sublime and 
abiding idea of the nature and consequences of sin. If it be asked, Why 
does God give the righteous so long a priority and cause the wicked only 
to ‘“‘return’’ after so long an interval? the reason, as we gather it from 
intimations, here and there, seems to be this: This Millennial era is 
designed to fulfil covenanted promises ; these require the resurrection of 
the saints and their triumphant establishment in the earth. ‘To do this 
demands, as almost every Millennial description portrays, the removal of 
God’s enemies to clear ‘* the inheritance’? of its oppressors. Being thus 
removed, the triumph of the saints, their victory over death, the bestowal 
of dominion—in brief, the ample and continued fulfilment of God’s promises 
in real, actual experience is fully exhibited and tested during these thousand 
years, clearly and fully vindicating the truthfulness and faithfulness of God, 
and the honor, dignity, and power of David’s Son. Now, it is declared 
that this faithfulness, etc., is to be manifested not only to angels, to the 
glorified, to the restored Jewish nation, to spared Gentiles, but also to the 
wicked. The time selected is at the close of the Sabbath of the world’s 
week, in the very height of completed fulfilment of promise, and sway of 
saintly reign, and the accumulated glory of the rule of David’s Son ; then 
the wicked arise and are filled with ‘‘ swdden shame’’ and ‘‘ confusion”’ 
when they behold the justly forfeited blessings in the possession of those 
whom they despised, rejected, and even persecuted. ‘This res. is theretore 
delayed, not merely to give the saints an honorable precedence by way of 
reward, and as a punishment to the wicked for refusing Christ and His 
proffered mercy, but to place the saints, the inheritance, the world, yea, 
even Christ Himself in the covenanted position by which the majesty and 
glory of God is the more fully seen, felt, and appreciated in the then 
proven, tested immortality and reign of the saints, renewal of the earth or 
removal of the curse, etc. At the end of the thousand years, so faithfully 
isit proven that al] the promises of God are ‘‘ yea and amen’’ in Christ, 
that none can gainsay it, for the covenant is more than fulfilled, and to 
forfeited blessings additional and greater have been added. ‘This is the 
time, gloriously, yea, sadly suitable, which God has appointed for ‘‘ the 
rest of the dead to live again,”’ and behold with their own eyes the glory 
they have lost by not obeying God—a glory shining forth in the land, mm 
the Theocratic government, in the subjects, in the immortal kings and 
priests, and in the exalted, enthroned Son of Man. Imagine just such a 


 “return,’’ under such circumstances, and then tell us, are ‘‘ holy men of 
_old’”’ wrong when they depict’ the shame, degradation, and unhappiness of 


the wicked at this period? Imagine Voltaire, Paine, Strauss, and a multi- 
tude like them to thus ‘‘ return’’ and see what they ridiculed, and what 
must then memory and conscience say ?? 


290 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRoP. 1278 


' By pressing Scripture (‘‘shall not be,” etc.) beyond all analogy, we could easily 
adduce proof that the believer, as represented by the Psalmist, will not rise again, when 
it is said, Ps. 39 : 138, ‘‘ before I go hence and be no more,” etc. 

* How terrible the contrast of situation and doom! The haters and persecutors of be- 
lievers, the scoffers of pious ones, then stand amazed and confounded at the shining 
glory of the once detested followers of Jesus. It is but reasonable that a Voltaire should 
be raised up to account for his blasphemy ; a Strauss, to tell why he was so indignant at 
the Christ’s assumption of Judgeship ; a Renan, to explain his detraction and disgusting 
allusion to ‘‘ the Galilean girls ;’ ten thousand, thousand others, to meet the hypocrisy, 
malice, brutality, etc., exhibited—and then there will be (Luke 13 : 28) ‘* weeping and 
gnashing of teeth, when they shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, 
in the Kingdom of God, and themselves thrust out.” It is but just that men should thus 
arise and witness to the utter falsehood and maliciousness of their detractions of Jesus 
and His Messianic claims. Eminent and talented men have written works specially de- 
signed to degrade Jesus ; multitudes have jubilantiy urged their defamatory statements ; 
sarcasm, ridicule, blasphemy, etc. are devised and circulated by hosts of enemies, andit 
is but just that they should be raised up to meet an ample and shame-confounding man- _ 
ifestation of their wilful and deliberate hostility to Jesus. How inquisitors, executioners, 
defamers, etc. will face their victims, then exalted and glorified, and especially the mag- 
nificent King of kings, is clearly and pointedly represented in the Word. 

A few words of caution may be added. Rev. 20 : 12-15 is not necessarily to be re- 4 
stricted (as by Dallas and others) to ‘‘ the rest of the dead ;’’ for it includes (so Lord and 
others) those who may have died during the thousand years. Lord (Hxp. Apoc.) makes _ 
it to embrace ‘‘all the wicked dead of all ages ;’ but we would not dogmatically restrict 
it even solely to such, because it may, for aught we can tell, include far more. For, 
while translations, glorifications, etc. may result during the Millennial age as a reward 
for holiness, yet the mention of the book of life and the reference to all the dead then 
existing may imply that.others, not accounted worthy of special honor and exaltation— 
although ultimately to be saved—are included in those dead. Again: in reference toa 
resurrection of the wicked, we add this: it is true (see e.g. Art. ‘‘ Resurrection” in ~ 
M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop.) that while the Jews held to a Pre-Mill. resurrection of ‘i 
the pious, some discarded the ultimate res. of the ungodly, but others (‘‘ the prevailing { 
opinion’’) held that the unjust would also finally be raised. Now observe how the lan- 
guage of Jesus and Paul accords with the latter prevailing view, as e.g. in “‘all that are — i 
in their graves,” etc. (John 5 : 28, 29), ‘‘ a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and 
unjust” (Acts 24:15). Such language is, of course, powerfully confirmatory of the then 
existing opinion ; so corroborative that it can only be avoided by special pleading. Again : 
this resurrection of the rest of the dead is aster the thousand years. We, therefore, have — 
no account whatever of any other resurrection preceding the Mill. age. Ithas been pointed _ 
out (Obs. 4, note) how some endeavor to discard this verse as unauthorized, in order to 
make out (so Russell and Barbour, Three Worlds, etc.) a distinct and separate resurrection 
of the heathen at the beginning of the Mill. age, so as to give them another probation, — 
etc. This view of a future probation for heathen, etc., is not new, for such men as Tho- — 
luck, Stilling, etc., adopted it, but inform us that the Bible keeps it in the background, 
teaches it only inferentially and not in a dogmatic form. Barbour, etc. make it very 
prominent, a corner-stone (as Rellyites) in their system, and largely build upon it. We 
are only concerned (passing by the stress laid upon ‘* all men” and “‘ all,’’ etc.) with this 
theory as it relates to a Pre-Mill. resurrection, and his main proof text in support of the 
same. ‘lo make out a Pre-Mill. resurrection they frequently quote the restoration of the — 
Sodomites, Ezek. 16 : 55, arguing that the passage of necessity implies their resurrection, — 
having been destroyed. But they overlook (1) how the word Sodom is used, viz., to des- 
ignate others (of like character) besides the literal Sodomites as e.g. Rey. 11 : 8 ; Zeph. 
2:9. Even ‘ the prophets of Jerusalem” ‘‘ are all of them unto me as Sodom, and the 
inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah’’ (Jer. 23:14; comp. Isa. 3:9, and especially Isa. 
1:9, 10). This usage enables us to appreciate Ezek. 16 : 55, for we have the warrant of 
Isa. 1 : 10 that “ rulers of Sodom’’ and ‘‘ people of Gomorrah’’ exist independently of the 
literal Sodom and Gomorrah. If we observe Ezek. 16 with care, we observe (2) that 
Jerusalem is the subject of prophecy—the earthly, as evidenced by v. 3—and God’s care 
and protection, as well as her perverseness, etc., are specified. The city, with its privi- 
leges, blessings, conduct, and punishment, is represented. Her supporters are designated : 
first, Samaria, i.e. that portion pertaining to the ten tribes (Samaria being the capital 
city) ; and second, Sodom, i.e. Judah (‘the lesser than thou,” so marg. reading). Both 
return from captivity, Judah first, then the ten tribes ; and they are given to Jerusalem as 


{ 
| 
| 


Prop. 127. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 291 


daughters (with which we need only compare, e.g. Mic. 4:8; Zeph. 3:10, 14; Zech. 
9:9, etc.). Hence whatever truth there may be in Tholuck’s and Stilling’s theory, it is 
evident that it can only be realized after the thousand years, if realized at all. The same 
is true of Barbour and Russell’s view, for the student will notice that their entire argu- 
ment is purely inferential, being utterly unable to give a direct passage favoring it. The 
fact that spared nations (Isa. 66) are mentioned refers to living (not dead) nations, and 
*‘ the ruling with a rod of iron” is not over the resurrected heathen, but, as a comparison 
of passages clearly show, over the anti-Christian hosts and living nations at and after the 
Sec. Advent. 


Obs. 11. Out of the abundant testimony favoring a twofold resurrection, 
and the literal, eclectic res. of Rev. 20, we select a few as illustrative. 
Dean Alford (Com. loci) remarks : ‘‘ I cannot consent to distort the words 
from their plain sense and chronological place in the prophecy, on account 
of any considerations of difficulty, or of any risk of abuses which the doc- 
trine of the Millennium may bring with it. Those who lived next to the 
Apostles, and the whole Church for three hundred years, understood them 
in the plain literal sense ; and it is a strange sight in these days to see 
expositors who are among the first in reverence for antiquity, complacently 
casting aside the most cogent instance of consensus which primitive antiquity 
presents. As regards the text itself, no legitimate treatment of it will 
extort what is known as the spiritual interpretation now in fashion. If, in 
a passage where /wo resurrections are mentioned, where certain persons lived 
at the first, and the rest of the dead only at the end of a specified period 
after that first-—if, in such a passage, the first res. may be understood to 
mean spiritual rising with Christ, while the second means Jiteral rising 
from the grave ; then there is an end of all significance in language, and 
Scripture is wiped out as a definite testimony to anything. If the first res. 
is spiritual, then so is the second, which I suppose none will be hardy 
enough to maintain ; but if the second is literal, so is the first, which, in 
common with the whole Primitive Church and many of the best modern 
expositors, I do maintain, and receive as an article of faith and hope.”’ 
Van Oosterzee (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, p. 786) advocates ‘‘ more than one resur- 
rection ; first a partial one and then an absolutely universal one. Of the 
former, not only does the Apoc. seem to speak, ch. 20 : 4-6, but also the 
Tord, Luke 14 : 14, and Paul, 1 Thess. 4.:16, as also 1 Cor. 15 : 23, as 
compared with verse 26,’’ etc., and then, referring to the latter (the uni- 
versal one), speaks of a poetic-prophetic grouping together of that which 
in reality will be seen realized, not side by side, but in  succession.’’ 
Ebrard (The Rev. of John) advocates a literal Sec. Advent, a literal first 
res., a literal reign here on earth over the spared nations, etc., and in his 
Gospel His. (p. 576, foot-note Clark’s ed.), thus refers to Rev. 20: 
*“ Chaps. 18 and 19 (Apoc.) depict the victory achieved over this Kingdom 
by Christ at His Coming. Then follows the first awakening, namely, of 
those who have died in the Lord, and now in glorified bodies live upon the 
earth, and maintain a spiritual rule over so much of humanity as is not yet 
glorified (just as Christ after His res. lived for forty days upon the earth in 
a glorified body). Then, after this last offer of salvation, follows the 


second resurrection to judgment.’’? Hagenbach (His. of Doc., vol. 1, 8. 139) 


pertinently says respecting the spiritual interpretation : ‘‘ The first res. 
(Rey. 20 : 5) ig explained by Augustine as the deliverance of the soul from 
the dominion of sin in this life ; as, in general, an orthodoxy which main- 
tains the authority of the Apoc., and yet will not allow Millenarianism, 


292 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127, 


can only escape from its difficulties by an arbitrary exegesis, like that of 
Augustine on this passage.”’ ' 


For the student wishing to see how others express themselves decidedly in favor of a 
literal resurrection, we append the following references. Aside from the Commentaries 
of Alford, Olshausen, Bengel, Gill, Steir, Lange, Fausset, Meyer, and others, many works 
indorse our position. Compare e.g. Dr. Kling’s Arts. ‘‘ Eschatology” and “‘ Resurrection 
of the Dead,’’ in Herzog’s Encyclop.; Dr. Fr. Volkmar Reinhard’s Dogmatik, sec. 189 ; Dr. 
Hofmann m Prophecy and Fulfilment ; Starke’s Synopsis New Test., vol. 10, p. 179, ete.; 
Lange’s Bremen Lectures, p. 244, etc.; Selnecker on Dan. 12:2; Sirr on The First. Res. ; 
Seiss, Last Times (who gives various references of value) ; Brookes’s Maranatha (who gives 
John Bunyan’'s and Toplady’s testimony) ; Gordon on The First Res. (paper before the 
N. Y. Proph. Conference) ; Luthardt’s Lehre von der Letzten Dingen ; Koch’s Das Tausend- _ 
jahrige Reich ; Auberlen’s Prophecies of Daniel and the Rev. of St. John; Delitzsch on Genesis; 
Elliott's Horw Apoc.; Mag Fred. Roos on Dan. and Rev.; Christlieb, Mod. Doubt and Ch. 
Belief, p. 452 ; Pileiderer, Der Paulinismus, p. 264-5 ; Danhauer’s Hodosophia, p. 1445 ; and, ~ 
in brief, Pre-Millenarian writers in general (who are specified in the His. of the Doctrine). 
To give the testimony of a large portion of these would itself require an extended work, 
even if presented in brief extracts. In such references we must not overlook the remarks 
of Dr. Craven in Lange’s Com. (Amer. Ed.), or the writers (e.g. p. 440) quoted favoring 
our view. ‘The old Berlenburger Bibel (t. 6, pp. 397-399) has a fair argument in favor of a 
literal first pre-eminent, Pre- Mill. resurrection, appealing e.g. to 1 Cor. 15 : 23, 51-52; 
Luke 20 : 35, and 14: 14; Heb. 11:35, etc, Indeed we are largely indebted to old 
writers (like Mede in Clavis Apoc., Brightman in A Revelation of the Apoc., Goodwin in 
Exp. of Rev., and others) for keeping this doctrine before the Church. Even such testi- 
monies as are given in The Crit. and Exp. Com. possess weight ; while incidentally the — 
concessions of a Chalmers (on Ps. 50), Wesley (Tyerman, Life of ), and many othersare to 
be regarded. We append the testimony of two persons, who cannot be accused of extreme 
partiality to our views. Spurgeon (quoted by Dr. Brookes, p. 50, Proph. Times, vol. 10) 
in his sermon on The First Res., says : ‘‘ I do look forward to this with joy, that though I 
may sleep in Christ before my Master come, and I know not whether that shall be orno, 
yet I shall rise at the day of His appearing, and shall be recompensed at the resurrection _ 
of the just, if I have truly and faithfully served Him ; and that recompense shall be to 
be made like Him ; and to partake of His glories before the eyes of men, and to reign 
with Him during the thousand years.” ‘‘ Meyer (so Lange’s Com. Rev., p. 441) remarks 
on 1 Cor. 15 : 24, that Paul, following the example of Christ Himself, has bound up the 
doctrine of a twofold resurrection with the Christian faith’’ (comp. next Prop.). 


Obs. 12. We have already referred to the astounding opinion entertained 
by Prof. Bush, Gipps, Waldegrave, and others, that this res. and Millen- — 
nlum is a portraiture of suffering and martyrdom in behalf of the truth. — 
To indicate the amazing perversions of the passage, Rey. 20 : 1-6, by our 
opponents in their efforts to wrest it from us, attention is called e.g. to 
Waldegrave’s statements (New Test. Millenarianism), and we select him — 
purposely, because he has been eulogized (The Bib. Rep.) as a model of an — 
interpreter and as a triumphant opponent. The binding and restrainment — 
of Satan as well as the little season, both ‘‘ set before us the working of 
Satan, for it is his working especially which is here exhibited to view 
during two distinct periods in the history of Christendom. The first—the 
longer period—said to last a thousand years, is one in which Satan, for- 
bidden to launch forth into the world any fresh impostures, does, notwith-— 
standing, prevail, with the aid of the civil power, fo persecute even unto 
death those faithful souls who, being risen with Christ, are made kings and 
priests unto God and His Father. The second—the shorter period—said 
to last but a little season, is one in which, the number of God’s living saints 
being marvellously increased, and martyrdom being no longer the rule, 
Satan attempts by other means, even by the multiplication of rei 
delusions, to compass the destruction of the Church.’’? The res. of the 


Prop. 127. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 293. 


martyrs, therefore, is simply a revival of the martyr spirit, made necessary 
by Satan’s reigning, and this too while the saints are reigning: ‘‘ They are 
ulso sufferers at the hands of men—sufferers even to the extent of laying 
down their lives for Christ’s sake—sufferers, I say, even unto death, and 

that at one and the same time with their reigning.’’ ‘‘ The thousand 
years will prove to be a period in which Christ’s witnesses are witnesses 
even unto death—a period, in short, of martyrdom, not of triumph—a period 
in which Satan (being precluded, indeed, from the invention of fresh 
delusions), is able, notwithstanding, to wield those already in existence 
with such effect as to make the Church of God to prophesy in sackcloth 
and ashes.’’ This caricature of the Millennium and the reign of the saints 
is presented by one largely eulogized as the champion against Chiliasm. No 
Chiliast ever produced anything so flatly contradictory to all testimony of 
Scripture, to all analogy on the subject ; so plainly antagonistic to numer- 
ous predictions, that the large majority of our opponents recoil from it as 
unworthy of credence, because it actually reverses the blessed teaching of 
prophecy. It is utterly weworthy of serious refutation, and affords a sad 
illustration how good men, in their eagerness to wrest the passage from us, 
can fall into the most absurd interpretation. 


Prof. Bush (Mill.) in accord with his theory of a past Mill. age, in which persecution, 
more or less, predominated, says : ‘‘ We strenuously maintain that it is the same persons 
who live, and reign, and judge, and are beheaded, and all too at precisely the same time.”’ 
What a blessed reward! What a glorious Sabbatical period! He approvingly quotes the 
Jewish Midrash Tillin, fol. 42 : 1, where it is said that ‘‘ upon the Coming of the Messiah 
the world shall be desolated for a thousand years” (which theory the Seventh-Day Adventists 
have recently revived), and adds: ‘‘ This accords with the view we are now advocating, 
that this Mill. period is not intrinsically a prosperous era, but the reverse.’’ 


Obs. 13, Sufficient has been said to vindicate our usage of the word 
“ souls’? to denote the person (Obs. 3), and yet in view of certain state- 
ments, it will be in place to add a few remarks. Fairbairn says that ‘‘ it 
is quite frivolous to insist upon the term souls being often used to denote 
persons ; no one doubts that it is; but the question is, can it be so taken 
here?’’ Now, the frivolity arises from the fact that a large class on his 
side—in fact nearly every work against us—gravely insist that -because 
“souls’’ are mentioned it cannot mean persons. Of course, to meet such 
an objection, “‘ frivolous’? as it may be, we are forced in self-defence to 
show that the term is used to denote persons. ‘Thus e.g. Barnes (Com. 
loci) lays great stress on the word ‘‘ souls,’’ as if it alone denoted the 
spiritual nature, and carefully conceals from the reader this meaning, but 
when not controverting us, he in another place (Com., Acts 3 : 20, on the 
phrase ‘‘ every soul’’) admits this usage, thus: ‘‘ Every person or indi- 
vidual soul is often put for the whole man by the Hebrews, Acts 7:14; 
Josh. 10 : 28’’ (with which compare his remarks on Acts 2 : 27, where he 
makes the term ‘‘ soul’’ equivalent to ‘‘ me,’’ and applies it to the corporeal 
res. of Jesus, thus flatly contradicting his comment on Rev. 20 : 4-6). 
Indeed, our opponents contradict themselves in the same comment on this 
point, when e.g. they admit that ‘‘ he’’ (v. 6) and ‘‘ they,’’ and ‘‘ the rest 
of the dead”’ are declarative of persons and not simply of disembodied 
spirits, and speak of them as such. We insist that the reason why the 
Spirit, through human agency, gives us the term ‘‘ souls’’ in preference to 
any other, is this: it is most in accord with scriptural usage, for not only 


294 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 127, 
is the resurrection of Jesus thus predicted and declared to be the res. of a 
“soul,” but it is predicted of, and promised to, individual believers, « 
e.g. Ps. 99:15, ** But God will redeem my soul from the power of the 
rave.”” Now then, when the res. is actually described, it is reasonable, 
It is strengthening, to find the same term employed, thus making prediction 
and fulfilment, promise and realization to correspond (comp. Obs. 3, note). 


a 


PROP. :128. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 295 


Proposition 128. Zhe language of the Gospels and Lpistles is in 
strict accord with the requirements of a Pre-Millennial resur- 
rectvon. 


A doctrine to be consistent must preserve its wnity in all the in- 
spired writings. Having seen how the Old Test. and the conclusion 
of the New Test. coincide, it will be important to notice how the 
Gospels and Epistles corroborate the Jewish views of the resurrec- 
tion based on covenant promises. 


Obs. 1. The resurrection of 1 Cor. 15 : 52 declares that ‘‘ at the last 
trump, for the trumpet shall sound (1 Thess. 4 : 16), and the dead (i.e. those 
deceased) shall be raised incorruptible,’’ etc. Now, the fair inference (for 
the Jews, as commentaries inform us, used this very language) is, that 
this denotes a resurrection identified with the bodies of dead saints. This 
is almost the nniversal opinion among critics. This same res. of the dead 
is mentioned in Apoc. 11 : 18, also under a last trumpet, and immediately 
in connection with ‘‘ the Kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ.”? Our 
opponents generally concede both of these to be literal, and the exact 
correspondence that they sustain to Jewish expectations has been noticed 
by able writers (and that these, with this language added, was perpetuated 
generally in the early Church). But attention is called to the fact that 
just as the Jews believed, when ‘‘ the Kingdom (sovereignty) of this world 
is become the Kingdom of our Lord and His Christ’’ (so Mss., 8. and A. 
Tischendorf’s N. T., and comp. Titman, Hahn, etc.) at that very time a 
resurrection takes place. When the sovereignty of the world is seized, 
when a Kingdom commences which is never to end, when events occur 
which commentators connect only with the Sec. Advent, then at that very 
period, *‘ at the last trump’’ (“‘ for the trumpet shall sound,’’ Rev. 11 : 15), 
the pious dead are raised to receive their reward. Surely this is amply 
sufficient to identify a Pre-Millennial resurrection, seeing that 1 Cor. 
15 :52; Rev. 11:18; and Rev. 20 : 3-6, are all under the same last Pre- 
Millennial trumpet. If one is literal, all then are literal, because taking 
place at the same time and for the same purpose. 


According to Dr. Oswald (The Kingdom, ch. 9) it was a comparison of these three 


passages that influenced Rev. Dr. Schmucker to advocate a Pre-Millennial resurrection 


of the saints. The same is reported of Charlotte Elizabeth, and others. 


Obs. 2. Attention is directed to 1 Cor. 15 : 22-24. ‘* For, as in Adam 
all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own 
order ; Christ first, afterward they that are Christ’s, at His Coming. Then 
cometh the end,’’ etc. Weare not concerned in adopting any particular 
rendering (as e.g. making ‘‘ order’? to mean ‘‘band,’’ and ‘‘ the end’’ 
equivalent to ‘‘ the last pand,’’ etc.), for whatever version is adopted, two 


296 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 128, 


things are self-evident in the passage enforcing the general analogy on the 
subject. After the universality of death is announced, then follows the 
positive declaration that the recovery from death—being made alive—is 
not a simultaneous occurrence, ‘* but every man in his own order.’’ We 
leave an opponent give the meaning of this phrase. Barnes (Com. loci) 
says: ‘* But every man—every one, including Christ as well as others. Jn 
his own order—in his proper order, rank, place, time. The word tagma 
usually relates to military order or array ; to the arrangement of a cohort 
or band of troops, to their being properly marshalled with the officers at _ 
the head, and every man in his proper place in the ranks. Here it means 
that there was a@ proper order to be observed in the res. of the dead.” 
This declaration of an eclectic res. is confirmatory of the Jewish view, and 
could not possibly have been thus used, if the design were not to cor- 
roborate its truthfulness. The dead are to be marshalled in separate, dis- _ 
tinctive divisions, according to their character or works. Next follows a 
statement of such a division: *‘ Christ the first-fruits,”’ the first in time, 
the beginning, the first in order, ‘‘ who is the beginning, the first-born __ 
from the dead, that in all things He might have the pre-eminence’’ (and 
with him ought, perhaps, to be associated the ‘‘ many’’ that arose at His 
resurrection) ; then, “‘ afterward they that are Christ’s at His coming,” 
which evidently describes another division portrayed e.g. in 1 Thess. 4 and 
1 Cor. 15, exclusively of the righteous ; ‘‘ then cometh the end.”’ Now, 
here we have (1) separate bands of resurrected ones asserted, and (2) these 
bands or orders separated by an extent of time (nearly two thousand years). 
This is all that our line of argument requires in order to support our 
position. 


The student observes that we do not discuss the word translated ‘‘ the end,” and the 
sequence indicated by *‘ afterward” and ‘‘ then.’”’ (Comp. Gordon, Sirr, and others on the 
** First Resurrection,” as well as Brooks, Seiss, Ryle, and others, in their advocacy of a 
Pre-Mill. resurrection.) The commentaries of Alford, Meyer, Olshausen, Fausset, Lange, 
ete., may be consulted on these points. Although a strong argument favorable to our 
position can be adduced, it really is not needed, seeing that the two points clearly desig- 
nated and conceded by our opponents are all-sufficient. We only refer to Hodge’s admis- 
sion respecting tagma (the student keeping in view how to telos was used to denote the 
rear legion, troop, or band, and how, therefore, the whole must be rendered, if the idea 
of different bands or companies is to be retained), when he says: ‘‘ The word tagma is 
properly a concrete term, meaning a band, as of soldiers. If this be insisted upon here, 
then Paul considers the hosts of those that rise as divided into different cohorts or com- 
panies : first Christ, then His people, then the rest of mankind. First, the resurrection 
of Christ, then that of His people, then that of the wicked.” . But, warped by his judg- 
ment and resurrection theories, he forsakes the plain meaning. Especially do we com- 
mend attention to Prof. Stuart, who, although a bitter opponent of Millenarianism, con- 
cedes that our view of the different bands, making the wicked the last one, is the only 
“satisfactory exegesis.” 

Some writers (as Dr. Berg, Chris. Intelligencer, Feb. 27th, 1868, comp. C. S. B., Proph. 
Times, vol. 7, p. 87-8) lay great stress on the phrase ‘‘in Christ shall all be made alive,” 
saying that ‘‘ in Christ” is a technical term denoting “ the state of a believer,’’ and hence 
refers the resurrection exclusively to the members of His body, the righteous, and that 
no reference to the resurrection of the wicked is to be found in the passage. Admit the 
full force of it, and that the resurrection of the righteous, of those in Christ, is alone 
specified, then the order is still preserved of an eclectic resurrection, (1) in pertaining — 
exclusively to the saints, and (2) that at Christ’s Sec. Advent we have the first-fruits of © 
saints (144,000) resurrected before the harvest in the first stage of the Advent and the 
martyrs (as we explained under the previous Props.) are raised up just previous to the ~ 
open Parousia. If such an interpretation is adopted—and there is force in it—then 
simply the order or companies of the saints are designated. The reader must determine 
for himself which view to adopt ; either one or the other sustains our position fully, 


Prop. 128. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 297 


The early Church (e.g. Tertullian Adv. Marcionem) adduced 1 Cor. 15 as favoring a Pre- 
Mill. resurrection, and the application is a just one. As a matter of interest to the 
reader, we append the authorized English Translation, Dublin, of the Latin Vulgate : 
** But every one in his own order: the first-fruits Christ, then they that are of Christ, 
who have believed in His Coming. Afterward the end, when,” etc. We only add that Dr. 
Berg and others make ‘‘the end’’ to refer to “the end of the world,’ including the 
resurrection of the wicked, the closing of the dispensations of grace, the burning of the 
world,’ etc., but we assert (1) that the ordering must be interpreted of the subject- 
matter discussed, and (2) the end must be determined from the specific teaching of 
Scripture on its meaning. Hence Dr. Kling (Lange’s Com. 1 Cor. loci) says : ‘‘ Those who 
are raised at successive periods of time are conceived of as coming forth in troops or 
bands, in some one of which every one will be found.” ‘‘ The end in this connection 
means the termination of the process of the resurrection, and stands correlatively to ‘the 
first-fruits ;’ it marks the period of the resurrection of the rest of mankind, who do not 
belong to Christ,” etc. (See the comment.) The Amer. Ed. (Dr. Poor) says: “If we 
adopt the meaning of band or cohort for tagma, then the implication is that those in Christ 
will come forth by themselves and the wicked by themselves—those of a kind keeping 
together. And this will be the natural order since ‘ those who sleep in Jesus, God will 
bring with Him.’ ” Even such a writer as Macknight (On the Epistles) gives the following 


‘translation and paraphrase : ‘‘ But every one in his proper band : the first-fruits Christ ; 


afterward they who are Christ’s at His Coming. Then the end shall be,’’ etc. ‘‘ Not, how- 
ever, together ; but every one in his proper band ; the first-fruit Christ is raised aiready; 
afterward they who are Christ’s shall be raised immediately at His Coming ; consequently 
before the other dead are raised,’’ etc. (This concession refutes much of his spiritualiz- 
ing). ; 

Obs. 3. In 1 Thess. 4 : 13-17, we have distinctive marks that ‘‘ the dead 
in Christ shall rise first.’’ Our opponents, to avoid the force of this expres- 
sion, inform us that it is used relatively to those that are translated, 
meaning that the dead arise before the living are translated. Allowing 
such an interpretation, yet the eclectic nature of the res. and its time is 
clearly manifested (1) by its exclusive reference to the righteous, and (2) by 
its precedence of the translation. The res. of the wicked is not mentioned, 
and the reason must .be found in other Scriptures. The simple fact that 
we have extended passages devoted only to the res. of the righteous jis in 
perfect agreement with our doctrine and utterlv opposed to the theory of 
a simultaneous res. of all the dead. The association of this res. of the 
righteous with the personal Sec. Advent of Jesus is an additional reason 
sustaining our view. 


We are not prepared to concede that the application of “ first’’ by.our opponents is 
conclusive, since a large number of able critics and writers interpret it according to the 
analogy of a first resurrection from among the dead. | It appears strange that Paul, know- 
ing the Jewish idea of an eclectic resurrection, should employ such a phrase unless he 
indorsed it. Barnes (Com. loci) says : ‘‘ A doctrine similar to this was held by the Jews. 
* Resch Lachish said, Those who die in the Land of Israel shall rise first in the days of the 
Messiah.’’’ We have shown, however, in other places, that the Jews held to a pre-emi- 
nent, distinguishing resurrection pertaining to their nation. 


Obs. 4. Luke 20 : 34-36 (see its connection with covenant promise, Props. 
49 and 137) is remarkable for its distinctness: ‘‘ The children of this 


world (or age) marry; and are given in marriage ; but they which shall be 


accounted worthy to obtain that world (or age) and the resurrection from 
the dead (or the res. that out of dead ones—see the emphasis in the 
original) neither marry, nor are given in marriage ; neither can they die 
any more ; for they are equal unto the angels ; and are the children of God, 
being the children of the resurrection.”? Here we have the following par- 
ticulars specified : (1) Some shall gain the future age by a res. from among 


298 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 128. 


the dead ; (2) it is implied that others not worthy shall not gain it by such 
a resurrection ; (3) this resurrection of the saints is distinctively referred 
to as the pre-eminent res., and one out of dead ones ; (4) such, as indicative 
of its eclectic nature, are designated as ‘‘ the children of the resurrection ,”’ 
(5) and being thus born from the dead, through God’s power, they ‘‘ are 
the children of God.”’ 


The reader is again reminded how this passage was employed (Prop. 49) in elucidat- 
ing the Memorial, being the legitimate outgrowth of the covenant, which necessitates, in 
order to its realization, a Pre.- Mill. resurrection of the Patriarchs. Hence Paul (e.g. Acts 
26 : 6, 7) links ‘‘ the hope” derived from covenant promises with “ the resurrection of the 
dead.”’ The personal identity of the Fathers is preserved through the resurrection thus 
promised. Hence we find writers, who have no Chiliastic bias, atfirm precisely the posi- 
tion assumed by us respecting the meaning of the passage. Thus e.g. Thompson (Theol. 
of Christ, p. 186) takes the ground that the Sadducees denied a literal resurrection ; Jesus 
in His reply holds fast to the Jewish view of such a resurrection, and confirms the Jews 
in their faith, and adds: ‘‘ He went on to assert the resurrection as set forth by Moses, 
in the fact that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob would ever have a recognized identity in the 
Kingdom of God.’ Horne (Introd., vol. 1, p. 423) says that the phrase ‘‘ I am the God of 
Abraham,’’ etc., proves “the resurrection of the dead inferentially or by legitimate con- 
sequence.” But why is this inferential proof a legitimate consequence? The answer— 
the only Scriptura] answer —is, that the Patriarchs may realize the promises made to them 
personally respecting the land, etc. On the passage itself compare the comments of 
Alford, Lange, Bengel, Olshausen, etc. The Mormons, as a resultant of their system of 
sealed marriages, flatly contradict the Saviour’s declaration respecting the non-marriage 
of the resurrected and glorified saints, for they positively affirm that after the resurrec- 
tion “men both marry and are given in marriage.’ (See the proof adduced in Art. 
‘* Mormons,”’ M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop.) 


Obs. 5. Phil. 3: 11, “* Jf by any means I might attain unto the resurrec- 
tion of the dead,’’ certainly does not give the force of the original, and it 
places Paul in the attitude of striving for something which is inevitable. 
But taking the emendation demanded by the preposition e/, and given by 
numerous critics and commentators (and admitted by some of our oppo- 
nents, as Prof. Stuart), we have a reading which vindicates Paul’s effort to 
obtain a prize, viz., a distinguishing eclectic resurrection. For many read 
it: “‘ If by any means I might attain unto the resurrection from among (or 
out of ) the dead (or dead ones.’’) The force of this rendering is sustained 
by the res. of Jesus which was (e.g. 1 Pet. 1 : 3) one from among the dead, 
and by the usage of the preposition. 


Sirr on the First Res., in Let. 5, gives a lengthy vindication of its usage, presenting 
various examples, showing conclusively that it is, single or in composition, intensive and 
expressive of an extraordinary, eclectic resurrection. The editor of Zhe Proph. Times, 
vol. 3, p. 142, etc., presents the same, and declares respecting the force of ek » ‘‘ Greek 
writers, lexicons, critics, and the Greek Test. everywhere and continually assign to it 
the office of expressing out of, from, from among, and invariably use it before a genitive 
signifying a@ whole from which a part is taken” (adducing as examples Acts 3 : 23 ; 1 Cor. 
5:13; Acts 19:33; Heb. 5:1, etc.). Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 195), as against us, 
rejects “from among the dead ’”’ (substituting ‘‘ from the dead ”), and endeavors to escape 
the idea of time or priority by referring the resurrection to ‘‘ its nature, its accompani- 
ments, and its issues,” which make it ‘‘ a resurrection peculiar to believers,” but adds : 
** Although, therefore, we cannot affirm that the translation ‘ from amongst the dead’ is 
critically inadmissible, no more can it be shown that it is critically admissible.” We leave 
the student to judge for himself, heartily endorsing his declaration, that its meaning is 
dependent on the doctrine of the resurrection as taught in the Scriptures, i.e. these pas- 
sages must follow the general analogy on the subject. Brookes (Maranatha, p. 464) renders 
it: ‘‘ If by any means I might attain unto the out resurrection’ (or, as we might say, the 
elect resurrection) ‘‘ the one, or that one, from among the dead.” Many versions are giveD 
which affirm an eclectic resurrection. The Latin Vulgate, in the authorized Dublin 


Prop. 128.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 299 


Translation, reads : ‘‘ If by any means I may attain to the resurrection, which is from the 
dead.”’ Fausset (Com. loci) comments: ‘‘ The oldest mss. read ‘ the resurrection from 
(out of) the dead,’ viz., the first resurrection ; that of believers at Christ’s Coming (1 Cor. 
15:23; 1 Thess. 4:15; Rev. 20:5, 6). The Greek word occurs nowhere else in the 
New Test. ‘The power of Christ’s resurrection’ (Rom. 1:4) insures the believer s 
attainment of the ‘ resurrection from the (rest of the) dead’ (cf. v. 20, 21). Of. ‘ Ac- 
counted worthy to obtain the resurrection from the dead’ (Luke 20 : 35). ‘ The resurrec- 
tion of the just’’’ (Luke 14:14). Similar statements are made by various expositors. 
Surely the simple fact that in the original this resurrection is made emphatic and eclectic 
by the variations attached, ought to arrest the attention of the reader. To convey to the 
English reader, unacquainted with Greek, this variation, we append the phrases with a 
literal rendering as given by critics. We have the simple phrase anastasis nekrén or 
resurrection of dead ones (Acts 17 : 32; Rom. 1:4; 1 Cor. 15 : 12, 21 ; Heb. 6 : 2), and 
he anastasis tén nekron or the resurrection of the dead ones (Matt, 22 : 31; 1 Cor. 15 : 42), 
Then we have a more particular resurrection as follows : anastasis ek ton nekron or resur- 
rection out of or from among dead ones (1 Pet. 1 : 3), and he anastasis he ek nekron or the 
resurrection that out of dead ones, or the resurrection, that one out of or from among dead 
ones (Luke 20 : 35—see Obs. 4—Acts 4 : 2), he exanastasis ton nekron, or the resurrection 
out of or from among dead ones, or the oul-from-among resurrection of dead ones, or the 
rising again out of dead ones. Luke 20 : 35 especially is very emphatic, having he anasta- 
sis he, viz., the resurrection, that one,” thus implying necessarily some other resurrection 
distinctive from this one. Every student must see the propriety—-keeping in view the 
covenanted, Prop. 49, Jewish resurrection, of which Paul, Acts 26:6, 7, to which the 
tribes hope to come-—of Bh. Pearce’s assertion that Paul expected this very resurrection, 
and hence uses the same word here translated attain to. 


Obs. 6, ‘This discrimination of resurrection is delicately referred to, and 
implied in passages. Thus 1 Cor. 6:14, ‘‘ And God hath both raised up 
(égeire) the Lord, and will also raise wp us (exegerei, out-raise or pre- 
eminently raise you).’’ The change of the verb by the addition of a word, 
significant of something peculiar and distinguishing, is worthy of notice 
(comp. Rom. 9:27, Greek). So take Mark 9:9, 10, and we have it 
asserted that the Son of Man should rise (ek nekron) out of or from among 
dead ones (as in fact transpired), and then the disciples (who had no diffi- 
culty with the already received—e.g. John 11 : 24—doctrine of a res. of 
the dead) questioned, one with another, what this rising from among or 
out of dead ones should mean relating to Jesus. As His res. being an 
eclectic one is designated a res. ek nekron, so do we find that of his believers 


_ designated. 


** Quickening” and “‘ quickening of the dead’’ was used by the Rabbis (so Bush, etc.) 
to denote a corporeal resurrection, and ‘‘ consolation’’ (Syriac, e.g. John 11 : 24, 25, “I 
know that he shall rise again in the consolation at the last day. Jesus said to her, I am the 
consolation and the life’’), ‘* day of consolation” (so Talmud and Targum on Hos. 6 : 2), 
as well as other terms which we have noticed under the Old Test. teaching, were also 
thus employed. Now thus used in the New Test. without a change of meaning, such as 
the Jews attached to them as to the time and relation, we can scarcely avoid the conclu- 
sion that they are thus to be understood as connected with a coming of the Messiah and 
a resurrection pertaining to Abraham’s children. ‘‘ The gates of hell,” Matt. 16 : 18, is 
connected with the continued perpetuity of the Church. It is customary to interpret it 
as relating to evil spirits, and we allow one of these to explain its meaning. Nast (Com. 
loci, comp. ‘‘ Petros,” p. 34, footnote by Dr. Seiss), after making “‘ hell ” equivalent to “ the 
abode of the dead,’’ and ‘‘ gate” to stand for “ power,” adds : “Thus the gates of hell mean 
strictly the dominion of death, and by implication the infernal powers held in the abode of 


_ death and darkness.’’ Whatever propriety there may be in his ‘‘implication’’ (which 


are always unnecessary and dangerous when the plain meaning will suffice), the history 
of the Church shows, and especially will manifest it under the last culminated Antichrist, 
that it shall terribly suffer by persecution, and here we have the assurance that deuth shall 
not triumph (comp. Lange, loci) over the Church and its multitude of slain saints, but they 
shall be raised up, and see her glory as she perpetuates herself in the age to come. Many 


800 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 128. 


writers find the first resurrection even in Matt. 24 : 31 (others the Jewish nation, etc.), 
as e.g. Lange (Com., p. 429) on the phrase ‘‘ And they shall gather together his elect,” 
says, ‘‘ Here the resurrection of the elect (the first resurrection primarily) is declared.” 
Phil. 2 : 11 has “‘ things under the earth,’’ which Barnes (Vom. loci) explains as ‘‘ beings 
under the earth,” ‘‘ those that have departed this life,” and yet this very worship and 
honoring of Jesus—thus associated with the idea of a resurrection-—is one identified with 
a Mill. prophecy (Isa. 45 : 23), and is to be witnessed before the Millennium is ushered 
in (Rev. 11:17; 15:3, 4, and 5 : 9-14). The resurrection is indirectly linked with the 
Kingdom, as in Luke 14:15. After Jesus had showed the Pharisee how to make a feast so 
that he might ‘‘ be recompensed at the resurrection of the just” (its separate mention show- 
ing a distinctive resurrection), one of those who sat at meat with Him, evidently associ- 
ating (as the Jews were accustomed to do) the resurrection just mentioned, with the 
Kingdom, said: ‘Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God.” Jesus in His 
reply virtually indorses this association of ideas, for instead of intimating a misappre- 
hension, He says all are invited to such blessedness, but that many reject it. 


Obs. 7. Our argument is abundantly sustained by other Scriptures, 
which, to avoid repetition, we can but briefly refer to, as Acts 3 : 19-21, 
for not only ‘‘ the times of restitution’’ (described in Mill. predictions) 
necessitate an included res. (so understood by the Jews), but ‘‘ the times 
of refreshing”’ are “‘ the times of reanimation’’ (see the proof given in detail 
under Prop. 144, and the reader will notice that ‘‘ the times of reanima- 
tion’? confirm the order of the resurrection as advocated by us). Then 
Matt. 19 : 28, ‘‘ the regeneration’’ (see the details given under Prop. 145), 
with the Jewish views of the res, being a birth (which was adopted by the 
early Christians, and used even by Husebius as expressive of a res.), cor- 
roborates the doctrine of an eclectic res., both as to character and time. 
The views given in a previous Prop. respecting the res. being a birth, and 
allied to a birth preceding the Millennium, is strengthened by its usage in 
the New Test., where believers are designated ‘‘ the children of God being 
the children of the res. ;’’ where ‘‘ the adoption’’ is connected with ‘‘ the 
redemption of the body ;’’ when the begetting of Jesus (Acts 13 : 33) is 


tendered as proof of the res. of Jesus, and He is represented as ‘‘ the 


jirst-born’’ from the dead, ete. 


In addition to what was said concerning the birth denoting a resurrection in Prop. 
126, many writers take the view that Jesus in His conversation with Nicodemus by the 
expression “ born of the Spirit’’ denotes the resurrection of the body, or at least includes 
it (the Spirit being the agency by which the resurrection is produced, as Christ's, and 
** the born of water’’ being expressive of baptism and the spiritual moral work attached 
to it). Thus e.g. Dr. Brookes in the Truth, vol. 3, No. 6, who refers to one verse as being 
thus rendered by the Latin Vulgate, Augustine, Ambrose, and others: ‘‘ The Spirit 
breatheth where He willeth ; and thou hearest His voice, but thou knowest not whence 
He cometh, and whither He goeth ; so is every one that is born of the Spirit.’’ Brookes 
adds : “ That it is consistent with the context will not be disputed, and that it is gram- 
matically and logically correct will be admitted when it is remembered that the word 
rendered ‘ wind’ in King James’ Version is translated Spirit in the same verse, and that 
out of three hundred and seventy-four times it is found in the New Test., it is invariably 
rendered Spirit or Ghost, except in John 3: 8, where it is translated wind, and Rey. 
13 : 15, where it is translated life.’ A multitude of able writers, following the Biblical 
analogy and the Jewish faith (see e.g. Michaelis Com. Heb. 1 : 5, Knapp’s Ch. Theol., p. 
528) designate the resurrection ‘‘ a birth ;” and hymns (as e.g. the one commencing ‘* The 
whole creation groaneth’’ in “Hymns and Songs of Praise,’’ by Hitchcock, Eddy, and 
Schaff, and Watts, “ My flesh shall feel a sacred birth,’ etc.) speak of it as a ‘* second 
birth” or “sacred birth,’’ etc. 


Obs. 8. The res. of the saints being a distinctive one, belonging ex- 
clusively to them and no others, this feature of separation as to charac- 


ter and time is always preserved. Thus (1) where a res. of the just and — 


Prop. 128.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 301 


of the unjust is mentioned together, that of the just has precedence ; (2) 
expressions such as ‘‘ the Son quickeneth whom He will,’’ ‘‘ they that hear 
shall live,’’ etc., imply that not al] shall be made alive ; (3) the promise of 
raising up His own at the last day specifically given to believers, implies 
that unbelievers shall not be raised at the same time; (4) the res. of the 
righteous described alone, without any reference whatever to the wicked 
(as John 6 : 39, 40, 44, 54; 1 Cor. 15, and 1 Thess. 4), implies a separate 
and distinctive one ; (5) the titles given to the res. of the righteous imply 
the same, as ‘‘ the better resurrection,”’ ‘‘ the res. of the just,’’ ‘‘ the res. 
unto hfe.”’ 


The careful student, of course, will consider all such declarations in the light of the 
age when uttered That is, he will place himself in the position of the hearers ad- 
dressed. Thus e.g. the Jews spoke of a resurrection both of the just and the unjust, 
but when particularizing the order of resurrection they discriminated both as to character 
and time. Again, a resurrection of righteous ones was always associated with the Mes- 
siah’s reign, and hence the promises of the Messiah of a special resurrection to believers 
in Him, was in the line of the Jewish views, derived from Messianic prophecy, on the 
subject. Again, “the last day” in Jewish theology was not the modern Romish idea of 
“the last day,’’ but was the last day of the dispensation, to be followed by another and 
glorious one under the Messiah, in which the promises were to be realized. Hence to 
raise one up at “‘ the last day” was by them understood as equivalent to a Pre-Mill. resur- 
rection, i.e. a resurrection to be followed by Messiah's reign on David’s throne. (Comp. 
e.g. Props. 138, 139 and 140.) 

Attention simply is called to the various readings first presented by Jerome (Horne’s 
Introd., vol. 1, p. 211) of 1 Cor. 15:51. If the reading of two of the most authoritative 
Mss., viz., that of the Sinaitic and Alexandrine (comp. Tichendorf’s N. 7.) is to be 
received, we have an additional argument in our favor. These mss. read: “We shall all 
sleep, but we shall not all be changed ;” whilst the later reading of the Alexandrian is, 
“ We shall not all sleep, but we shall not all be changed.’’ The critical student will be 
reminded that just as it is in the translation, some will be taken and others left, so also 
is it with the preceding resurrection, some will be taken and others will remain. 


Obs. 9. Our opponents, as Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming), Barnes (Com. 
Apoc.), and others adduce the following proof texts to substantiate ‘their 
view of a universal and simultaneous res. of all the dead; both just and unjust, 
wiz., Dan? 12:2; John 5 : 28, 29; Rev. 20: 11-15; 1 Cor. 15.: 20-28 ; 
John 6 : 39, 40, and 17:9, 24; 2 Tim. 4:1. The reader may compare 
these with our references to the same, and then observe that no interpreta- 
tion and application of these passages can possibly be valid, which intro- 
duces an antagonism—most direct—between Scripture statements. Indeed, 
he will find more, viz., that several of the texts assigned as proof (e.g. 
- Dan. 12:2; 1 Cor. 15 : 20-23; Rev. 20 : 11-15) fully sustain our position, 
being sufficiently decisive of an eclectic res. The others are equally so, for 
observe that John 5 : 28 describes ¢wo resurrections, one ‘‘ the res. of life,”’ 
and the other ‘‘ the res. of damnation,’’ while the order must be decided 
by passages descriptive of the same. The word ‘‘ hour,’’ upon which our 
opposers lay so much wneritical stress, simply means, as able critics inform 
us ‘a time,’’ so that a time is coming when all shall be raised, but as other 
Scriptures tell us, ‘‘ every man in his own order’ (even Augustine, Epis. 
197, 2; Ambrose, Epis. 199 : 17, and many others make ‘ hour’ simply 
equivalent to ‘‘ time,’’ and thus used e.g. 1 John 2:18; Matt. 9: 225 
John 4 : 23; Mark 13:11; Luke 10: 21, etc.). The remaining passages 
need no explanation, following, as they do, the general analogy. 


The reader is reminded that many of our opponents do not make a simultaneous 
resurrection in their comments on 1 Thess. 4 and 1 Cor. 15, and that they agree with us 


302 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 128. 


that events are contained in the same sentence (e.g. 1 Cor. 15 : 22, 23) which are sepa- 
rated by a long interval of time ; and that general expressions indicative of totality (e g. 
respecting all men dying and yet some are translated) are sometimes modified by more 
particular mention of order or details. But sufficient has been said to enable the reader to 
form a just estimate of the two interpretations. Prof. Sanborn, in his Essay on Millena- 
rianism, makes the utterly unauthorized statement that ‘‘ the Church has believed in all 
ages that there would be a simultaneous resurrection of the dead, both of the just and of 
the unjust.” This can only deceive the ignorant, for every intelligent reader of Church 
history knows that the Jewish belief on the subject was carefully inculcated and held by ~ 
the early Church (as shown in detail in our Props. on the history of Chiliasm), and the 
opposite view arose and prevailed through the Alexandrian and Popish influences. 


Obs. 10. In a subject so varied as that of the resurrection it becomes us 
to heed the caution given in the investigation of any doctrine, viz., to 
collate the passages referring to it, and explain the more concise by those 
which give the order, time, and manner of occurrence. In such a com- 
parison it is impossible to find a specific account of the resurrection of the 
wicked taking place at the same time with that of the righteous. Their 
standing together, under the general affirmation of a resurrection of both, 
would be an argument against us if it were not that in other places the 
Spirit, when circumstantially describing the res., separates them by an 
interval of time. It is wisdom to accept of the Spirit’s explanations. The 
intelligent reader will appreciate this rule of careful comparison before 
deciding. 

If some one should object to indistinctness in any of our references, it may be 
observed that none of them are so obscure as the proof given Acts 13 : 33, 34. Butif 
viewed in the light of the resurrection, necessitated by the Covenant, etc., this proof is 
clearly deducible, flowing naturally and legitimately out of a well-defined Divine Pur- 
pose. It is to be regretted that the Babylonian captivity and return has blinded the eyes 
of so many expositors, so that they cannot survey scarcely any of the predictions without 
bringing the same in as a kind of general explanatory support, suited to evaporate most 


precious promises that cannot be satisfactorily incorporated into a spiritual Millennial 
theory, 


Obs. 11. It is impossible to comprehend the order of events bearing on 
this subject as presented by our opponents, owing to the contradictions 
involved. ‘To illustrate : take that large class of commentators and others 
who correctly unite the res. with the personal Advent, and consistently 
declare that before the Millennial age is introduced Antichrist will be 
destroyed. Now turn to 2 Thess. 2, and (as Barnes, etc.) they advocate the 
destruction of the man of sin by the personal Coming ef Christ, and, ac- 
cording to their own admissions, this, in the very nature of their conces- 
sions, must be a Pre-Millennial Advent ; and, of course, with their identi- 
fying the literal res. with precisely such a Coming, there should be no 
difficulty in rceiving a Pre-Millennial res. Simple consistency demands it. 
Again, here and there in various authors, we find unexplained contradic- 
tions that, at least, show that order in these events is sadly neglected. 
Take an excellent and highly esteemed writer for an example: Van 
Oosterzee (Theol. of N. T., s. 42), speaking of the res. of the righteous 
truthfully says: ‘‘ This is the first resurrection,’’ and in a footnote 
appends 1 Cor. 15 : 23; 1 Thess. 4::16; Luke 14:14: Rev. 20 : 25, 
declaring that this will take place at the end of the age. He thus adopts 
the Millenarian view, and if this were all it would be eminently satisfac- 
tory, but the admission is marred by afterward placing at the same time, 
as the teaching of Paul, ‘‘the general res. of the just and the unjust.”’ 


i ~ 


Prop. 128. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 303 


Whether the author designed it or not, i¢ flatly contradicts his previous 
statement. Passing to a lower grade of writers, it would only be a thank- 
less office and a caricature of the Word of God to point out the strange 
utterances based on ‘‘ the second death,’’ etc. 

In justice, however, to Oosterzee, he advocates (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, p. 786) : ‘‘ More than 
one resurrection ; first a partial one, and then an absolutely universal one. Of the former 
not only does the Apoc. seem to speak, ch. 20 : 4-6, but also the Lord, Luke 14 : 14, and 
Paul, 1 Thess. 4 : 16, as also J Cor. 15 : 23 as compared with verse 26,’’ etc., and, refer- 
ring to the connection of the latter, he tells us of a ‘‘ poetic-prophetic grouping of that 
which in reality will be seen realized, not side by side, but in succession.” Compare 
Reinhard’s Dogmatics, s. 189, Semisch’s Art. Chiliasm in Herzog’s Encyclop., and authori- 
ties already presented. 


Obs. 12. The notion advanced by Priest (View of Mill., p. 254), placing 
the last trump after the thousand years, and the ‘‘ remaining’’ of 2 Thess. 
4:16 to mean a remaining wntil the thousand years are ended, scarcely 
deserves refutation. It is alluded to here because some parties are trying 
to revive it, and because of its connection with the doctrine of the res. 
This view arises from a neglect to compare Scripture with Scripture, seeing 
that there are only seven trumpets (marking epochs of time), and the last is 
expressly asserted (Rev. 11) to be in immediate connection with the res., 
rewarding of the righteous, and the Millennial Kingdom, Besides, as all 
critics write, ‘‘ the remaining’’ refers simply to the precedence of the res., 
and the very ones that ‘‘ remain’’ are also changed and associated with 
those favored with the res. 

One writer (Butler, Lects. Apoc.), contrary to the uniform teaching of Millenarians, 
suggests that the resurrection is separated from the Sec. Advent by a long interval of 
time, perhaps that of the Mill. age itself. . But this is opposed by the general teaching of 
the Scriptures, which links (when declaring the manner of procedure or order) the resur- 
rection with the personal Advent, as we repeatedly show. This Advent and associated 
resurrection are, as we prove step by step, Pre-Millennial, and was so held by the first 
Christian churches. Such a view, as well as that of others who place these resurrected 


saints in the third heaven (as Stuart, etc.), totally misapprehends the covenant promises, 
the nature of the Theocracy, ete. 


Obs. 13. These first begotten of the dead sustain a peculiar and distinctive 
relationship to Christ, belonging, as the first-born anciently, in an especial 
manner to the Lord. This will be noticed hereafter (Props. 118 and 154). 
Now it may be said that as Christ comes to reign as David’s immortal Son, 
prepared to fulfil the covenant promises by virtue of the power of the 
resurrection and the Divine united with Him, so it is suitable, yea, neces- 
sary, that those who are accounted worthy to be associated with Him 77 
His reign (which is asserted to take place at the Millennial period) should 
also experience the power of the resurrection and become /ike unto their 
Head. Hence the propriety of representing the res. taking place at this 
very time. Without it, the saints would not be qualified ; with it, the 
promises of God can be abundantly realized. 

' Figuier (The To-Morrow of Death, p. 114) makes his “‘ superhuman” being still mortal, 
passing at death from one stage to another, and finally landing into the Divine, the 
Absolute. The Word of God presents no:such Oriental derived nonsense, but a destiny 
immeasurably superior. Indeed, the careful reader of the Scriptures and of history will 
see a deep reason underlying this eclectic resurrection. It is an outcome of the Plan of 
Redemption, being essential to it, and extending its efficiency and glory. God purposes 
to save the race (as a race) of man, but to save and exalt it in its associated capacity there 
must first be something introduced analogous to what takes place in the individual be- 


304 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRoP. 128, 


liever. Man is saved by receiving the truth, being under its guidance and influence, and 
thus becomes renewed and sanctified by it. The evil tendencies within him are thus 
arrested and rooted out. So with society, the race itself. The sad history of the world 
teaches us the fact that there is not sufficient moral and religious element in it to elevate 
it to a position in which it could safely receive and enjoy Mill. blessings‘and glory. Na- 
tions, most mighty and wise, in their rise, progress, and deterioration, evidence this ; the 
Theocracy even, with its additional higher motives and influences, established for a while 
in the Jewish nation, but withdrawn on account of sin, is decisive proof of it. Society, 
national life, cannot, owing to depravity, elevate itself to that perfect state contemplated 
by the Word of God. It needs and must have an element conjoined and b)ended with 
it, to act asa corrector andinfluencer. This is found in this first resurrection and its results. 
The world is saved through the power of the resurrection as exhibited in Jesus and in 
those at His Coming. Humanity in those resurrected ones is at once lifted to a higher 
plane, which insures—through their reign —an elevation for the race that nothing else is 


so well adapted to produce. In the Kingdom established under the associated resur- | 


rected ones, is thus exhibited the marvellous wisdom, patience, love, and work of God in 
thus counteracting by one Godlike stroke the inherent evil in human organizations. It 
is indeed ‘‘ a strange work,’ but most admirably adapted to secure that glorious ‘‘ regen- 
eration’’ of the race as a race, and restore to it its forfeited blessings. It destroys the 
old and brings in the renewed ; it subverts the selfish worldly polity and introduces the 
heavenly ; it removes the depravity of the world by introducing and incorporating a new- 
born, most powerful, convincing, and authoritative life and rulership in the resurrected 
and glorified persons of the kings and priests. (Comp. such Props. as 152, 154, 156, 167, 
196, etc.) 


Obs. 14. How frequently our attention is directed to this Pre-Millennial 
res., and owing to its peculiarity and rank this is reasonable. Christ appeals 
to this frequency when (John 6 : 45 ) He says: ‘‘ No mancan come to me 
except the Father draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day.” 
Then it is added: ‘‘ /é is written in the Prophets,’’ etc., Christ knowing 
the Jewish opinions based on these prophets, confirms the res. as some- 
thing well known and contained in the Prophets. Now, where do the 
Prophets teach this res., if not in the passages adduced ? How comes it 
that so many critics deny Christ’s assertion, and can find no such res. in 
them? ‘The answer to the last may, perhaps, be found in the fact that if 
a literal res. is admitted, then it must also be acknowledged as Pre-Millen- 
nial, and rather than accept the detested Jewish, Chiliastic notions “‘ of 
folly and ignorance,’ these predictions of David, Isaiah, Ezekiel, etc., 
must denote national deliverance or anything else but a literal res., and 
this is ‘‘ wisdom and true enlightenment.’’ So far too does this proceed 
that while no such res., excepting perhaps the faintest of allusions, can be 
found in the Old Test., acknowledgments freely come from all sides that 
the very language of the Prophets indicates that the doctrine of a res. must 
have been ‘ 
exist. But why was it so much believed in that Prophets freely employed 
language derived from it? Let the Jews tell us, let the Prophets inform 
us themselves. Surely their testimony is worth aan more than that of 
modern critics, who learnedly speak of outside influences. Now, the first 
Millenarian has yet to be produced who professes to receive his faith 
outside of the Divine Record, or from any other source than that derived 
from God. More than this: it does not require critical acumen or special 
learning to see that the very Covenant itself, the foundation of following 


revelation, necessitates such a belief, and that from this basis arises the — 


numerous allusions and predictions bearing on the subject. The reader is 
referred to the Covenant, and, as we have shown (Prop. 49), its fulfilment 
is utterly impossible without a resurrection. This then forms the shaping 


a common belief,’’ or else the figures drawn from it could not — 


PROP. 128. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. c0D 


of God’s promises, and the longings, faith, hope of believers, if we allow 
language its wswal, customary meaning. 


The critical student will observe that Christ’s allusion to a resurrection “ at the last 
day, as it is written in the prophets,” fully sustains our position (Prop. 140, etc.) concern- 
ing the Jewish usage of this phrase, seeing that the prophets do not link the resurrection 
with an ending of the world (as modern wisdom does), but with a continuation and renova- 
tion of the world in a new ordering or dispensation. Those who may think that the 
resurrection is not referred to, but only the teaching of God mentioned as predicted by 
the prophets, only receive part of the scope and intent of Christ’s words. This is easily 
shown, first by the subject-matter of the resurrection dependent upon and allied to pre- 
vious fitness, and then quoting Isa. 54 : 13, which we show at length (Prop. 118) is associ- 
ated with a resurrection (hence the aptness and beauty of the quotation enforcing both 
points), and so also Micah 4 : 1-4 and Jer. 31 : 34 (as we show in the Mill. descriptions 
and restoration of the Jews). In view of this resurrection introducing the Kingdom (as 
the Jews believed), it was eminently proper for Jesus both to state the fact of the resur- 
rection and to indicate the power lodged in Him to raise the dead. This exhibition only 
increased the condemnation of the Jews, seeing that they thus found their own Script- 
ures fully corroborated.. As a Pre-Millennial resurrection was believed in by those 
whom He addressed, His very language, embracing no denial, but making the condition 
of such resurrection dependent on the reception of Himself, is corroborative of the Jewish 
view. Such a Pre-Millennial resurrection is necessitated by the covenant, for in no other 
possible way can the inheriting of the land and the promised blessedness be realized. 
Hence there is deep significancy in Paul (Acts 26 : 6, 7) linking “ the hope”’ derived from 
the covenant promises with the resurrection, as He does ‘‘ ot the hope and resurrection 
of the dead I am called in question.” This was an appeal to a well-known doctrinal posi- 
tion, so fundamental, without which the covenant itself must ever remain a dead letter. 


Obs. 15. The reader may have noticed that this Pre- Millennial res. in 
several places is directly identified with a restoration (Props. 111-114) of the 
Jewish nation to Palestine. ‘This, additionally, serves as proof of the 
correctness of our position. For, our argument drawn from the Davidic 
Covenant, makes such a restoration a necessity in order that the throne and 
Kingdom of David may be re-established. If Christ and His saints are 
to reign as predicted over this restored people, etc., then, as a matter of 
course, this res. must take precedence, just as the Prophets locate it. 
Hence, it is eminently proper that the resurrection of ‘‘ the whole house 
of Israel,’’ including the Gentiles grafted in by faith, previous to their 
entrance into the promised inheritance, should be delineated as Ezekiel 
gives it in connection with a national restoration of the Jews under the 
reign of David’s Son. The res. and the throne and Kingdom of David are 
inseparable, and the former must, to meet the Divine Plan as revealed, 
precede the latter ; and in this the Prophets agree (Prop. 126). 


Obs. 16. The doctrine of such a first res. presents motives such as no 
other can, explanatory of Paul’s desire to attain unto it. The reign with 
Christ, and distinguishing honor and blessedness are connected with it. 
It gives us an explanation of the martyr spirit of the early Church, and the 
earnest desires expressed to experience its power. Besides, it indicates how 
untrue and uncharitable are the deductions of infidels, and even others, 
_ that they were sustained and strengthened by a false belief. 

Notice Fletcher’s prayer, Baxter’s, and others, given in Taylor’s Voice of the Church. 
Tertullian tells us that in his day it was customary for Christians to pray ‘‘ that they might 
have part in the first resurrection ;” to-day, if the truth is to be stated, multitudes, includ- 
ing ministers, know nothing about it. How few e.g. now utter the pious wish of Fletcher, 


“ O that the thought, the hope of Millennial blessedness, may animate me to perfect holi- 
hess in the fear of God, that I may be accounted worthy to escape the terrible judgments 


306 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRrop. 128. 


which will make way for that happy state of things ; and that I may have part in the first 
resurrection, if I am. numbered among the dead before that happy period begins.” In 
reference to the martyrs, see Gibbon and others. Let the reader e.g. comp. what the 
learned Dodwell, Dis. Cyprian, 12, s. 20, 21, says ‘‘ The primitive Christians believed 
that the first resurrection of their bodies would take place in the Kingdom of the Mill, 
And as they considered that resurrection to be peculiar to the just, so they conceived the 
martyrs would enjoy the principal share of its glory. Since these opinions were enter- 
tained it is impossible to say how many were inflamed with the desire of martyrdom,” 


etc. (Comp. Props. 182 and 183.) 


Obs. 17%. This res. is so linked in with other subjects that additional 
proof is advanced confirmatory under various Propositions ; and these, to 
do us ample justice, the reader must also take into consideration in form- 
ing a decisive opinion. ‘Thus e.g. if we are correct in establishing a 
personal Pre-Millennial Advent, or the inheriting of the earth, or the 
Millenarian view of the judgment day, the judgeship of Christ and of the 
saints, or the period of regeneration, day of Christ, the morning of that 
day, etc., this adds materially to our argument in locating this res, 


Obs. 18. The believer can meet death without fear. While death is an 
enemy, while feeling and acknowledging his penal power, yet with the 
assurance thus given of a speedy, complete victory over him, they can 
receive him as one over whom they are destined to triumph. He can well 
use the language of Micah 7: 7, 8, ‘‘ Therefore I will look unto the Lord ; 
L will wait (comp. Isa. 25 : 9) for the God of my salvation ; my God will 
hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy (death) ; when I fall, L 
shall arise ; when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me. TL 
will bear the ndignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against Him, 
until He plead my cause and execute judgment for me; He will bring me 
forth to the light (like David, Ps. 17 : 15), and I shall behold His righteous- 
mess.’? The believer has ‘‘ hope in his death,” and “‘ his flesh shall rest im 
hope.”’ 


Our doctrine forbids the mystical view, so largely prevailing, of a resurrection imme- 
diately after death, which completely spiritualizes away the Second Advent itself. This 
makes the believer to gain at death a victory over death, while the Scriptural idea is that 
death gains the victory and will retain it until the Coming of the resurrecting Jesus, the 
victory being evidenced by the body consigned to the grave. The believer anticipates, 
in death, victory, and the sting of death being removed, can die in hope and triumphant 
faith of ultimate redemption. All such mystical theories make death, not penal, but a 
friend—a kind of Saviour. (Comp. Prop. 125.) At this resurrection will be verifiedin — 
the highest and most glorious manner such promises as those contained in Prov. 3:2; — 
Ps. 91 216, etc. 


‘ 
Obs. 19. This first resurrection being an eclectic one, separate and 
pertaining to those accounted worthy of attaining to the privileges of *‘ the :. 
first-born,’’ it indicates a previous judgment. ‘To insure a first res. (ora 
translation) there must be a corresponding fitness, and therefore this res. — 

itself is evidence of the Divine acceptance of the person experiencing its 
power. An antecedent estimate of character and worthiness must, of 
necessity, exist. This is based on justifying faith which releases from 
condemnation and insures eternal life through Jesus ; while the position and — 
honor of the saint after resurrection is graduated by the works done in his 
life of faith. 


Prov. 128.] § «THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 307 


In view of this first resurrection being introductory to the Kingdom, it was requisite 
for the Messiah to indicate that the power to raise the dead was fully lodged in Him. 
This He did (e.g. John, chs. 5 and 6, etc.), and the result must have been to establish His 
hearers (the Jews) in their Jewish views respecting the resurrection, and which was con- 
tinued unimpaired in the Primitive Church. We have the assurance that all who come 
unto Him and are His, He will raise at the last day, losing nothing, being a perfect Re- 
deemer and imparting a perfect redemption. In reference to the previous judgment, see 
Prop. 135, where it is presented in detail. 


Obs. 20. Out of the multitude of testimonies we select a few, illustrative 
of the men (most eminent for ability) who hold to our view. Rothe 
(Dogmatic, 2 P., p. 70) advocates a bodily resurrection, etc., as follows : 
‘* 'The Redeemer asserts distinctly the future res. of the body. And still 
His utterances so sound as to separate that of the righteous from that of 
the wicked, doth as to fact and time. So in Luke 20:35, where the 
discourse is not of the res. in general, but distinctly of a res. to the earthly 
Kingdom of the Redeemer, the so-called First Resurrection. So it sounds 
(es klingt) when He calls Himself the ‘ Resurrection and the Life,’ when He 
says, ‘ All that the Father gives Him shall come to Him, and He will raise 
them up at the last day,’ ‘ all who believe in Him,’ ‘ all who eat His flesh and 
blood,’ where the clear implication is that the rest of the dead awake not at 
the same time. Such a distinction He makes in Luke 14 : 14, a resurrection 
for the pious, a res. for the wicked. So the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15 : 23, 
comp. with Rom. 8 : 10, contemplates, not a general resurrection, but that 
of believers, ‘they who are Christ’s,’ ‘the sons of God.’ The Apoc. dis- 
tinguishes a first and second res. The first res., which ensues at the same 
dime with the Advent, Rev. 19 : 11-21, is expressly described as the ‘ First,’ 
Rey. 20: 4--6. In it only the martyrs and they who have. remained pure 
from the contamination of the world-power, have a share. These and 
only these reign with Christ 1000 years, while the ‘ rest of the dead’ awake 
not to life. After the expiration of these years, and victory over Satan let 
loose, then the rest of the dead arise for judgment, Rev. 20 : 11-15.” 
Such indorsements come from men who are fully persuaded that the Plan 
of Redemption, as covenanted and confirmed in Jesus the Christ, positively 
demands such a res. in order to insure a complete realization of promise. 
So Dorner (Person of Christ, vol. 1, p. 412) says: ‘*‘ Complete victor 
Christianity never can be until nature has become an organ in its service, a 
willing instrument of the perfect man, that is, of the righteous who are 
raised from the dead.’’ 


Out of a multitude of similar testimonies, we select one, quoted by Dr. Craven 
(Lange’s Com. Rev., p. 354) from Creation and Redemption ; *‘It is incumbent on us here 
to say a few words on the subject of the First Resurrection, for there is a general impres- 
sion that the belief in it rests solely upon this passage (Rev. 20: 6). But this is a great 
mistake. The truth of a resurrection of some at a different time from that of the general 
resurrection, is evident from Scripture, independent of this passage in the Apoc. Omit- 
ting the passages from the Old Test. Scriptures, sustained by the promises of which the 
Old Test. worthies, as St. Paul says, suffered and served God in the hope of obtaining 
“a better resurrection ’ (Heb. 11 : 35), we will state as briefly as may be the conclusion to 
_ which we are led by the words of the Lord and His Apostles. Our Lord makes a distinc- 
_ tion between the resurrection which some shall be counted worthy to attain to, and some 
‘not, Luke 20:3, 5. St. Paul says there is a resurrection ‘ out from among the dead ’ 
(ewanastasis), to attain which he strove with all his might as the prize to be gained, Phil. 
3:11. He also expressly tells us, that while in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be 
made alive ; yet it shall not be all at once, but ‘ every man in his own order ; Christ the 
| first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at His Coming.’ It is particularly to be 
remarked that wherever the resurrection of Christ or of His people is spoken of in Script- 


308 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 128. 


ure, it is a ‘resurrection from the dead ;’ and wherever the general resurrection is 
spoken of, it is the ‘ resurrection of the dead.’ This distinction, though preserved in 
many instances in the English translation, is too frequently omitted ; but in the Greek 
the one is always coupled with the preposition ek, out of, and the other is without it ; 
and in the Vulgate it is rendered by a mortuis or ex mortuis, as distinct from resurrectio 
mortuorum. In Rom. 8 : 11, ‘ The Spirit of Him that raised up Jesus from the dead,’ it is 
ek nekroén, a mortuis. Soin Rom.10:7; Eph. 1:20; Heb. 13 : 20; 1 Pet. 1:3,21. So 
Lazarus was raised ek nekron, John 12:1, 9. Our Lord in His reply to the Sadducees, 
made the distinction between the general resurrection of the dead, and the resurrection 
which some should be accounted worthy to attain to. The children of this age (ainds) 
marry, but they who shall be accounted worthy to attain that aion, and the resurrection 
from the dead (anastlaseds tés ek nekron) shall not marry (Luke 20 : 34, 35). St. Paul, 
when he spoke of a resurrection to which he strove to attain (Phil. 3: 8, 11), and to 
which he was with all his might pressing forward, as the high prize to gain which he was 
agonizing, and for which he counted all else loss, as if one preposition was not enough 
to indicate his meaning, uses it doubled, eis tén exanastasin tén nekron. ‘Si quomodo 
occurram ad resurrectionem, qua est e« mortuis.’ If St. Paul had been looking only to the 
general resurrection, he need not have given himself any trouble, or made any sacrifice 
to attain to that ; for to it all, even Judas and Nero, must come; but to attain to the 
First Resurrection he had need to press forward for the prize of that calling. And thus 
in his argument for the resurrection in 1 Cor. 15 (vers. 12, 21), when he speaks of the 
resurrection generally, he speaks of the resurrection of the dead (anastasis nekron) ; but 
when he speaks of our Lord’s resurrection, it is ek nekron, from the dead. And he marks 
the time when Christ’s people shall be raised from the dead, namely, ‘ at Christ’s Coming,’ 
‘every man in his order ;’ 1st, Christ ; 2d, Christ’s people ; 3d, all the remainder, at some 
other period, which he terms ‘ the end,’ when the last enemy, death, is to be destroyed, 
put an end to (vs. 23-26). And it follows as a matter of course, that if those who are 
Christ’s are to be raised from the dead at His Coming, and if He comes previous to the 
destruction of the Antichrist, and to the Millennium, this first resurrection must be at 
least a thousand years before the general resurrection.” 


Obs. 21. The reader is requested to observe that in our line of argument 
in behalf of a literal Pre-Millennial resurrection we are amply supported 
by the general analogy of Scripture on the subject. Whatever may be 
thought of the interpretation and application of particular passages, yet 
the following connected chain of divine teaching is apparent. First, we 
have the Covenant and its promises, which make such a resurrection @ — 
necessity 1n order to their verification. Second, the realization of such 
Covenant promises is based directly upon a resurrection from the dead, and 
such a distinguishing res. pertaining to the righteous is taught in numerous — 
places in the Old Test. Third, this teaching of a peculiar, eclectic res. (s0 — 
clearly taught that the Jews had received it) is repeated in varied expres- — 
sions and declared hope in the Gospels and Epistles. Fourth, it is special- — 
ly treated of in the Apocalypse, a work particularly devoted to eschatology. 4 
So decisive is this chain of evidence that the early Church, planted by the — 
Apostles and the elders appointed by them, was universally under its — 
influence and guidance. We gladly and hopefully remain under the same, — 
But in addition to all this, we have a series of connected doctrines taught, — 
which are essential to a Pre-Mill. resurrection, such e.g. as the Pre-Mill. 
Advent, the judgment day, the day of the Lord Jesus, the morning of the 
day, the reign of Christ and the saints, and various others. Nothing 
requisite to sustain our view of the res. is lacking, and, therefore, thi 
union and harmony of doctrine greatly confirms our faith and hope. 


oh 


r 


In view of this Scriptural argument, the immense array of proof texts, the Jewi 
view, the early Church belief, the concessions of opponents, and the expressed faith 
many able expositors and divines, is it not singular that in many works and artiel 
devoted to Eschatology, our doctrine is either barely hinted at or entirely ignored? T 


e 


PROP. 128. | THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. 309 


contemptuous treatment can scarcely be attributed to its being unworthy of notice (for 
its historical aspect and its honorable advocates would redeem it from such silence), 
and we are forced to the conviction that such an avoidance is caused by persons being 
afraid of its authority, both Scriptural and traditional, and feel their weakness to under- 
take its refutation. 


Obs. 22. Freely admitting that no doctrine is to be simply received on 
human authority, yet we confess to a gratification that our faith is that of 
the Primitive Church on this point. It is a satisfaction to know that we 
understand God’s Word on this subject just as the immediate disciples and 
followers of the Apostles comprehended it. For, such a union of view 
does not make us liable to the suspicion which might justly arise if it was a 
doctrine that only originated in the fourth century, or in the tenth, or 
even later. Besides this, it is a doctrine which, if true, it would be 
reasonable to expect men to teach, who were so nearly related to the Apos- 
tles in time, and who had, more or less, the benefit of their previous 
instruction. 


Compare, for early view, Props. 71 to 75, inclusive. The reader will not censure us 
when we also congratulate ourselves upon the important concessions, made even by our 
opponents (as e.g. Prof. Stuart, Brown, Barnes, etc.). So fixed was this precious doc- 
trine of the first resurrection in the faith of the early Church, that even Origen, the 
father of the present prevailing spiritualizing interpretation, could not entirely free him- 
self from its teaching. ‘Thus he expresses himself (quoted by Brookes, and taken from 
his Thirteenth Homily on Jeremiah) in accord with us and irreconcilable with his own sys- 
tem, as follows: ‘‘ If any man shall preserve the washing of the Holy Spirit, etc., he 
shall have part in the first resurrection ; but if any man be saved in the second resurrection 
only, it is the sinner that needeth the baptism by fire. Wherefore, seeing these things 
are so, let us lay the Scriptures to heart, and make them the rule of our lives ; that so, 
being cleansed from the defilement of sin before we depart, we may be raised up with the 
saints, and have our lot with Christ Jesus.”” Here the distinction of separate resurrec- 
tions is preserved, and the first is acceded to be pre-eminent, and specially belonging to 
the saints. 


Obs. 23. Lastly, we may be allowed to congratulate ourselves on the fact 
that our system of interpretation opens no door of entrance to the many 
conflicting and dangerous errors respecting the resurrection. Many, taking 
the weapons ready forged to hand by a spiritualizing interpretation of 
Isaiah, Ezekiel, and John, turn them against a literal resurrection of the 
dead. Work after work could be mentioned which has done this, jubilant- 
ly quoting from the orthodox the argaments for a figurative, moral, or 
ecclesiastical resurrection. ‘This is only the legitémate developing of the 
Origenistic system of interpretation, an almost impregnable refuge for all 
forms of error. Now, in all those systems, which reduce the res. to an 
incompleted redemption of the body, or which refine it away into a mystical 
conception, etc., not one of them can, or does, appeal to us for deductions 
or aid, since in no shape or form do we give them the slightest coun- 
tenance. Hence probably arises the extreme hostility manifested toward 
our system by various authors, because it is a standing rebuke to their own 
efforts at spiritualizing. 


It is unaccountable to us, why professed believers in the Word should, as some do, 
detest the doctrine of the First Resurrection as advocated by the Primitive Church, What 
can possibly influence the bitterness and hatred against it in some quarters, when we 
show forth its pre-eminency, its exceeding desirableness, and its leading to unspeakable 
honor and glory? We confess our inability—after the abundant Scriptural basis pre- 
sented upon which it is founded—to assign a justifiable reason for the same. Let us ask 


310 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 128. 


such to reflect, that such conduct is not argumentation, and that, peradventure, the 
ridicule heaped upon it may eventually recoil upon themselves, inasmuch as they may be 
found speaking and writing slightingly and sneeringly of one of the most precious of 
God’s own appointments. Surely, aside from the Scripture, the host of able men who 
have held to it and derived comfort from it (even at the stake) should influence reflect- 
ing men to treat it—although opposed to it—with respect. Under several Props. we give 
specimens of the language used respecting—what we must consider—God’s own appoint- 
ments and precious promises. 


CS aia Lon Ve 


PROP. 129. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ole 


Proposition 129. Lhe Jewish view of a Pre-Mill. resurrection 
requisite for the introduction of the Messianic Kingdom is 
fully sustained by the grammatical sense of the New Test. 


Attention is thus prominently called to the fact, that the agree- 
ment existing between Jewish belief and the language of the New 
Test. most effectually supports our doctrinal position. 


Obs. 1. To avoid repeating, the reader is requested to notice how under 
the preceding Props. relating to the res. taught in the Old Test., the Apoc., 
and the Gospels and Epistles, the constant reference was made to the Jewish 
belief prevailing, and quotations were given fully sustaining the same from 
critics, historians, commentators, etc. Now, we ask the reader to consider 
how it was possible for Jesus and the inspired writers to employ language, 
in view of such an existing belef, fully corroborating it, unless the belief 
was a correct one, in strict accord with the Divine Purpose. Writers of all 
shades of opinion, opposers to Chiliasm included, tell us that the Jews did 
not expect a fulfilment of the Messianic predictions, of the Abrahamic 
Covenant and the promises based upon it, without a resurrection, eclectic 
in its nature, accessory and initiatory to their realization. The student, if 
honest and sincere, must, before rejecting our doctrine, give a satisfactory 
reason why the statements of the New Test. in their plain grammatical 
sense (for this sense is admitted, but a spiritual one is substituted) teach 
the same kind of an eclectic res., associated with a future reign of the 


Messiah. He must also, if considerate, show why this Jewish belief, thus 


corroborated by a sense of the New Test., was universally held by the 
Churches established under Apostolic guidance, if an error. This no 
one can do, without impeaching the Divine instruction of the New Test. 
and the Divine guidance manifested in the establishment of the Ch. 
Church. The conclusion, inevitable, to which we are forced is this: that 
the doctrine is truth, founded on Divine utterances and assurances, and 
committed to the Church to stimulate faith and hope. 

As to the Jewish belief, we only need to quote one authority hostile to Pre-Millena- 
rianism, viz., Prof. Stuart, who (Com. Apoc., vol. 1, p. 177) says: ‘* That the great mass 
of Jewish Rabbins have believed and taught the doctrine of the resurrection of the just, 


in the days of the Messiah’s development, there can be no doubt on the part of him who 
has made any considerable investigation of this matter.”’ 


Obs. 2. Again, there is no question concerning the grammatical sense, 
for that is admitted even by our opponents, many of whom we have quoted. 
But we are assured that that sense is not the one intended ; that a typical 
or spiritual meaning is the one to be received. Hence the doctrine of a 
literal Pre-Mill. res. is derided as ‘‘ antiquated,’’ ‘‘ Jewish,’’ etc., and 
utterly unfitted for the advanced thought of the age. A question, how- 
ever, arises, which we will do well to ponder, viz., which is the safest to 


312 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 129. 


accept of, a God-given sense, or of one which is at the option of the inter- 
preter? If a Pre-Mill. res. is an error, then it is one contained in the 
letter of the Word, and given by inspired men under the guidance of God 
Himself, and we are justifiable in entertaining it ; but, on the other hand, 
if it be a truth, thus plainly declared, we are inexcusable in its rejection. 


Obs. 8. Infidels object to the New Test. on the ground that it unmistak- 
ably teaches this previous existing Jewish view (so Strauss, Bauer, Renan, 
-ete.), and reject the whole as evidence of superstition and ignorance. 
Apologists lamely strive, by the application of spiritualistic interpretation, 
to avoid such a conclusion, while admitting (1) the Jewish view as existing 
at the First Advent, and (2) the grammatical sense expressing it, but which 
is, they say, merely an accommodation to existing prejudice, and must be 
understood in a higher and nobler sense. No wonder that many apologies 
only confirm the unbeliever in his state of unbelief, seeing that they are 
utterly wnfair to the Record and derogatory to the divine teaching of the 
Master and the Apostles. We, on the other hand, fully admit the infidel’s 
objection grounded on Jewish belief and corroborative New Test. teaching, 
and, instead of apologizing for the same and explaining it away, we account 
for it as a matter grounded in God’s Redemptive Plan, contained in the 
covenants and predictions, and which simple consistency and unity requires 
to be taught in the New Test. 


Obs. 4. Judge Jones (Notes, p. 284) remarks of the Jewish opinion : 
‘¢ They understood that the promises (in covenants) which God made to 
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob were absolute ; and they believed that He 
would surely perform them, even to those of former generations, who had 
art in them ; and on this ground, mainly, they taught the resurrection of 
the dead, Acts 24:15.’’ ‘* Three opinions touching the res. prevailed to 
a greater or less extent among the Jews. (1) Some maintained that only 
the just or righteous of their nation would be raised ; (2) others main- 
tained that the whole of their race (all Israelites) would be raised ; (3) and 
some maintained that all Israelites and some Gentiles would be raised. It 
is evident from Acts 24 : 14, 15, that the Jews of Paul’s day did not adopt 
the first of these opinions, but they appear to have /imited the res. to their 
nation. In Rom. 9 : 2-5, Paul teaches that the adoption, by which he 
meant the resurrection, Rom. 8 : 23, pertained to Israelites ; and hence it 
would seem that the res., as a term of the original covenant, was limited 
to Israel. Rabbi Bechai says, God granted four special honors to Israel, viz., 
(1) the land of Canaan ; (2) the law ; (3) prophecy ; (4) the resurrection of 
the dead. Josephus, though obscure, evidently did not believe the res, 
would be universal.’’ 


Aside from the authorities quoted under previous Props., the student may refer to 
Lardner’s Works, Harmer’s Mis. Works, etc., and it will be found that in the various 
opinions expressed there still remained the idea of a limited, eclectic resurrection over 
against that of a universal one. In the resurrection pertaining to the Messianic Kingdom 
and Millennial blessedness, the prevailing view, based on covenant promises given to 
the nation, was that Israelites (and Gentiles incorporated by adoption) alone partici- 
pated in it. Now this conception of the Pre-Millennial resurrection is retained in the 
New Test., because, as we have shown in detail, the Gentiles called also experience its 
power and blessedness in view of their being received and acknowledged as the children 
of Abraham (see Props. 61-65). In numerous works we find references to this Jewish 
belief in a limited resurrection, as e.g. Pressense (The Early Days, etc., p. 74, quoting 


Prop. 129. } THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 313 


from Grimm’s Die Samariter) refers to the Talmud, declaring respecting the Samaritans, 
** this accursed people shall have no part in the resurrection of the dead.’’ The Book of 
Enoch (regarded by able critics as pre-Christian—see art. on M’Clintock and Strong’s 
Cyclop.) expressly (61:5; 91:10; 92:3; 100: 5) teaches that the righteous shall be 
raised up and share in the blessedness of the Messiah’s Kingdom. Later works of a 
mixed character, as the Zest. of Judah in the Twelve Patriarchs, allude to the resurrection 
and exaltation of the Patriarchs in the time of the Messiah, and express the faith : 
*¢ They who have died in grief shall arise in joy, and they who have lived in poverty for 
the Lord’s sake shall be made rich, and they who have been in want shall be filled, and 
they who have been weak shall be made strong, and they who have been put to death for 
the Lord’s sake shall awake in life.”” Jewish-Christian writings have varied references. 
The ancient Jews (Cudworth’s Intel. System, p. 797) called the resurrection of the body 


‘¢ the angelic clothing of the soul,’’ which reminds one of the saying of Jesus, ‘* made 
equal unto the angels.” 


314 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 1380. 


Proposition 130. Zhis Kingdom is preceded by a translation of 
the living saints. 


This is a prerequisite, in order that those accounted worthy to 
inherit the Kingdom, and rule the nations with Christ, may be 
athered. In reference to the dead saints, a Pre-Mill. resurrection 
Props. 125-129) is promised by which to attain this object ; and 
with such a resurrection (i.e. at that time) a translation of the 
living saints is also connected in 1 Thess. 4:17, ‘‘ the dead in 
Christ shall rise first (or away) ;' then we which are alive and 
remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds (or, in 
clouds)’ fo meet the Lord in the air,’’* etc. The same is repeated 
in 1 Cor. 15: 51, 52, in union only with the resurrection of be- 
lievers: ‘‘ Behold, 1 shew you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, 
but we shall all be changed,”’ etc.* 


1 Comp. Acts 8 : 39 ; Matt. 13 : 19, etc. 

2? Barnes, Com. loci, says: “ Greek: ‘in clouds’—without the article. This may 
mean ‘ in clouds ;’ that is, in such numbers and in such grouping as to resemble clouds. 
So it is rendered by Macknight, Koppe, Rosenmiiller, Bush, and others. The absence of 
the article here would rather seem to demand this interpretation.”» Compare Lange, 
Alford, etc. 

3 Many critics have ‘‘ into the air’ connected with the verb ‘‘ caught away.’” Compare 
Lange, Alford, Ellicott, Vaughan, etc. The phrase, with the suggested amendments sup- 
ported by critical authority, would be as follows: ‘‘ Then we which are alive and remain 
(who are living, who are left over) shall together with them be caught away (or snatched 
away) into the air in clouds to meet the Lord ; and so shall we ever be with the Lord.” 

4 Some writers (as Rev. Wilson in Proph. Times, vol. 12, p. 131) make the language 
(John 11 : 25, 26) of Jesus to Martha applicable to this period : ‘‘I am the resurrection 
and the life. He that believeth on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live” (i.e. by 
the power of the resurrection) ; ‘‘ and whoever liveth and believeth on me’’ (i.e. at the 
time of resurrection) “ shall never die” (i.e. he shall experience a translation). 


Obs. 1. While all writers on prophecy insist upon the translation of 
living saints at the Advent of Jesus, and the Millenarian authors direct 
especial attention to it; while it was a special object of hope and desire 
to the early believers and to succeeding ones, it is only more recently, since 
eschatology has received remarkable study and investigation, that important 
additions (resulting from comparing Scripture with Scripture) have been 
made to our knowledge respecting it. Our work would be incomplete 
without noticing this feature, and adding something to a subject imperfect- 
ly comprehended by many.’ A few preliminary remarks are necessary in 
order to appreciate some things pertaining toit. Thus e.g. the common 
view that the resurrection will be a public affair, to be witnessed by the 
world, is now discarded as untenable in the light of Christ’s (also pertain- 
ing to ‘‘ the first-fruits’’) resurrection, which was strictly private. It is 


¥ 


now held, and properly, that the members will be raised like the Head was i 


PROP. 130. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 315 


(for if a public resurrection, humanly speaking, is desirable, then surely it 
ought to have been that of Christ’s), in order that the preparatory events 
for the coming judgment of the world may be introduced in such a manner 
(privately) as to establish “‘ the snare’ and ‘‘ the net’’ intended for the un- 
_ believing and wicked. Leading prophetical writers justly have no hesitancy 
in asserting that no mortal eye of unbelief shall behold the resurrection, — 
This at once places the translation of the saints in a new aspect, and 
indicates, as it accompanies the resurrection, that it also is unseen (like 
Knoch’s and Elijah’s) by the world. Again, careful students of the Word 
felt satisfied that the resurrection of the saints in Rev. 20: 4-6 was 
specifically that of those who passed through the great tribulation under the 
culminated Antichrist, and was preceded by that of: others, as implied in 
Rev. 14: 1-5, etc. ‘This is corroborated by the fact already presented 
(Prop. 127), that the word ‘‘ first’’ applied to the resurrection has reference 
not to its being first in time (which would be incorrect, seeing that Christ’s 
res. and that of saints, Matt. 27 : 52, 53, preceded), but of its being a 
resurrection which also brings those who participated in it within the 
privileges of ‘‘ the first-born,’’ viz., a double portion, Deut. 21 : 17; priest- 
hood, Num. 3:13; and government or dominion, Gen. 27 : 29.2 The 
subject.of the resurrection, for a long time, was not clear to the writer 
until he observed the real scriptural application of the word “‘ first,’’ as 
just given. ‘The first resurrection, viz., that resurrection pertaining to 
*‘the first-born,’’ ‘‘ the first-fruits,’’ commenced with the resurrection of 
Jesus, and it receives its accessions as stated e.g. in 1 Thess. 4 : 16, 17, 
and in Rev. 20 : 4-6. This also serves to illustrate the translation, pre- 
paring us, in view of several resurrections (belonging to that of the just), 
to appreciate references, allusions, and implications which indicate more - 
than one translation. Again, prophetical writers are also agreed that what 
is called the Sec. Advent (the Advent itself as distinguished from the reign 
and Kingdom that follows) is not to be regarded as simply one act, but 
embracing a series of acts connected with the one Coming (for when Jesus 
comes again He remains upon earth). That is, the Sec. Advent is to be 
considered more in the light of the First Advent (which latter embraced 
not less than thirty-three years, and numerous acts predicted as related to 
His Coming), as something which, owing to a variety of things prophesied 
concerning it, cannot possibly be limited to a few years. Comparing all 
the events that are included in the Sec. Advent, it is simply impossible, 
without great violation of order, etc., to crowd them all together as the 
instantaneous resultants of such a Coming. This, then, impresses caution 
in not compressing what is intimated concerning the translation or removal 
of saints necessarily to one transaction or day. Again, admitting the 
requirement of not confining the Advent to a single act, or day, or brief 
period, previous to the establishment of the Kingdom in all its glory, writers 
now generally attribute to this introductory manifestation a period of 
seven years, of forty years, and of (thirty and forty conjoined) seventy 
years. (Considering the events to follow the Advent before the overthrow 


_ of Antichrist, such as the development of. the confederation, the return of 


a portion of the Jews to Palestine, the doom of the harlot, etc., the longer 
periods are preferable.) This at once enables us to see how such resurrec- 
tions and translations harmonize with the specific introductory period, in 
which God’s power and love is manifested at the time when the power of 
His enemies shall be also formidably exhibited and broken. Again, analogy 


316 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 130. 


favors the removal of the righteous in a time of severe and terrible judg- 
ment intended for the wicked, as in the case of Noah, Lot, the early 
believers at Jerusalem, etc., while previous translations are not lacking, as 

in the case of Enoch and Elijah. The Second Advent inaugurates a series 

of most tremendous judgments, both upon the Church and the world—so 
terrific that they are constantly pointed out as the culmination of God’s 
wrath—and it is reasonable to suppose, judging from God’s past dealings, 
that He again will grant special deliverance to those who are devoted to 
Him. At this time also, the removal being designed not only to save ont — 
of tribulation, but to prepare the saints, deemed worthy of it, for promised 
rulership then to be instituted, and for joint participation in the adminis- 
tration of judgments upon the nations, a translation accompanied by the 
same transforming change, glorification, which the resurrected saints — 
experience, is precisely that which we ought to anticipate. Again, it is 
universally admitted by Millenarians that ‘‘ the day of the Lord Jesus’ is 
preceded not only by ‘a morning,’’ but that it virtually begins in “‘ the 
night ;’ Christ representing His Coming to be when it is yet ‘‘ might,” 
He being ‘‘ the morning star,’’ which ushers in ‘‘ the morning’’ of the 
glorious day. This refers the resurrection and translation of a chosen 
body to ‘‘ the night,”’ i.e. to the close of this dispensation, as preparatory 

to the introduction of an incoming one.* Or, in other words, it warns us 
that, as the past shows, dispensations may overlap each other to some 
extent, in that certain initiatory movements of the incoming one commence 
and are in progress before the other entirely closes. This prepares us then 

to accept of the wonderful things which are predicted to occur at the 
winding up of this dispensation, and to regard them in their relationship 

to the One to come. Again, critical writers in investigating 2 Thess. 2:2 
have shown that the word translated ‘‘ 7s at hand’’ (in the phrase ‘‘ the day 

of Christ (or Lord) 1s at hand’’) means, correctly rendered, ‘‘ 2s come,” or _ 
*“has come,’ i.e. is something already present, and not something still — 
future.* This correctly explains the trouble and alarm of the Thessalonian 
brethren, who were certainly not afraid of ‘‘ the blessed hope,’’ which Paul 
says they waited for (1 Thess. 1 : 10), and for which they were prepared 
(1 Thess. 2:19 and 3 : 18, and 5 : 4, 5), but apprehending that ‘‘ the day 
of Christ?’ had already come, and they not having experienced the promised 
translation, and their pious dead being still with them without an experi- 
enced resurrection, they were trowoled and distressed at the thought. 
Those brethren with hearts full of love for the Saviour were not so fearful 
that they would desire and pray (as multitudes now) that the blessed Lord — 
should delay His Coming, but, in some way misapprehending the real state 
of affairs, they believed that the initiatory proceedings belonging to the 
day of Christ had already commenced, and that they and their pious dead 
were left without realizing the exceeding precious promises given to them. 
This simple change in a single word, supported too by the strongest of 
evidence, explains not only the cause of the Thessalonians’ trouble (which 
Paul proceeds to remove by showing that an apostasy must first come to 
develop into the predicted Antichrist, implying that such an apostasy with — 
its result necessarily required time, still in the future, before ‘‘ the day of 
Christ’’ came), but throws much light, corroborative, on the subject of 
the resurrection and the translation of the saints. For, to cause such — 
trouble they must have believed that ’’ the day of Christ’’ would be inaugu- 
rated by preliminaries unseen by the world, and that the resurrection and 


PRopP. 1380. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. B17 


translation would doth be invisible, and they, not participating were doomed 


to terrible tribulation, or that the predictions were false. We say nothing 


respecting the source from whence they derived such thoughts, but one 
thing is impressive, viz., that the Apostle does not correct such impres- 
sions, but rather by his silence confirms them in them. Yea, more, in 
beseeching them ‘‘ by our gathering together unto Him,’’ he virtually 
indorses the views entertained by them respecting this gathering.°® 


1 A writer in the N. Y. Evangelist, under the title of *‘ Pre-Mill. Incongruities,” not 
observing how we distinguish between the concealed and the open, visible Coming, finds 
fault with Dr. Brookes and “ the Proph. Conference,’’ for saying in one place that the 
Advent may be immediate, and then in another place substituting events as preceding 
the visible Advent. 'The ‘‘ incongruity” is in the critic, simply because he is ignorant of 
the doctrine that we hold. Again, in Lange’s Com, 1 Thess. 4, doc. 7, the two stages, 
resulting in a translation previous to the tribulation, is stigmatized as an ‘ Irvingite 
interpretation” (because taught by E. L. Geering of the “ Catholic Apostolic Church,’’ in 
his work Mahnung und Trost der Schrift in Betreff der Wiederkunft Christi). Not having 
seen Geering’s work, we still express a doubt whether he, as alleged, sets this up as a 
dogma having “‘ salvation connected with the acceptance of it,’’ because our acquaintance 
with writers of this class indicates that not ‘‘ salvation,’’ but great privilege and honor 
and deliverance is connected with its acceptance. The question, after all, is this : What 
is the teaching of the Word on the subject? Brookes (Maranatha, p. 493) aptly remarks 
of this opposition : ‘‘ The objection to the truth advocated in this chapter is urged with 
a bad grace by those who insist that Christ has come thousands and millions of times 
since His ascension from the Mt. of Olives in every startling providence, in every revival, 
in every death during the last eighteen hundred years.”’ 

2 This fact of several resurrections, all relating to the one specially promised to the 
brethren of Christ, has even led some writers to advocate a kind of continuous one. 
Thus e.g. Dr. Seiss, without, however, subscribing to it as a truth, says: “ Selnecker, 
one of Germany’s greatest divines, of the age next succeeding the Reformation, quotes 
Ambrose as teaching that every year some saints are raised from their graves, and ascribes 
the same opinion to Luther, as well as accepts the same as his own.”’ Selnecker, how- 
ever, most appropriately remarks: ‘‘ To this resurrection belongs everything that is 
raised to immortality before the last day.’’ . 

3 The ‘‘ morning star” comes before “ the day’’ dawns ; the ‘‘ sun’’ shines during “the 
day ;’ Jesus is both. As the morning star, He is seen by few : as the sun, He is seen by 
all. Those who watch not merely for the sun, but for the morning star, properly heed the 
cautions and injunctions relating to the posture of watching. 

4 In Props. 121 and 123 this feature was only incidentally alluded to as our line of rea- 
soning, referred mainly to the one verse showing a visible personal Coming as a distinc- 
tive event also connected with ‘‘ the day of Christ.’’ Here, however, we bring out 
prominently this characteristic. The verb translated ‘‘is at hand,’’ in the sense of 
impending or near, is elsewhere translated ‘‘ present,’’ its proper meaning. McKnight 
(who certainly has no sympathy for our views) translates it ‘‘ hath come.” Alford (see 
Alford’s remarks) and Lange, “is present,’’ and so Bengel and Olshausen, ‘‘ what is 
present.” Ellicott and Liinemann explain it as something already begun, i.e. present or 
‘is now come.’’ Syriac version has it “ is come,” so the Swiss version, Luther’s ‘* vor- 


_handen sei,’’ which may be taken either as ‘‘to be present’’ or as impending, at hand. 


Dr. Lillie says the word, as far as he can trace it, ‘‘ invariably denotes actual presence.’ 
The Revision has it “ is now present.”’ ; 

’ One of the editors of the Proph. Times, vol. 5, p. 43, has so appropriately written 
upon this point that we reproduce it. ‘‘ This passage also shows the very different 
manner in which the early Christians must have conceived of the Day of the Lord and 
the Coming of Christ, from that which now obtains, in order to have been liable to such 
an erroneous impression on the subject. With the present popular conceptions of the 
sudden grandeur, conspicuity, and universal publicity of the Coming of Christ, it would 
be utterly impossible to obtain currency for the idea that it was already present or 
accomplished. People now are looking for the world to come to an end—for an utter 
break-up of the whole system of nature—for a complete wreck of the universe. When 
we talk to them of the last day and the return of Christ, they begin to think of the burn- 
ing up of all sublunary things, and of the complete extinction of human life, and even of 
the whole dwelling-place of man and all created things. But if the early Christians had 


318 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 130. ° 


thought of this subject after this style, how is it possible that they could have believed 
the last day had come, when the world still stood and the stars remained in their places, 
and the whole course of nature was still going.on as before ?”’ etc. 


Obs. 2. But some other things, also introductory to the subject, must be 
attentively considered before we come to a decisive conclusion. Thus, as 
has been pointed out by many writers, the Scriptures describe a Coming: of 
Jesus for or in behalf of His saints (as e.g. 1 Thess. 3 : 14-17; 1 Cor. 
15 : 51, 52), and then again another with all His saints (as e.g. Zech. 
14:5; Rev. 19:14; 1 Thess. 3:18; Jude 14, 15), and these two, differ- 
ing thus in an important particular, indicate separate stages or’ mantfesta- 
tions pertaining tothe same Second Advent. Without allowing something 
of this kind, several acts pertaining to the one great Coming to this earth, 
it is impossible to reconcile such passages. For they are sustained in their 
difference not only by the simple act of coming for and with tlie saints, but 
in the design of such a Coming, viz., as to the former, for the purpose of 
salvation and glorification, and as to the latter, for the direct overthrow of 
the enemies of God, the restoration of the Jewish nation, and the glory 
(thereby promoted) of the saints. This is still more confirmed by the 
conclusive statements which the Spirit gives of this one Second Advent, 
when it is represented to us under two aspects, viz., one, a coming when 
men are at peace, buying, selling, marrying, etc., and anticipating no evil, 
but only ‘‘ peace and safety,’’ all things apparently promising continued 
prosperity and happiness (so e.g. Luke 17 : 26-30; Matt. 24 : 36-39; 1 
Thess. 5 : 3, etc.) ; the other, a coming in a time of war, of great distress 
and suffering (as e.g. Zech. 14, Rev. 19, Joel 3, Luke 21 : 27, etc.) ; the 
one, @ coming in a concealed, thief-like manner, i.e. unobserved, unnoticed, 
unheralded (1 Thess. 5 : 2; Matt. 24 : 43, 44; Luke 12 : 37-40 ; Rey. 3 : 3, 
etc.) ; the other, a coming so open, conspicuous, that all shall witness it (as 
e.g. Matt. 24:30; Rev. 19; Matt. 25 : 31, etc.). The more students come 
to weigh and compare Scripture referring to this period, the more are they 
convinced that it would be presumptuous for us ¢o limit all these varied 
utterances ¢o one single act, and that we must allow a series of events to be 
comprehended under this Coming ; the Spirit directing us now to one and 
then to another of them ; ¢he order of which is only to be attained by a 
careful comparison. It also is a fact that these ‘‘ first-born,” to whom the 
honor of aiding in the execution of God’s judgments (and the translated 
belong to them) are given (e.g. Ps. 149 : 9, comp. Prop. 154), must be both 
resurrected (and remember that the translation is connected with the resur- 
rection) and translated defore they can participate in inflicting ‘‘ the 
judgment written’’ upon the nations (as Dan. 7 : 22; Rev. 2 : 26, 27, etc.). 
Besides this, the significancy of ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ (which embrace not 
merely resurrected saints, but, as we have seen, translated ones, as both are 
cojoined by the Spirit) would be entirely lost, i.e. as something preceding 
a general harvest which is to follow, if we did not allow that the one neces- 
sarily goes before the other, leaving an interval between them, although 
‘‘ the first-fruits’? and ‘‘ the harvest’’ are both included under the same 
general Advent,’ thus again showing that just as at the First Advent Jesus 
was only manifested to a few favored ones, and an interval of years elapsed 
before His final public manifestation, so at His Sec. Advent He will only 
be exhibited to those accounted worthy, and after a set interval ultimately 
to the world. It is by observing this characteristic of the Sec. Advent 


ee 


SO ee ee ee 


Prop. 130.] ‘THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 519 


that the true force of the injunction to constantly look and watch for the 


Coming of Jesus can be appreciated. Not distinguishing that several 
aspects of this Coming, including separate acts, etc., are given, has led 
eminent writers to lay down certain things (such as a partial restoration of 
the Jews, a covenant with the Jews, etc.) as prerequisites to such an 
Advent, and they are correct, but only in reference to one aspect of it, viz., 
the visible Coming or manifestation of the Son of Man with His saints, as 
e.g. Zech. 14. On the other hand, we have assurances given to us not to 
interpose any event whatever between us and such an Advent, but to regard 
it as an event that may occur at any moment without any notification of its 
approach (excepting only such as are given by approximative signs), and 


these two representations of the same Advent are only reconcilable by 


noticing what a comparison of Scripture inculcates, that the first aspect of 
this Coming refers to a concealed, hidden Coming for specific purposes (viz., 
to raise, translate, and glorify His saints, to inaugurate the preliminaries 
of his Kingdom, etc.), which takes place before the events predicted as 
pertaining to His visible manifestation.’ 


1 That we are to distinguish between ‘‘ the first-fruits” and ‘‘ the harvest” is self- 
evident, for they are separated and treated distinctively in Holy Writ, ase.g. Rev. 14 : 1-5, 
where a specific number is designated ‘‘ the first fruits unto God and to the Lamb”’ (to 
which James 1 : 18 evidently refers), and then afterward comes (v. 14, 15) ‘‘ the harvest.” 
Rev. Dr. Newton (Proph. Times, vol. 3, p. 18) correctly thinks that this language and 
result is based on a typical Levitical ordinance, viz., the gathering of the wave sheaf and 
presenting it, as specially holy and relating to the sanctuary, to God as ‘the first-fruits 
of the harvest,’’ before the harvest itself was gathered. Perhaps we will find in those 
Levitical ordinances much that is typical of the future, to which we are now blind or 
short-sighted. Thus e.g. it is found that two leavened wheaten loaves were also waved, 
and called ‘‘ the first-fruits unto the Lord,’’ which may adumbrate— for aught we know 
to the contrary—the resurrected and translated saints, who, ‘“‘ being many are one loaf’’ 
in their twofold, Jewish and Gentile character and dispensation. This field 1s an in- 
teresting one, but liable to abuse and perversion, as the past has taught us. 

* The student can well obtain a hint of this unseen (to the world) stage of the Advent, 
from the manner in which angels have come unseen and yet influenced kings, as e.g. 
Dan. 10 (comp. remarks of Barnes, Com. loci). From this last passage, which contains 
things beyond human knowledge, it may be conjectured that one reason why no greater 


details are given, why no minute unsymbolical exhibition of the coming order of events 


is presented, arises from the fact that in some way beyond our comprehension spiritual 
powers (as e.g. this same Michael, Dan. 12 : 1) shall be enlisted in advancing the Divine 
Purpose in the coming Theocracy. In reference to the First Advent, the reader will 
observe that it is predicted that the Messiah comes as the Babe of Bethlehem, as entering 
the temple, as riding on an ass, as coming to Jerusalem, as appearing in Galilee, etc., 


_ and the history of Jesus embraces their respective fulfilment in separated stages of the 


same Advent. So careful comparison evidences a similar succession of acts in the Second 
Advent—two of which are held up—owing to their significance and results—with great 
prominency, viz., the thief-like Coming or presence, and the open, visible Coming or 
presence. 


Obs. 3. We now come to a passage which directly teaches a translation, 
viz., Luke 17 : 34-37, ‘‘ J tell you, in that night there shall be two men im 
one bed ; the one shall be taken and the other left. Two women shall be 
grinding together ; the one shall be taken and the other left. And they 
answered and said unto Him, Where, Lord? And He said unto them : Where- 
soever the body is, thither will the eagles be gathered together’ (see Matt. 
24:28). The context shows (1) that this relates to the personal Sec. 
Advent, and (2) occurs in a time of peace and apparent prosperity, precisely 
similar to that. of the Antediluvian era just before the flood, and to that 


2 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 130. 


of Sodom before Lot’s removal. The passage itself teaches (1) that this 
translation is to be expected ‘‘ in that night,’’ as if purposely to conceal it 
from the eye of unbelief ; (2) that this is no gathering of nations, but of 
individuals, one here and one there ; (3) that it is @ separation of parties, 
one being taken and another being left ; (4) this taking of one party and 
leaving of another indicates a previous judgment (just as the sudden taking 
and changing ‘‘ in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye,” 1 Cor. 15 : 52, 
also evidences), and not such an one as is recorded e.g. in Matt. 25 : 31-46 ; 
(5) that the remoyal of the one party is designed as a particular blessing in 
averting incoming evil, and the leaving of the other must be in order that 
they may experience it. Next follows the much disputed verse respecting 
the eagles, and before discussing its meaning it is necessary to decide its 
location in point of time. It is very easy, as some do, to refer it to the 
Romans in Matt. 24, but it is rather difficult to apply this verse in Luke 
the same way, because in the context there is no allusion, even the most 
distant, tothe Romans. On the other hand, Jesus pointedly links it with 
His own personal Advent (comp. Prop. 114), as the context plainly (vs. 
22-30) proclaims. This effectually disposes of the Roman theory, but still 
leaves the verse subject to a variety of conflicting opinions.’ Without 
assuming that the explanation following is infallibly the correct one, yet 
we give it as commending itself as reasonably the one containing the sense 
intended. And first: ‘‘ the eagles’? mentioned we must make, with numer- 
ous writers,” to denote the saints. Saints are represented by “‘ eagles’’ in 
Isa. 40 : 31; Dent. 82 : 11,12; Ps. 103 : 5, even as God Himself is likened 
to an eagle (Ex. 19:45; Deut. 32 : 11) and Christ to a hen (Matt. 23 : 37). 
Such comparisons are not to be rejected because of any supposed incon- 
gruity (as e.g. being birds of prey), seeing that it is applied to messengers of 
the Divine procedure in Rev. 4:73 in Rev. 8: 13 (the leading mss. and 
critics reading ‘‘ eagle’ instead of ‘‘ angel’), and that similar comparisons 
are applied to Christ, as Rev. 5:5. Scripture wsage sustains such an inter- 
pretation, and even if the idea is made prominent that eagles prey, this 
itself would only confirm the application, because the saints accounted 
worthy of resurrection and glorification are to assist Christ in His judg- 
ments upon the nations (when Zeph. 3:8, the Lord “‘riseth up to the 
prev’’). It may be that Jesus had in mind Isa. 40 : 31 (Delitzsch’s transl.), 
**'They who wait for Jehovah gain fresh strength, lift wp their wings as 
eagles, run and are not weary, go forward and do not faint,”’ as applicable 
to the saints at this period. Jn the next place, what are we to understand 
by ‘‘ the carcass’’ of Matthew and ‘“‘ the body’’ of Luke? One thing is self- 
evident, that they refer to the same thing—the passages being parallel—and 
hence all interpretations, no matter how plausibly presented, which makes 
‘* the carcass’ one thing and ‘‘ the body’”’ quite another, must be avoided. 
The passage in Matthew is related to the Coming of the Son of Man ; that 
in Luke to the Coming and a predicted translation or removal, and doth 
make out a gathering of the saints to a certain place. Now, if we leave 
Scripture describe this gathering at the time of the end, we find that the 
saints or eagles are gathered (Zech. 14, Rev. 19, Joel 3, etc.) to execute 
vengeance upon the confederation of wickedness. That this great con- 
federation of the mighty of the earth is intended by ‘‘ the carcass’”’ and 
‘the body”’ is apparent from two things: (1) such a manifestation of the 
saints really answers the question in Luke, for after the announcement of 
the removal of some the question was asked, ‘‘ Where, Lord ?’’ (i.e. when 


ee) 


Prop. 130. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. B91 


shall this be witnessed or be made known ?) and the answer comes that as 
this is done ‘‘in the night,’’ not visible, the evidence of such a removal 
will be openly shown when these very ones shall be gathered together at the 
overthrow of Antichrist. (2) This is confirmed by the meaning of the 
word rendered ‘‘ carcass’’ (although even the word ‘‘ carcass’ might be 
retained as indicative of both contempt and doom) ; the primary significa- 
tions denoting “‘ a fall, or fallen thing, or failure,’’? and thus directly re- 
ferring to the fearful fall and overthrow of Antichrist which the saints are 
not only gathered to witness, but exultantly to participate in. The ‘* body’’ 
of Luke refers to the same confederation, because, as Scripture informs us, 
“the body’’ of it, its congregated armies under the leadership of Anti- 
christ, the vast bulk of it will be assembled together in Palestine or the 
East, where the Word assures us Christ and these eagles will come, Zech. 
14:5. It only remains to say that, considering the promise to these 
translated or removed ones to participate in the gathering of the saints at 
the overthrow or fall of Antichrist (and his ‘‘ body,’’ Dan. 7:11, is 
‘* destroyed’’), it follows that such a removal must necessarily precede, by 
some interval of time, the formation of this confederacy, viz., in a time of 
peace, etc. ‘The reader may, for himself, consider what power and minis- 
trations may be included under this comparison of ‘‘ eagles,’’ and whether, 
during the interval, it may not become an exceeding precious promise to 
suffering believers. * 


1 For, aside from the Roman application (viz., that the eagles are the Roman legions, 
and the carcass or body the Jewish nation or Jerusalem, so Lightfoot, etc.), other inter- 
pretations are given, as e.g. a writer (“‘ C. C.’’ Proph. Times, vol. 4, p. 22), owing to the 
first meaning of the word rendered ‘‘ carcass’’ (viz., ‘‘a fall’’ or ‘‘ thing fallen,’’ then 
** failure,” ‘‘ fault,’’ and last, ‘‘ carcass or corpse’’) makes ‘‘ carcass’’ in Matt. 24 : ‘‘ Where 
the fall (or failure, or fallen thing) is, there shall the eagles (saints) be convoked,’’ and 
applies this “ fall’’ to that of Satan at the end, which the saints are to witness. The 
** body’ in Luke he refers to the body of Christ. Reineke (Proph. Times, vol. 3, p. 129) 
makes “ the carcass’’ in Matt. ‘‘ the corrupt ecclesiastical systems established by the 
harlot and her daughters,’’ and the eagles are the saints, etc., while ‘‘ the body’ in Luke 
is ‘‘ the Church,’’ and the eagles the saints gathered to it, etc. Another writer (Proph. 
Times, vol. 4, p. 26) interprets the eagles as representing the angels and the body Christ's 
elect. Fritzsche (Olshausen, Com., vol. 2, p. 245) interprets the eagles of believers and 
the body or carcass of Christ. Olshausen makes the eagles Christ and the angels, and 
the body corrupt Israel ; Fleck makes the body corruption, and the eagles false Christs. 
Augustine makes the body Christ (‘‘ because He died for us”), and the eagles saints 
(who “hereafter, as eagles, will be caught up to Him in the clouds’). Several 
writers (in Proph. Times) make the eagles saints, and both ‘‘ the carcass” and “‘ the 
body” to be Christ. This last interpretation, while consistently preserving both passages 
as parallel, certainly gives a harshness to it by making “‘ the carcass,’’ i. e. the slain body, 
refer to Christ, because it is against fact, the saints not being gathered to a slain body, but 
to a living Christ. Comp. Rev. 1 : 18, etc., or as Dr. Schaff (note, p. 227, Lange’s Vom.), 


_ rejecting Wordsworth’s view, savs: “A reference of carcass to the sacred body of the 


Saviour, which never saw corruption, violates every principle of good taste and pro- 
priety.” Dr. West, in his Lect. ‘‘ A Voice from Olivet,’’ makes the ‘‘ carcass” to be 
“Gentile Christendom.’’ Rey. Brown, the Evangelist, presents this view : the predic- 
tion is future ; the body or carcass being the Jewish nation, and the eagles that future 
anti-Christian power which shall assault the nation just before the open parousia of 
Jesus and His saints. Such an interpretation and application is not in conflict with the 
time and the order of events. Nast (Com. loci) makes the carcass to be “‘ the condition 
of nominal Christianity—not of the true believers—when the times of the Gentiles are 
coming to a close ;” and the eagles represent the judicial visitation of Christ. Dr. Rutter 
(Roman Catholic) in Life of Jesus, p. 415, interprets ‘‘the body’’ to be Christ, and ‘‘ the 
eagles” to be elect, and in a note says that others, as Manduit, make ‘‘ the body”’ to be 
“the soul of a reprobate,” and “ the eagles’’ to be ‘*‘ devils.” He refers the gathering to 
the time specified in 1 Thess. 4: 16. Lange’s Com., Luke 17 : 37, touches it delicately, 


322 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 1380. 


making it a proverbial expression, and simply indicative (Steir) of ‘‘ where the corruption 
of death is, there must the eagles come,’’ but on Matt. 24 : 28, ‘‘ the figure of the eagles 
will express the necessity and inevitableness of the Advent,’’ and ‘‘ the carcass must 
represent the moral corruption and decay of the world itself, and the eagles the judg- 
ment, not only in its personal but also in its physical elements and forces.” Alford 
(Com. loci) makes the carcass the whole world, the eagles the angels of vengeance, and 
the time at the Sec. Advent. Few now entertain the view of Grotius, that ‘‘ the carcass 
means those who die to themselves ; the eagles the gifts of the Holy Spirit.” Meyer 
(Com. loci) says, ‘* the carcass is a figure of the spiritually dead,’’ and the eagles ‘‘ repre- 
sent the same as is described in ch. 13: 41, that is, the angels sent out by Christ.’’ We 
have laid no stress (leaving that to the discretion of the reader) on the symbolical or 
figurative import of the eagle as presented in dictionaries and typologies, but this cer- 
tainly adds materially to our view. 

* Vide quotations from Chrysostom, Origen, Jerome, Augustine, Hilary, Luther (as _ 
e.g. “ as the eagles are gathered where the carcass is, so shall Christ’s people be gathered 
where He is”), in Proph. Times, vol. 9, p. 106 and 107, and references to others who teach 
the same, as Ambrose, Theophylact, Euthemius, Calvin, Brentius, Bullinger, Bucer, Gaul- 
ter, Beza, Pellican, Flacius, Musculus, Pardzeus, Piscator, Cocceius, Jansenius, Quesnel, 
Du Veil, Calovius, Suicer, Ravanell, Poole, Trapp, Cartwright, Pearce, Leigh, Andrews, 
Wordsworth. This list could readily be swelled to a vast extent, and we only refer to a 
few writers who have specially treated of it, as Seiss, Reineke, Bell, Chester, Brookes, 
Baxter, Ross, Purdon, Birks, Hunter, Phillips, Kelly, and others. P 

3’ The Saviour, no doubt, referred to this very translation and deliverance from incom- 
ing evil, when, after delineating the evils culminating in the vengeance of His open Com- 
ing, He said : ‘‘ When these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up your 
heads,” etc. Before the end itself, then already glorious deliverance comes. Beforee.g. 
Ps. 149 : 6-9 can be verified, there must be a previous resurrection and translation of 
those accounted worthy to purticipate in the promise. The Coming ‘‘asathief inthe _— 
night’’ is certainly not the Coming with His angels and saints in great glory and power— 


- 


so that all shall, “ every eye,” see Him—for vengeance, for the former is a secret, and the 
latter an open Coming. The Coming e.g. of Rev. 16:15, which brings a blessing to 
them that watch, is certainly different from the Coming of Rev. 19, which is to take 
vengeance upon His enemies. Some hold to one stage alone of the Advent, referring us 
to Kev. 19 as the Advent which will result in the translation promised. But, aside from 
the Coming with His saints, the entire representation is one of Coming to judgment (in 
which His saints participate). The object of the Coming is specifically stated to be, not 
to resurrect and translate the saints, but, to ‘‘ judge and make war,’’ ‘‘ to smite the 
nations,” etc., and therefore simple consistency requires a proper discrimination of the 
stages of the Second Advent and of the events respectively related to one or the other. 


Obs. 4. Other passages either directly teach such a translation or re- 
moval, or else strongly imply it as a resultant or prerequisite. Take Rey. 
14, and the order of events is in the highest degree corroborative of our 
position. Without discussing the relation that this chapter sustains to 
previous predictions, it is sufficient for our present purpose to notice that 
a time arrives Jefore the final end when a certain specified number of saints, 
viz., the 144,000 (a symbolic number?) mentioned, are separated from 
among men, forming a chosen body called ‘ the first-fruits unto God and 
to the Lamb.”’ ‘These “‘ first-fruits’’ go before the vncoming harvest, am 
interval of time (which includes (1) the proclamation of the particular 
message that God’s judgments are to be poured out, and insisting upon 
the worship of God in view of the Antichristian worship that will be re- 
quired ; (2) the downfall of Babylon, and (3) the fearfil persecution and 
martyrdom of believers) being placed between the two, at the close of which 
the harvest comes, and the dreadful vintage follows. This teaches us then 
to expect that a gathering of saints before the harvest is indeed one of the 
Divine procedures pertaining to the last things of this dispensation.’ The 
Parable of the Ten Virgins (Prop. 181) confirms this, for it instructs (aside 
from other particulars) us to anticipate at the Coming of Jesus that @ 


Prop. 130. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 323 


certain class of persons (called the Wise Virgins in contradistinction to 
another class pronounced the Foolish), living at the time of the Sec. 
Advent, shall be so fortunate, owing to preparedness, as to be received 
by Jesus Christ at His Coming, while others shall be left. The adverb of 
time, ‘* then,’’ binds this parable to the preceding context, and forces us to 
interpret it asa representation of the condition of the Church at some 
distinctive point of the Sec. Advent. Without insisting upon the explana- 
tion given by Olshausen, Alford, Stier, Seiss, etc., that the foolish virgins 
are even persons of some piety, who, neglecting to look for the Bridegroom, 
are left to endure the incoming tribulation, it is amply sufficient to say 
that the persons left are, at least, professing members of the Church, and 
that, as the announcement of the marriage (Rev. 19) precedes the over- 
throw of the Antichristian powers, those left behind must necessarily 
endure the trials incident to the arrogance, etc., of those powers. ‘Those 
going in to the marriage—living saints taken away, translated, for this 
purpose—precede the time of sore tribulation.” Passages which imply it 
relate to the promised participation of the saints in acts of judgment upon 
the living nations, to the married wife as distinguished from the barren 
woman, to the coming with the saints for purposes of salvation, etc. But 
others of a still stronger tenor are embraced in the promises that when the 
last great tribulation is to burst upon the Gentile nations, then certain 
believing ones shall escape. Thus e.g. Luke 21 : 36, “* Watch ye therefore 
and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these things 
that shall come to pass and to stand before the Son of Man ;’’ the escaping 
and being favored with nearness to Christ are united. In Rev. 3 : 10, of 
a class it is said: ‘* Because thow hast kept the word of my patience, I also 
will keep thee from the howr of temptation (or trial) which shall come upon 
the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.’’® 'The 144,000 described 
above are taken from this ‘‘ the hour of trial,’’? comp. Rev. 14:7. Itisa 
joyful fact that when the most fearful time of trial, the flood of great 
waters, comes, then God interposes in behalf of His own people and saves 
them out of it (to which even such passages as Ps. 32: 6, 7; Prov. 3 : 25, 
26; Ps. 37 : 838-40, etc., may refer), while another class are left to endure 
its terrific force and come up out of it as blood-stained martyrs, Rev. 
14: 9-13; Rev..20:4,5, ete. It is significant also that in Rev. 7 we have 
jirst a distinct, separate number of chosen ones forming the same number, 
144,000 (called Jews, because engrafted by faith and thus incorporated with 
the commonwealth), and then afterward a great multitude who come 
“out of the great tribulation,’ thus again pointing out a distinction 
existing between certain of God’s people. Such are not given without 


adequate causes, and it is well to heed them.* 


1 It is a matter of amazement how coolly and deliberately men can appropriate Script- 
ure to themselves which relates to the future. Sects, at various times, have professed to 
be those sealed ones of Rev. 14, as e.g. Joanna Southcote, who had her followers sealed, 


_ ete. Error constantly repeats itself ; and to-day we have some of the Seventh Day 


Adventists (as e.g. seen in the writings of a Mrs. White) claiming that the Adventists of 
their party constitute this number. Others adopt the same view in respect to their own 
particular sect or organization. This is simply a perversion of the Scripture promise, 
which confines it to no special sect or denomination now existing, but to a gathering out 
of God’s favored ones wherever they may be in faith and love at the time of resurrection 
and translation. The translation itself is perverted by some, as e.g. evidenced in John 
Asgill (a.D. 1700), who published a work entitled ‘‘ Argument, proving that men may be 
translated to heaven without dying,” etc., but applying it to the then present time (and 
not where the Scriptures locate it). Its absurdity was sufficiently manifested by his own 


324 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 130. 


death. In reference to the application by the Seventh Day Adventists of the 144,000 to 
themselves, this is based on a misconception of the time of the ten horns, of the Anti- 
christ, of the two-horned beast, etc. Aside from the lack of propriely in appropriating 
such a magnificent portraiture to their present condition, these ‘ first-fruits,’’ that pre- 
cede the harvest, are not left here, as they pretend to do, to deliver the angel messages, 
It is simply amazing what self-confidence and credulity can do in the way of Scripture 
application to sect in order to bring forth claims of professed purity and pre-eminence, 
On the other hand, the Plymouth Brethren hold these 144,000 to be literally Jews. 
Thus e.g. Lincoln (Zects. on Rev.) correctly makes the enumeration of chs. 7 and 14 
identicai, but overlooking the continuation of the election and the engrafting into the 
elect nation, he has these not the Church, but a portion of the Jewish race ; not the first- 
fruits of believers in the Church, but the first-fruits of the Jewish nation. Aside from 
the difficulty of reconciling this with the Scriptural idea of the election, the engrafting 
by which Gentiles become the seed of Abraham, the order of fulfilment, ete., it is suffi- 
cient now to say that two considerations alone forbid its reception : (1) He thus has a 
portion of the Jewish nation literally upon Mt. Zion, etc., before the Antichristian perse- 
cution, which is amply rebutted by the prediction of Zech. 14 ; (2) on his hypothesis it is 
impossible to reconcile the omission of the tribe of Dan, for Dan, according to the original 
promises, will likewise be restored, but in this process of engrafting which is thus 
expressed, a sufficiency and distinctiveness is presented to indicate the intimate and 
enduring relationship. Wemay add: the identity of number, the sealing and withdrawal 
just previous to the tribulation, etc., fully shows that the two descriptions relate to the 
same body. 

* For a class of advanced students, it will be well to say in this connection, that many 
deductions respecting the Bride and the time of marriage are set aside by our remarks 
under Prop. 169, obviating also objections alleged against the view which distinguishes 
too largely between ‘“‘ the first-fruits’’ and ‘‘ the harvest,’’ etc. This ‘‘ bride” here 
assumed is not the Church, the saints only being guests—guests who occupy different 
seats of honor, etc., in view of preparedness. The marriage is only consummated after 
Antichrist is overthrown ; the preliminaries antecedent are of such a nature as to consti- 
tute, in view of the preparation and the gathering of guests, the time of marriage, ete. 
See Prop. 169. 

3 Dr. Craven (Lange’s Com. loci) points out that ‘‘ It is also to be observed that the 
promise is not of preservation in trial (or testing), as was the promise to Peter, Luke © 
22 : 325; but of preservation from (ek) the hour or period of trial’’ (comp. 2 Pet. 2 : 9). 

4 The doctrine of a translation of believing ones previous to the great tribulation is 
also taught by ‘* The Cath. Apostolic Church.”” This is regarded by some (Lange’s Vom., — 
1 Thess. 4 : 13-18, doc. 7) as distinctively belonging to them, having been plainly taught 
by Irving (as in The Apoc., vol. 2, p. 1024), but the history of Millenarianism shows that 
it was held and taught by others before and after the rise of that body—it being contained 
in the doctrine of the Pre-Mill. resurrection and removal of the saints, in their partici- 
pating in judging the nations, etc. It is only since Mede’s, Bengel’s, and Irving’s time _ 
that the doctrine has been specially examined in all its details and bearings, having 
received the approval, because Scriptural, of the most able European and American 
writers, holding various denominational relationships. We have shown how e.g, it was — 
evidently held by the Thessalonians, causing their consternation (Obs. 1). Bengel 
(Gnomon, 1 Cor. 15) remarks that ‘‘ we shall not all sleep,” v. 51, “ And we shall be 
changed,”’ v. 52, ‘‘ And this mortal shall put on immortality,” v. 53, ‘‘ And this mortal shall 
have put on immortality,” v. 54, all refer to the translation, and that the two antitheses 
require it ; so that those whom corruption has seized through death, and likewise those 
who are still mortal (i.e. subject to death) are included as escaping the power of death. 
Some writers (as Brookes in Maranatha, p. 510) make 2 Thess. 2 : 2, 3 illustrative of the 
coming and gathering of the saints antecedent to the ushering in of ‘‘ the day of the 
Lord.” It certainly is in perfect harmony, and enforces this view. Some are misled by 
the expression ‘‘ day of the Lord,” as if it was equivalent to ‘* the Coming of the Lord,” 
and hence conclude that the last Antichrist will first be revealed, and that only a visible 
Coming is denoted, but a little reflection and comparison will show that they are not 
synonymous, seeing that the former is the result of the latter. Rev. Brown, the evangel- 
ist, makes those accounted worthy to escape to be in “‘ rest’? when Jesus comes in open 
Parousia, by reference to 2 Thess. 1 : 7, “‘ rest with us when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed,” 
etc. There may be a reference to this very deliverance in 1 Thess. 1 : 10, ‘‘ delivere 
us from the wrath which cometh’’ (Variorum), or *‘ our deliverer from the coming ve 
geance’ (Conybeare and Howson). ‘‘ Greybeard,’’ in his Lay Sermons, properly distin- 
guishes those stages inte “ the Lord’s Coming to meet His saints in the air, and His sub- 


Prop. 130. | THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 325 


sequent appearing with them in glory.’’ Dr. Seiss has added a good note on the subject 
in his Appendix to the edition of The Last Times, 1878, commencing p. 341 (and see his 
** Apoc.,’’ p. 229, etc.). Various articles on the stages and translation are to be found in 
_ the Old and New Series of the Proph. Times, and the different Pre-Millennial periodicals, 
Dr. Brookes has some excellent remarks on the same in his Maranatha, and numerous 
recent works refer to both, and distinguish. 


Obs. 5. This distinction in point of favor is marked by still another set 
of passages which describe the hiding of the saints when this time of 
trouble, this storm of persecution and fury bursts upon the Church and 
world. Keeping in view that these outpourings of judgments at the time 
of the end are always represented as special manifestations of God’s wrath, 
we can appreciate the principle given in the language of Zeph. 2 : 2, 3, in 
which it is promised to the meek that when ‘* the day of the Lord's anger’’ 
comes, by the seeking of righteousness and meekness, “‘ ¢¢ may be ye shall 
be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger. That this will be realized is ap- 
parent from various predictions, such as Ps, 31 : 19, 20, ** Thow shalt hide 
them in the secret of Thy presence from the pride of man ; Thou shalt keep 
them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues’’ (or, Sep., ** Thou 
wilt screen them in a tabernacle from the contradiction of tongues’’ (comp. 
also Ps. 27:55; Mal. 3 : 16-18). How this removal and hiding, which the 
Spirit states as a mark of ‘‘ great goodness,’’ 1s to be accomplished may be 
seen under the Props. following ; for at this period it will be especially 
true (2 Pet. 2 : 9) that “‘ the Lord knoweth how to deliver the godly out of 
temptation.’’ Isaiah (ch. 26 : 20, 21) prophesies that at the very time of a 
resurrection of saints, and when ‘‘ the Lord cometh’’ to ‘* punish the inhabi- 
tants of the earth for their iniquity,’’ and to cause the earth to uncover 
her ‘‘ slain,’’ then God’s people are to be protected ‘‘ until the indignation 
be overpast.’’ David (Ps. 45) portrays the exultant language that such 
translated or removed saints can well employ in view of their entire safety 
when the vast flood of evil shall shake the kingdoms of the earth. Indeed, 
there are peculiar predictions which alone stand out with clearness in the 
light of such a translation of the saints, as e.g. in Ps. 111 : 1, where it is 
said (so Clarke, Com. loci) that God shall be praised both “‘in the secret 
assembly of the upright’’ (or, as others, Lange, etc., ‘‘ select assembly,”’ 
1.e. special), and also in the congregation, i.e. the general or public, which 
is thus verified. In Ps. 94, at the time when God shall show Himself for 
“ vengeance’’ against the wicked, of some it is said, vs. 12, 13, that they 
are so guided and instructed ‘‘ that Thow mayest give him rest from the days 
of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked ’’—i.e. they shall not 
experience the days of adversity which the same Ps. informs us culminates 
into a “ gathering themselves together against the soul of the righteous and to 
condemn the innocent blood’ (comp. Rev. 14,16, and 19, etc.). From the re- 
moval of these righteous to the final overthrow of the wicked, the interval 
with the efforts of unbelief is expressively called the digging of a pit for 
the wicked, i.e. preparing the way for the fearful manifestation of ven- 
geance upon them. All such predictions, supported by the analogy taken 
from Enoch, Noah, Lot, etc., however inconclusive they might be when 
taken isolated, obtain significancy as they stand related to other Scripture. 

Compare Olshausen, Com., vol. 2, p. 253, on the escape of the righteous. The Apoc. 
_Expounded (vol. 1, p. 207, given by Seiss in The Apoc., p. 230) makes Daniel ‘‘ a type of 
those kept out of the hour of temptation. When all nations, kindreds, and people are 


required to worship the image of the plain of Dura, he is not there.”’ See an impressive 
article in Proph, Times, vol, 6, p. 79, etc., ‘‘ On the Responsibility of Christian Teachers” 


1 


326 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. — [Prop. 1380. 


(urging fidelity to revelation on these and kindred points, lest others are misled by us 
into that fearful tribulation and accuse us of having deceived them by erroneous predic- 
tions of peace, etc.). That the saints would be protected in the day of tribulation is an 
old doctrine, as the reader can verify, e.g. by reference to 4 Esdras 2 : 27, 28, and in 
Rabin. interpretations (e.g. see “ Jewish Expos. of Malachi” in Princeton Review, Ap. 1855, 
p. 324 ; remarks on ch. 3:17). Lincoln (Lects. Rev., vol. 2, p. 55) says that “ escape” 
imports salvation by passing through the trial, and instances 1 Cor. 10 : 13, where the 
ability to bear trial is ‘‘ escaping trial.” But this idea is set aside by the express declara- 
tions respecting a removal previous to the great tribulation in the order of events laid 
down. Even in Mal. 3 and 4 a certain order is preserved : (1) the making up of His 
jewels or possession previous to the day that burns as an oven ; (2) the sparing of certain 
ones declared ; the fearful day of vengeance in which the spared ones participate in a 
state of exultation. An additional strong argument might be based on the meaning of 
the word Parousia, denoting not merely a coming or approach, but an actual personal 
presence (as given e.g. often in Lange’s Com., Aiford’s Coin., New Revision of New Test., 
Diaglott, ete.), so that He is present (in the first stage) and the world refuses to recognize 
His presence, although certain events (the resurrection and translation) are indicative of 
it. (Comp. e.g. Russell's remarks in Object and Manner of Our Lord's Return, p. 51.) We 
may add: There may be an indirect reference to this very translation in passages, which 
are now uswally applied only to watching, as e.g. when Jesus says that we shall watch so 
that we may know His coming. Now as the day and the hour is unknown, this is inter- 
preted as meaning that we should be in a posture of looking and preparedness so that we 
are not taken unawares. While this is true, may not a deeper significancy attach to 1t, 
that we should be in this posture, so that we may become personally, by a happy change, 
aware of His presence ? ' 


Obs. 6. Intimations also are given that such a translation or removal of — 
the class of righteous, while unwitnessed, will de known to the nations, — 
This can well be imagined, for the sudden disappearance of men and — 
women, one here and another there, will excite general inquiry and be the 
subject of varied comment. It will inevitably lead to what the Spirit i 
describes in Ps, 83 : 3, for let these resurrected and translated ones be — 
taken by the Lord and conveyed to a place of safety (comp. Prop. 166); let 
it be partially comprehended for what purpose even this removal is effected, 
then will be fulfilled what is written, that the enemies of God not only 
confederate together, but that ‘* they take crafty counsel against Thy people, 
and consult against Thy hidden ones,’’ and this consultation 1s ‘* with one 
consent or heart.’’ The same “ hidden ones’’ are, probably, presented to 
us in Isa. 16 : 3, 4, 5 (comp. Prop. 166), in view of its connection with the — 
establishment of the Davidic throne and Kingdom, unless it be applied to — 
a portion of the Church during the tribulation who shall fly or be brought 
to the wilderness for safety (and if the latter, may not this be a hint to the — 
Church when under the last extended persecution, where safety only will | 
be found, viz., in the wilderness near Mt. Sinai, where, as Prop. 166, the 
Lord Christ and His saints will be assembled? We cannot, as yet, fully 
determine ; time must show its meaning).* The fact that the wicked shall 
know something concerning those ,hid ones, and shall take what they deem 
prudent measures (viz., to form a general confederation, etc.), is hinted at 
in passages like Ps. 17 : 7-9; Ps. 64: 2, etc., and still more plainly re- 
vealed in Ps. 143 : 7-9. The saints are ‘‘ hid in the time of troubdle,’”’ and 
‘““in the secret (place) of Thy Presence’’ (verifying the Spirit of Ps. 91), 
until the period arrives for their open manifestation in supernatural power. — 


* Some writers make the wilderness the United States, others Great Britain, others — 
even (as Claas Epp) Russia, ete. Some make it simply equivalent to concealment, or pro- 
tection, or world-renunciation, or a place of refuge, or expatriation, etc. | 


Prop. 130. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 327 


It is likely, however, from the consultation of the wicked against them, 
that while the removal is allowed it will be attributed to natural causes, or 
to a concerted movement, and that all reference to its supernatural occur- 
rence will be stoutly denied. In all probability, ‘‘ the sign of the Son of 
Man” (Matt. 24 : 30) will be something connected with this translation 
(for events belonging to one period of time are grouped together without 
giving in every particular the exact order, as e.g. Isa. 25 : 6-9, etc.). The 
sign is one thing and the open visible Coming is another, and yet being a 
sign directly pertaining to the Son of Man, it relates to Him as in some- 
thing connected with the Theocratic (see Prop. 81) ordering. Now, let 
this removal of the saints take place as described by Paul, John, ete., in 
the night, accompanied by a shout and trump (i.e. events may be denoted— 
see Obs. below) ; let the Son of Man be ‘‘ im the air’’ to receive His risen 
and translated ones, and as the night advances around the earth, so let Him 
proceed around this globe in the process of gathering-—such will be the 
accompaniments and the appearance in the sky, that, however explained 
by the world as electrical, meteorical, etc., it will constitute a sign, and a 
most impressive one, of the Son of Man. Invisible Himself, sheltered 
behind the curtains of the bright enveloping clouds, yet His Presence in 
the air may be exhibited by tokens never before witnessed. 


See Prop. 174, where this sign is noticed more at length. It may be added here that 
if the sign does not refer to a peculiar and striking manifestation in the sky itself, then 
it may relate to the resurrection, translation, and withdrawal of the saints themselves, 
such being an indication or sign of ‘‘ the Son of Man,’’ i.e. of His presence. Or it may 
(as we can only at best conjecture) denote that the assembling at Mt. Sinai (Prop. 166) 1s 
such a sign —indicative of a previous resurrection and translation by ‘‘ the Son of Man.’ 


Obs. 7. The effect that this translation will have upon the Church is 
remarkably corroborative of our position. If we turn to Rey. 14 it is 
stated that immediately after the removal of “‘ the first-fruits’’ there will be 
a most powerful renewed preaching of the Word of God, deriving its force 
from a proclamation of the now certain coming judgments of God and 
tribulation under the Antichrist. What causes such a change in the style 
of the preaching, which will result in the conversion, as parallel passages 
show, of very many, preparing them to pass through the great tribulation, 
and to suffer death rather than to worship the Beast and his image? 
Nothing less than this astonishing removal of certain chosen ones, accounted 
worthy, owing to their distinctive faith in God’s promises, Zo escape. Let 
this event occur just as it is described ; let here one and there one of the 
believing and watching be taken, and surely those who believe in God’s 
Word and are left behind will be most wonderfully affected by the event. 
_ By one sudden and startling event, coming home to the heart and directly 
appealing to the warmest affections, the prevailing spiritualizing systems 
and theories of progressive advancement and perfection will be overthrown, 
and the Millenarian doctrine, once derided and sneered at as ‘‘ carnal,”’ 
etc., will be most eagerly embraced and proclaimed. (The writer has often, 
often felt that it is specially for this period that he is laboring, when his 
work will be appreciated, etc.) The Church, then starting up with Abra- 
hamic faith will recognize its chronological position, will see what is before 
it, and, energetically infused by fear and hope, prepare itself for the 
fearful ordeal through which it must pass. And we are assured that the 
Church in this contest, overpowered as she will be, will sustain the persecu- 


328 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 130 


tion with triumphant faith, feeling convinced from the events occurring 
and the time elapsed, that the Son of Man is even already present, waiting 
for the moment of direct interference. 

Dr. Tyng, in his work He will Come, correctly represents the stages and translation. 
The latter he forcibly represents as causing for a little while a consternation in, and con- 
founding of, the world, but he overlooks the practical effect that it will have in causing 
others to receive and proclaim the truth, and even die for it. This doctrine also teaches 
us what estimate to put on the emigration theories (Proph. Times, N. S., 1875, p. 145), 
seeing that we are specially charged to await this Coming and translation wherever we 
may be, and not to listen to any appeals to go forth (as e.g. to Palestine) and await His 
Coming. It also throws light on that special ‘‘ scoffing,” etc., so characteristic of the 
time of the end. 


Obs. 8. It has been aptly remarked that the removal of righteous persons 
has been followed (ase.g. Enoch, Noah, Lot, at Jerusalem, etc.) by the out- 
pourings of God’s judgments, and the principle is taught e.g. in the sealing 
of the 144,000 (Rev. 7). A comparison of Scripture teaches that when 
this translation is experienced, ‘hen will rapidly arise that culminated head 
of Antichrist which will overwhelm the Church with terrific persecution. 
Before this event some restraining power prevents such a dreadful con- 
federation. Attention is called to this in order to correct two prevailing 
mistakes in the interpretation of 2 Thess. 2: 7%. One theory makes that 
which hinders the revelation of the Wicked One, the Man of Sin, to denote 
the Roman power (Pagan), i.e. the civil power; but this is erroneous, 
because this Antichrist will arise out of and really be the last head of this 
same Roman power (Prop. 160), fallen back to its former unchristian (e.g. 
given to idol worship), paganized condition. Another theory is, that the 
Hinderer mentioned is the Holy Spirit, and that this Spirit will be with- 
drawn, resulting in widespread wickedness, etc. ; but this again is opposed 
to fact, viz., that after ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ are taken away the Spirit re- 
mains, as is evidenced by the proclamation of the message, by the sustain- 
ing of the martyrs, and the multitude coming through the tribulation, 
The obscurity of the prediction and its conciseness is based upon some- 
thing that was at the time well known, for in the preceding verse the 
Apostle says positively, ‘‘ And now ye know what withholdeth’’ (same word 
precisely, excepting being in the neuter form, and thus referring to some- 
thing) ‘* that he might be revealed in his time.’’ 'That is, the Thessalonian 
brethren knew what this restraining influence was which then existed and 
would continue to exist down to a certain time, when this Antichrist, the 
fruit of long-continued defection, would arise during the period allotted to 
him, Rather than accept the modern views given by prophetical writers on 
this point, we would fall back to Theodoret’s opinion (Bloomfield, @. Test. 
loci), that that which hindered, restrained, prevented the culmination of 
this Antichrist is ‘‘ the decree of God’s Providence,’’ and this would, at 
least, be consistent with the grammatical construction, which, as critics 
inform us, may refer either to a thing or person in verse 7, but only to a 
thing in verse 6. The solution probably has not yet been found, and in 
place of a better (which close study and comparison may yet present) we 
suggest the following: Regarding the fact that the Thessalonians knew 
what hindered, we turn to the First Epistle, and we find in the first chapter 
(v. 4) a declaration which covers the ground, viz., in the doctrine of elec- 


tion, that too of which they had knowledge, ‘‘ Anowing, brethren beloved, — 


your election of God.’’ Let the reader consider our Props. concerning the 


| 


Prop. ‘130. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 329 


election, that God in this dispensation is calling out a definite number 
(incorporated as the seed of Abraham), who are to be associated in the 
Kingdom as rulers, etc., and then he will see that until this gathering out 
rocess has progressed up to a certain point (embracing these ‘‘ first- 
fruits’) this Divine purpose of obtaining these chosen ones allows ‘‘ the 
times of the Gentiles,’’ but restrains that fearful predicted outbreak until 
a determined number of God’s people are secured. When this is done, 
however, ¢hen, even while God’s Spirit is still willing to strive with and 


_aid the faith of men (as seen in the martyrs), human nature will be allowed 


to riot in its unbelief, and to work out its vain theory of the destiny of the 
race. Then, during a brief period, human nature will be permitted to 
exhibit its highest departure from the truth, its most bitter scorn and 
detestation of believers, its most unrelenting hostility and cruelty to the 
followers of Christ (comp. Props. 160, 161, 162, 163, 164). 


This point is the more worthy of notice, seeing that able and intelligent writers fall 
into error in this matter. Thus e.g. ‘* Greybeard,” in Lay Sermons, No. 108, totally mis- 
apprehends, when during the last tribulation, he has: ‘‘ The Holy Ghost will have left 
the earth ; the only restraining power to evil will have been taken away, 2 Thess. 2 : 7.’’ 
So Brookes (Maranatha, p. 511) makes the same deduction, and bases on it the opinion 
that the translation of the saints will produce no profound and lasting impression. Thus 
also other writers, whom we notice elsewhere, and several of the ‘‘ Believers’ assert in 
view of it that there is no ‘‘ Church’’ during this interval (viz., between the first and 
second stages of the Advent), and that this is indicated by no mention of the word 
*‘church’’ in that period. But all this is vitiated e.g. by the order laid down in Rev. 
14, (1) the first-fruits ; (2) the renewed proclamation of judgment truth ; (3) the fall of 
Babylon ; (4) the Antichristian persecution ; (5) the martyrs clinging to the truth ; (6) the 
harvest of believers after the tribulation ; (7) the vintage of wrath on the persecutors. 
Now without the sustaining power of the Spirit, the Gospel, and the means of grace dur- 
ing this interval, the number of faithful ones that come out of the tribulation could not 
be produced. 


Obs. 9. While embracing the doctrine of a Pre-Mill. translation, and of 
more than one translation, even (as e.g. in that pertaining to “‘ the first- 
fruits,’’ and that relating to the harvest), yet, with our present light and 
understanding of the Scriptures, we cannot accept of so many as given e.g. 
by Baxter (Louis Napoleon I1I., ch. 4) and others, simply on the ground 
that a more careful comparison will synchronize and thus identify the 
sameness of some of them. Whatever may be the truth in this matter, it 
can only be presented in a discussion of the order of events as embraced in 
the entire Apocalypse (a Jabor which is foreign to our present work, and 
performed by other writers), and therefore we have only availed ourselves 
of the references to such a translation, without in every instance determin- 
ing the relative order, confining ourselves, as sufficient for our purpose, to 
a twofold translation, one to precede and the other to follow (as the resur- 
rections) the great tribulation—one pertaining to ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ and 
the other to ‘‘ the harvest.’’ 


Obs. 10. Let us briefly consider the objections that can be alleged, not 
against a translation itself (for that is too plainly taught), but a Pre-Mill. 
one as presented. Some writers have incautiously made out that these 
*‘ first-fruits,’’ by being thus favored, etc., are not only a chosen body 
(which is true, and within another), but infer from it that it only com- 
poses ‘‘ the married witfe,’’ i.e. only embraces the rulers with Christ, ctc., 
thus excluding the harvest or those coming out of the tribulation. This 


330 | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 180. 


has caused serious objections, and justly too, to be urged against the view 
as thus presented, for it is a fact, whatever distinctions may exist within 
the orderings and stations of the Kingship and priesthood, that the very 
last saints of this dispensation, even those who pass through the tribula- 
tion and fall under Antichrist’s power, are distinctively promised (Rev. 
20 : 4, 6) to also reign with Jesus Christ; so that the ‘“‘ first-fruits’’ and 
the ‘‘ harvest’’ combined form that triumphant body of rulers who reign. 
Any interpretation, however plausible, which would debar the martyred 
saints, etc., under the last persecution from a direct co-heirship with the 
other saints in the Kingdom, is most certainly defective. The Scripture 
too usually presented as favoring it, viz., Ps. 45, does not apply to such a 
distinction between saints gathered during this and former dispensations 
(i.e. in the various women mentioned as related to the King), but rather 
between such saints thus gathered and the Jewish and Gentile nations, 
etc., as they shall exist (as e.g. the Jewish nation being likened to *‘a 
barren woman,’’ also again united to God, and other nations may well be 
thus represented as virgins, etc., acknowledging His reign, etc.) in the 
Millennial age. While distinctions are to be found in the body of saints, 
and while 7¢ is ¢rwe that the first saints gathered down to the re-establish- 
ment of the Kingdom in its glory enjoy a distinction Jeyond all others that 
follow, it seems unscriptural to discriminate so far as to debar those to 
whom 7s specially promised a participation in reigning gloriously with 
Christ. A degree of caution is here required in order to avoid prejudice. 
Some good thing, that we may well leave undefined, will be given to these 
‘* first-fruits,’? but the unbelieving, unguarded Church will so atone by 
its faithful witnessing, even unto death, for its past delinquency and un- 
watchfulness that it too ‘‘ inherits the Kingdom’’ with the others. Another 
objection is brought from 2 Thess. 2, viz., that the coming of Jesus and 
the destruction of Antichrist are united together, and hence forbids any 
such a previous translation. The objector, however, forgets two things: 
(1) that the Apostle only argues logically that “‘ the day of Christ’’ cannot 
come without the visible appearing and destruction of Antichrist (just as 
our argument demands), without specifying all the particulars antecedent, » 
either to this visible Advent of Christ, or this Antichrist, and (2) that the 
saints participate both in the Coming of Jesus and destruction of the 
Wicked One, neither of which are mentioned. The Apostle does not con- 
tradict timself, as is apparent, if due notice is taken that the Thessalonians 
believed ‘‘ the day of Christ”? to be already present, and his reasoning 
proceeds to show, not that saints are not to be raised and translated before 
that day (which is implied), but that before the day itself is ushered in as 
predicted, a visible Coming and the destruction of Antichrist must precede. 
Again, it is objected that the gathering of the elect by the messengers 
described Matt. 24 : 31, is a gathering of all saints after the tribulation. 
But this, while after the tribulation, does not affirm that ai/ the saints that 
ever lived are thus included, but simply refers to the elect then living at 
the period designated, and may denote, as some believe, believers in general 
scattered over the earth ; or rather, as others hold, the members of the still 
elect Jewish nation, which, as many prophecies predict, shall at this very 
time be again gathered to Palestine. Besides this, all the passages relating 
to the gatherings of this intently interesting period must be collated an 

compared, when several, without contradicting each other, will appear 
pertaining to ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ and to ‘‘ the harvest,’ to the Church and 


Prop. 130.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 331 


to the Jewish nation. Again, it is alleged that the multitude of Rey. 7 all 
came out of the great tribulation, and that this evidences that the entire 
Church of this dispensation living at the time must enter and pass through 
it. Aside from other reasons in reply, it is sufficient to direct attention to 
the 144,000 mentioned in the same chapter, a body separate from all 
others, who were sealed in order to their complete safety before the 
incoming storm. Some object on the ground that ‘‘ the shout and 
trump’’ accompanying the resurrection and translation show it to be a 
visible occurrence, seen by the world. But such forget that while there 
will be a sufficiency of manifestation to excite attention and startle the 
world, yet the shout, etc., may be like Daniel’s ‘‘ man clothed in linen’”’ 
(10 : 5-7), whose voice was ‘‘ like the voice of a multitude,’’ and yet the 
men with him, strangely affected even to quaking, ‘‘ saw not the vision ;” 
or like the voice from heaven (John 12 : 28-29), which distinctly spoke, but 
the people that ‘‘ stood by and heard it, said, that 7¢ thundered ;’’ or like 
the voice speaking to Saul, which his fearful companions heard not. The 
voice, the shout, the trump (indicative of events ushering in) is for a chosen 
class of persons, and if it is God’s good pleasure, the same may only be 
heard by them, even if others stood by, just as Stephen in the crowd only 
saw the glorious vision, or Elisha’s eyes were only opened to behold the 
horses and chariots of fire. Other objections have been so fully met in 
previous remarks, that it is unnecessary to reproduce them, unless we 
except one, owing to its practical importance. It is said that such an order 
of events, privately accomplished, is opposed to the publicity, not only of 
the Sec. Advent, but of intervening events, viz., that before such a 
Coming, resurrection, and translation transpires the partial restoration of 
the Jews, the culminated Antichrist, the gathering of the nations, etc., | 
must be first witnessed. But as Cunninghame, Cox, and many others have 
shown, this is no¢ to distinguish His visible Coming with the saints, at 
which time all these things are manifested, from that of His Coming for 
them, preparatory to the former. Several stages of the same Advent, 
leaving @ sufficient interval for the development of those things between 
them, is, as the ablest prophetical writers have asserted and proven, the 
only possible way in which to reconcile the condition attached to the Sec. 
Advent (as e.g. coming in atime of peace and coming in a time of war, 
etc.), and places it at the same time in the position given to it by the 
Spirit, viz., as something that may occur at any moment, and for which 
we are constantly to watch without looking first for the fulfilment of 
intervening things. 


\ 


Fausset (Chris. Herald, Aug. 14th, 1879) makes the time of the translation, chronolog- 
ically considered, under Rev. 16:15. -But this cannot be so, because then the saints 
would—as the preceding vials testify—have experienced the tribulation under Antichrist, 
from which, as we have shown, a large party is to escape. The explanation of Kev. 
16 : 15, in order to harmonize it with the order of Rev. 14, is as follows, being fully sus- 
tained by a comparison of Scripture : Having just referred to the gathering of the hosts | 
of Antichrist, the Spirit in v. 16 turns to another gathering which is to meet and con- 
found the one first mentioned, viz., the gathering of the saints to Mt. Sinai, where the pre- 
liminaries of the Theocratic Kingdom are inaugurated (Prop. 166). This gathering 1s, as 
abundant Scripture testifies, under the thief-like Coming of Christ, and hence as stand- 
ing related to the other gathering (that of enemies) it is also announced as a warning. It 
is not chronologically located in the order of events, but is placed there for the reason 
assigned, and properly too, because both gatherings are in opposition to each other and 
will come into terrible conflict. (Comp., for details, Prop. 163.) 


332 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 1380. 


Obs. 11. The question may be asked, Why such a distinction? The 
reply is, because such is God’s pleasure in the matter. It is not for us 
to assert with any degree of positiveness who shall thus be favored with a 
translation, and escape the great tribulation. We can only point out the 
general affirmation (as e.g. ‘‘them that honor me, I will honor,”’’ etc.) 
upon the subject, and leave each one draw his own conclusions. ‘There is 
a difference between mere salvation and the special honor, station, dignity, 
ete., that God in addition may be pleased to bestow upon certain ones. 
There were other pious ones when Enoch and Elijah were translated, and 
yet they only were favored ; and we doubt not that many who ultimately 
will be saved with great glory (because of their faithful witnessing during 
the last severe trial) will de left at this translation. While we cannot 
confine, as some do, this preference to mere belief in and watching for the 
Advent (for in connection with this stands the purity and proper develop- 
ment of Christian character, which, alas, some who thus believe and watch 
do not manifest to the extent required, or even to the degree that some 
honest and sincere disbelievers in our doctrine exhibit), yet such faith and 
watching is eminently set forth as a characteristic of those translated ones. 
Because they thus believe, showing due respect unto God’s Word, and 
permit such faith to have its practical effect in heart and life, we are 
assured that they shall thus be favored, as e.g. the general announcement 
in Mal. 2:17, which the New Test. more fully explains in some of its 
particular aspects, as in Luke 21 : 36; Matt. 24 : 36-51, etc. At the same 
time we deeply feel that without a special preparedness, devoted piety (as 
exemplified in the translated Enoch and Elijah), which evinces itself in 
opposing the torrent of worldliness and wickedness encroaching upon the 
Church, Millenarianism, however upheld and ably defended, is unable of 
itself to secure such a distinguishing benefit and honor. A personal, indi- 
vidual acceptation of the truth combined with a happy experience of its 
sanctifying influence, together with testifying in its behalf before others, 
is imperatively needed. It is not simply those who ‘‘ watch’’ that shall 
‘“escape,’’ but those, Luke 21 : 36, who *‘ watch and pray always,’’ avoid- 
ing the corrupting influences around them. The number of translated ones 
may not be very large (for the number of translated ones given as (so 
Baumgarten, etc.) types in comparison with the number of those not 
translated, and with that of the resurrected saints is small), so that Dr. 
Seiss, with whom many concur, is undoubtedly correct in saying : ‘‘ I have 
no idea that a very large portion of mankind, or even of the professing 
Church, will be thus taken. The first translation, if I may so speak, will 
embrace only the select few who watch and pray always,’’ etc. The fact 
that Enoch was the seventh from Adam may, for aught we know, be 
suggestive (as Bengel, owing to seven being a sacred number, also comp. 
Prop. 143) of the occurrence of this translation when the seventh millad 
arrives, and Enoch’s specific prediction (Jude) of the Lord’s Coming by 
those accounted worthy of translation ; while Elijah’s pertains simply to 
exalted, eminent piety, without any special reference to such testimony. 
Yet, let it be said, whatever the doctrinal position of the persons trans- 
lated, and whatever may be the personal attitude respecting the nearness of 
the Advent, etc., that one distinguishing characteristic will be exhibited 
bv all, viz., that they ‘‘ love the appearing’ of Christ (2 Tim. 4 : 8), that 
they earnestly desire it, and regard tt as the highest possible blessing, *‘ the 
blessed hope’ (Tit. 2:13). There may be also a deeper meaning than is 


PRop. 130. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. Baa 


generally assigned to the phrase ‘‘ them that look for Him’’ in Heb. 9 : 28— 
a meaning derived from an existing fact at the time of the Advent. Still 
another reason applies why this resurrection and translation of saints 
should take place at this particular crisis; this will be noticed in the 
following Props., viz., that as Christ comes to make the preliminary 
arrangements for the setting up of the Theocratic Davidic Kingdom, it is 
eminently suitable, that all the saints down to that period should be 
gathered in order to receive their instructions, to have their positions, ete., 
‘assigned, so that they can act with Him as executors in the Divine adminis- 
trations that follow. This (Prop. 166) measured by the creatures capacity 
requires time, and such time will be given to this particular purpose in the 
place predicted. Hence this distinction grows out of the Divine purpose, 
which such saints are designed to aid in executing and establishing. 


All who are watchful servants, and whom the truth leads to purity of heart and life, out 
of all denominations, shall be thus translated, but they who despise prophecy (Jer. 
23 : 33-36) shall bear their burden. We have no sympathy with that intolerable bigotry 
characteristic of Christadelphianism, which maintains that none can be saved (although 
having antagonistic parties among themselves) but themselves, thus evincing the lack of 
the greatest of all Christian graces ; or with Seventh-Day Adventism, which declares that 
unless we leave our respective denominations (called by way of emphasis ‘‘ Babylon,” 
etc.) and connect ourseives with their sect, adopting their views of the seventh day, etc., 
we cannot be saved ; or with other sects (as the Believers, the followers of Barbour, etc.) 
who, with far greater charity, still deem it necessary to increase'and multiply sectarianism 
and divisions in order to hold forth with prominence certain distinctive features which 
entitle them to realize with exclusiveness this translation. While it is sadly true that 
the existing churches lack much and come far short of their profession (which we give in 
detail e.g. Props. 174 and 177), yet it is far better to let our light shine wherever we 
happen to belong, and where it is needed, than to withdraw and increase the evils of sep- 
aration and exclusiveness. The truth, the Church of our Lord, has suffered immensely 
from such mistaken zeal and bigotry, and, as we have ourselves noticed, in the indis- 
criminate condemnation engendered by it, persons are upbraided and reprobated, by those 
under its influence, who possess to a far greater degree the mind of Christ and the graces 
of the Spirit than their opposers (as e.g. evidenced in controversy, language, spirit). 
We apprehend, and venture the assertion, that many will be saved eventually who will not 
be crowned—saved as by fire--oceupying a subordinate position (comp. Prop. 135). 
Among those who will suffer loss and even miss a translation, there may be believers in 
the Sec. Advent and advocates of its nearness, but overlooking that with a watching post- 
ure there must be connected an appropriating faith and practical obedience resulting in a 
proper development of Christian character ; they vitiate their position by degenerating 
into some sectarian peculiarities which are urged, and pressed, and promulgated with a 
fiery spirit of partisanship (unchurching and anathematizing all others) ; or by merely 
being excited through a carnal interest taken in the forecasting of future events pro- 
phetically expressed (making them to seem ‘‘ wise,” ‘‘learned,’’ and ‘‘ profound”) ; or 
by being influenced by a morbid curiosity, a Jove for the marvellous and sensational, a 
relish for mere speculation relating to the future without a practical reception of sancti- 
fying truth, causing the theoretic and historical to overshadow and crush out the practical. 
So long as a man loves the Lord Jesus, loves His appearing, we dare not, in view of 
what Paul says of love in 1 Cor. 13, condemn him, for it is specifically said : ‘‘Jf any man 
love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema, Maranatha,” 1 Cor. 16 : 22. 


Obs. 12. The reader may, for himself, estimate the greatness and value of | 
such a translation, embracing (1) exemption from death, (2) deliverance 
from a terrible incoming tribulation, (3) a special exaltation to the Presence 
of Christ, (4) the bestowal of glorification, joint rulership with the mighty 
King, ete. Richard Baxter (Works, vol. 16, p. 555) may express these 
blessings in his ardent prayer and longings that Christ, may speedily come 
in order that death might not be experienced, etc., saying : ‘‘ The thoughts 
of the Coming of the Lord are most sweet and joyful to me, so that if I 


334 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 180, 


were but sure I should live to see it, and that the trumpet should sound 
and the dead should rise, and the Lord appear, before the period of my 
age, it would be the joyfullest tidings to me in the world,’’ etc. A multi- 
tude of writers, italicizing the promises of God in Christ Jesus, delineate 
these blessings, and hold them up as worthy of consideration and con- 
templation. Happy, blessed beyond description, the man or the woman 
thus honored ! 


If it be asked why do we not have a concise statement of the facts of those stages, 
translation, and events following? the answer is found in God’s way of presenting the 
facts of the First Advent, so as not to interfere with man’s agency, so as to urge us toa 
comparison and study of His Word, etc. God is exercising our faith and hope, and even 
honor—for long ago (Prov. 25 : 2) it was said : ‘‘ It is the glory of God to conceal a thing : 
but the honor of kings is to search out a matter.’’ We fully indorse this declaration of 
Dr. Wordsworth (Ch. Herald, March 27th, 1879) when, in urging attention to ‘‘ The Com- 
ing Persecution,’’ he incidentally presents the idea (which will be largely realized in this 
translation, the signs and events following): ‘‘ It is probable that some of the most illus- 
trious evidence of the truth and inspiration of prophecy, and of its practical value for the 
guidance of the faithful, is reserved for the last days—especially for the coming conflict be- 
tween truth and error, between’the Church and the world, between Christ and Antichrist, 
and the great and glorious consummation which will follow that conflict.” 


Obs. 13. The reader, too, will for himself imagine the influence that such 
a translation must have, whenever it occurs, upon families, communities, 
churches, etc. The sudden disappearance of husband or wife, parent or 
child, sister or brother, pastor or member, etc., will be startling in the 
extreme. Such a separation ‘in that night,’* when in the bed, or the 
social gathering, or on the journey, will result in an outburst of grief, in 
a wonderful heart searching, and in arenewed, most diligent study of God’s 
Word. But only (excepting the first, e.g. grief) in those who fear God 
and desire to be obedient unto Him. We thus return to this thought, only 
to direct attention to the fact that for a number of years various propheti- 
cal writers, and quite a number of periodicals, have warned the Church 
and the world that such was the Divine procedure, and have given proper 
prominence to this order of events. This answers a twofold purpose, viz., 
it vindicates God’s mode of working, which is (in case of great events 
involving tremendous issues) to make His procedure previously known 
(Amos 3 : 7, etc.), and when it ¢hus comes to pass it not only establishes 
His truth, but serves to guide those who are willing to receive His Word 
into a proper apprehension of the same. If such an event is to occur @ is 
most reasonable to anticipate that believers in the Word, just previous to 
its occurrence, will proclaim it, so that when it has taken place others may 
recognize it at once as a part of God’s own divine and gracious ordering. 
This, then, will alleviate the grief of believers when a beloved one is thus 
suddenly taken away, because they will rejoice in their having been thus 
favored, and will s¢rive to prepare themselves and others for the coming 
struggle, that they too may be accounted worthy of a glorious reunion with 
resurrected and translated ones. 


The thief-like Coming and presence of Jesus will at once be made evident by this gather- 
ing of ‘‘ the first-fruits.”. Hence we cannot possibly receive Russell’s view (Our Lord’s 
Return, p. 62, ete.), which indorses Barbour’s (Three Worlds) position : (1) that Jesus has 
already come, is now present and is (mentally) inspecting the guests of the marriage ; (2) 
that we are already in the time of the harvest, which is now progressing, the separation be- 
tween (mental) wheat and tares going on, which will finally culminate in a bodily separa- 
tion, the wise going into the marriage and the door is shut. The theory evidences a con- 


Prop. 130.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. i515) 


fusion of ideas, and does not properly discriminate between ‘the first-fruits’’ and the 
harvest. It is based upon an erroneous application of the Antichrist and Kingdom ; 
upon an untenable interpretation of the events taking place between ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ 
and the harvest ; and upon the deductions of an inconclusive, but confidently urged, 
chronology. We show, on the other hand, that ‘‘ the first-fruits’’ necessarily precedes 
the harvest, that certain events which have not yet taken place intervene, that the exten- 
sive proclamation, martyr faith, etc., evidences that the withdrawal is recognized by the 
Church, etc. So also we cannot receive, in view of the order laid down in the 14th ch. 
of Rev., the statement contained in the Proph. Times, March, 1878, that after the transla- 
tion there will be no more tribulation of the Church (because all the pious will be taken) 
but only of the wicked, which is opposed to the proclamation and martyrdom after the 
144,000 are taken. In the same connection (p. 72) another mistake is made when the 
translation is placed after the ending of the Jewish tribulation. It precedes its close, and 
(Zech. 14) after the Jews have drunk the last bitter dregs of their cup does Jesus come 
with His saints, previously gathered to take vengeance on the Gentiles. 


Obs. 14. It is reasonable to expect that this doctrine of a translation will 
be ridiculed both before and after the occurrence of it. Indeed, the 
parallel existing in the days of Noah, just before the deluge, and that just 
before the Advent would fail in an important particular if ridicule and 
scorn were not added to the objections urged against belief in a speedy 
Advent and its inevitable results. Among these results that of the special 
honoring of some living saints by a translation without seeing death is 
already made the subject of derision and sport. The abuse of the doctrine 
by some evidently sincere but misguided persons (who confidently, against 
most express Scripture, fix the day and hour of its occurrence, and who, 
against the testimony of the Spirit, that it is not to be anticipated by a 
gathering of saints and most foolish provision of ascension robes, meet at 
the designated time to experience it) greatly tends to such levity ; just as 
if the vagaries and foolishness of men in perverting a doctrine necessarily led 
to its entire rejection—a principle so palpably erroneous that if applied to 
truth in general would leave but little for us to accept. Scoffers are to 
arise in the last days, who will express their contempt of God’s promises, 
and pronounce those, who Noah-like trust in them, to be, if not ‘‘ mad’’ or 
possessed of a ‘‘ devil,’’ at least ‘* exceedingly soft and foolish.’’ This natu- 
rally is to be expected of the world, but unfortunately some of the scoffers 
are professed believers in that Word of God, which expressly teaches a still 
fu'nre translation to come suddenly, as a snare, upon the Church and the 
world, which gives us typical, real illustrations of such translations in two 
noted cases, and which urges us constantly to look and watch for that 
which is to effect it.’ It is saddening that men cannot at least treat such 
subjects with soberness, and discuss them without sneers, ‘This is before 
the translation ; the same will be true of multitudes immediately after it. 
Acts 13 : 41 will be repeated ; and those who are arrested by its occurrence 
and take it to heart will be wnsparingly ridiculed. -Human nature will be 
true to itself, and the doctrine will be particularly detestable to it, since it 
evinces a species of favoritism—a contrast—condemnatory to its own 
Naturalistic and Humanitarian position. The Spirit predicts—and His 
Word is truth—that ridicule, sneers, etc., shall give finally place to so 
positive a dislike and hatred to.all pertaining to it that those who are left 
and are believing shall experience, not merely a wordy reviling persecu- 
tion, but the stroke of the descending, beheading sword and aze. 


1 See a well-merited rebuke given by Dr. Seiss (or one of the editors) in Proph. Times, 
vol. 4, p. 187, to such a class of scoffers in the art. ‘‘ The Deathless Rapture—A Sneer 


336 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 130, 


Answered.” A portion of the religious press pronounced the statements of Dr. Seiss in 
the eighth Lec. on the Apoc. respecting this translation, ‘“* Millenarianism run mad— 
nonsense—the gravest error—most destructive heresy’’—‘‘ a fine prospect for news 
reporters” —‘‘ the last extreme of Millenarianism,” etc. The Doctor sustains the asser- 
tions of his lecture by scripturally showing that such a removal without seeing death is 
no new thing, that God deals thus with the living at His Coming, that some will not die, 
that some will be left, and that the proximity of it is fully maintained (1) by our not 
knowing the time, hence, for aught we know, may be imminent, and (2) by the com- 
manded posture to watch, etc., lest it come unawares, etc. 


Obs. 15. To the critical student it is proper in this place to make some 
remarks on the phrase ‘‘ Time of the Hnd’”’ and ‘* Last Days.’’ ‘These 
terms have been in the past sadly appropriated, and conveniently dated 
from some period antecedent to the writer and thus represented as present ; 
under its shelter (Dan. 12 : 8-10), with the plea that ‘‘ the wise shall under- 
stand,’’ men have confidently given us predictions relating to the future, 
which, to say the least, are simply conjectures and inferences suggested by 
minds strongly impressed by the alleged fact that they were already in 
‘« the time of the end.’’? Many writers could be quoted illustrative of this, 
and several bodies of believers seem, if we are to judge by the usage of this 
phrase, to make it essential to their system. Books, tracts, sermons, 
essays are written to show, without: proof excepting an array of signs and 
the declarations of others, that we are now, and have been for some years, 
in ‘the Time of the End.’’ Over against all such deductions, the simple 
fact, as a more careful examination of the Scriptures indicate, is, that 
‘*the Time of the End”’ is still future. It is to be applied fo this interval 
between the two stages of the Advent, a period which may embrace, for 
aught we know (considering the events that are to take place in it, and 
that the last week of Daniel does not include the whole time of interval, 
but only the time when the Covenant is made with the restored Jewish 
nation, the breaking of the same, and Antichrist’s persecution of the Jews), 

‘from 35 to 75 years, more or less. 

Let the reasons for such a reference be briefly assigned. This interval 
forms ‘‘ the end’’ spoken of by Daniel, i.e. the time when the series of 
events predicted by himself should terminate ; it is the culmination of 
prophecy, relating to Antichristian powers, the Jewish nation, and the 
Messianic triumph; it is the time when the end has come and God’s 
judgments are to be poured out upon the nations, resulting in a great 
deliverance, and thus vindicating the Divine Purpose. When the first 
stage of the Advent occurs it is evidence that the end of the dispensation 
has arrived, and from the res. and translation of the believers down to the 
open Advent, we have literally ‘‘ the time of the end.”? The overlapping of 
the two dispensations by this secret Parousia, instead of proving adverse to 
our view is corroborative of it, since such in the ease of the Jewish and 
Christian is called ‘‘ the ends of the world’”’ (1 Cor. 10 : 11) by Paul. ‘The 
end itself is not an abrupt, sudden end, but embraces time or years in its 
termination. A series of gigantic events are included in the winding up of 
this dispensation of so remarkable a nature that no one with the least faith 
in the Scriptures can doubt respecting the closing period of the age. But 
to particularize still more, every one can see for himself that this ‘‘ time of 


the end (Dan. 11 : 35) follows (comp. Prop. 160) a long continued and — 


indefinite period of trial to the Church, such as the Church has experienced 
in the past. Then (Dan. 12 : 6-10) the end is associated with the restora- 


—— 


Prop. 130.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 337 


_ tion of the Jews to their own land, which is still future; with (Dan. 
12 : 13, comp. Prop. 126) the resurrection of Daniel at the first stage of 
the Advent; with ‘‘the end of these wonders’’ (v. 6), i.e. with their 
termination, when they are about to be completed ; with (v. 7) the time 
when ‘‘ these things (the wonders predicted) shall be finished,’’ i.e. shall 
approach their termination. Thus a comparison shows that the end 
commences with the resurrection of the saints, and the time of this end 
-embraces within it God’s controversy with the nations and the deliverance 
of the Jewish nation. For it seems that for purposes of salvation and 
vengeance, to manifest in an extraordinary degree the supernatural power 
of God in behalf of His people and in crushing His enemies, this interval 
between the two stages is (Dan. 8: 19) not merely “ the latter end of the 
indignation,’ but ‘‘ the appointed time of the end’’—a time specifically 
measured off by these stages, and the events connected therewith, com- 
posing the end or completion of the combined series of predictions—the 
culmination. This ‘‘ time of the end’’ includes ‘‘ the times’’ or ‘‘ days”’ 
of Dan. 12, which, as a dispassionate examination proves (comp. Prop. 173), 
are contained in this interval, and have special reference to the climax of 
Jewish tribulation and Antichristian opposition. The ‘‘ end”’ itself, or 
‘* the end of the days,” is the full completion, witnessed in the overthrow 
of Antichrist and the establishment of the Theocratic Kingdom at the 
open Parousia. In addition, at ‘‘ the time of the end”’ these prophecies 
will be ‘*‘ unsealed’? (Dan. 12 : 9), i.e. they will be completely opened or 
understood in their unity and culmination. This unsealing is still future, 
for the simple reason that whatever advancement and knowledge may have 
been obtained by study, and whatever unity of view may have been secured 
in grand outlines, no two interpreters of Daniel can be found who per- 
fectly agree with each other, in details at least. But we do know that 
between these two stages there is a complete unsealing, because the secret 
Advent with the resurrection and translation stamps at once the chrono- 
logical status, the method and application of interpretation, the proper 
reception and place for the Apocalyptic visions, etc. The messages (Rev. 
14) following the withdrawal of ‘‘ the first-fruits”’ is sufficiently indicative 
that no lack of knowledge respecting the present and future is then pre- 
vailing, but that a correct apprehension of the predicted things is wntversal 
among believers. 

St. John (1 John 2 : 18) uses the phrase ‘the last time’ declaratively 
respecting this entire Christian dispensation, because Antichristian spirit 
and principles characterize it during the whole period, while Jude (v. 18), 
connecting it with the Advent, seems to limit (comp. 2 Pet. 3 : 3) 1t more 
to the concluding period of the same. It has been observed (e.g. Faber, 
Diss. on Proph., p. 87) that the expressions ‘‘ latter days’’ or ‘‘ times,”’ 
and ‘‘ last days,’’ do not precisely denote the same period of time. While 
the former may include the latter to some extent, yet the one is significant 
of an indefinite termination of this dispensation, i.e. in contrast with the 
past history of the world or past duration ; the other is expressive of ‘‘ the 
last days’’ or ‘‘ the end,”’ or ‘‘ time of the end.’’ The chief characteristic 
of ‘‘ the latter days’ is that of superstition and apostatizing, and the main 
feature of ‘‘ the last days’? is that of blasphemous infidelity and direct 
opposition to God. ‘The one is the forerunner of the other; the one 
culminates in the other; the one, Antichristian, paves the way for the 
other, the fully developed Antichrist, who denies both Father and Son. 


338 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 1380, 


‘‘ The latter days’’ usher in ‘‘ the last days.’’ But this view can only be 
sustained by noticing that this distinction only holds good where they are 
used in prophetical sense, i.e. in a prediction relating to the future. The 
student will observe that the phrases ‘‘ latter days’’ and ‘“‘ last days’? in 
the Old Test. are the comparative and superlative of the one expression in 
the original, ‘‘ the end of days’’ (comp. Faber’s Diss. on Proph., ch. 3). 
This refers to this very time of the end and its grand resultant, as seen e.g, 
in Isa. 2:2; Mic. 4:1 (with which comp. Acts 2:16, 17), seeing that 
the Millennial Kingdom is only introduced in connection with this closing 
period. The same is noticeable in Hos. 3 : 5, where ‘‘ the latter days’’ or 
‘*the end of days’’ is united with the future restoration of the Jews and 
the Messianic reign. In these ‘‘ latter days’’ (Kzek. 38 : 16) Antichrist— 
still future—is to enter Palestine and meet his doom, which only takes 
place in this interval. The declaration (Dan. 2 : 28) that God maketh 
known ‘‘ what shall be in the latter days’’ or “‘ at the end of days,’’ does 
not simply mean futurity in general, but that God really and truly repre- 
sents to the King not merely what is ‘‘ hereafter’? (as afterward stated), 
but especially things which pertain to this culmination of events, this con- 
cluding period containing so many pregnant issues concerning Gentile 
domination, Jewish supremacy, and the Messianic reign. Indeed, a slight 
acquaintance with the predictions shows plainly that the greatest stress 
and detail is expended on this very period, to which the eye of faith and 
hope turns. ‘‘ The latter times’’ of 1 Tim. 4:1 admits of a wider scope, 
and indicates, as the context and warning shows, that the spirit to be 
developed in them is one gradually formed and extending itself, becoming 
more and more intensive, through a series of times. ‘The phrase ‘‘ these 
last times,’’ in 1 Pet. 1 : 20, if not used declaratively, then refers (as is also 
true of ‘‘ the last days’? in Heb. 1 : 1, 2) to the fact that Jesus, the Mes- 
siah, was manifested during the closing period of the Mosaic economy, 
which removal was signally verified by the events befalling the nation and 
capital. However any of these phrases may be employed in a general 
sense, it is also true, as a careful comparison of the same evidences, that 
the Spirit employs them to express the closing period of this dispensation, 
ushering in the interval between the two stages, and then specifically the 
interval itself, with its result. 


The reader will see that this consideration alone utterly vitiates an immense amount 
of prophetical interpretation and application, and the self-confident exaltation, as spe- 
cially called witnesses, of various classes. Some systems are so wedded to the phrase as 
fundamental to their conclusions, that it is impossible to yield it up without at the same 
time giving up their respective theories of the order of events. ‘The phrase is applied to 
any period that happens to fit into some favorite chronological period or its close ; and 
its beginning, duration, and termination varies with the view entertained concerning 
dates. Various commentaries, Lange, Barnes, Alford, Olshausen, etc., give interesting 
comments concerning these phrases, but the chronological application can only be found 
by a careful comparison of the prophecies, and that we are forced to locate, not in the 
past or the present, but in the future—in the interval between the two stages, And, as 
already intimated, we dare not, owing to the silence of the Scriptures on the subject, 
express its exact duration. We cannot limit it to seven years (i.e. the interval) as some 
do, because those seven years are applicable to a special time, relating to the Jews and 
Antichrist, and do not cover the entire interval, as seen e.g. in Mic. 7 : 15, etc., and in the 
events pertaining to the period which cannot, without undue violence (as e.g. the Jews 
dwelling in unwalled villages safely and prosperously when Antichrist comes upon them, 
etc.), be crowded into so small a space of time. In reference to the mighty increase of 
knowledge predicted of this period, it is sufficient to say that the gigantic events then 
taking place, owing to the first stage of the Advent, the resurrection and translation of the 


Prop. 1380. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 339 


saints will give the believer such a clear and decisive understanding of the prophecies, its 
chronology and the events to be anticipated, that then students of prophecy will see eye 
to eye, and encourage each other out of the fully comprehended Word of God. (On the 
phrases, comp. e.g. Dr. Braune, Lange’s Com. 1 John, p. 72, sqq., and commentators 
generally on the same as used by Daniel, Isaiah, Micah, Paul, Luke, Peter, and John. 
The order of events during this ‘‘ time of the end,’’ as well as *‘ the end” or *‘ the end 
of the days,” will be given under such Props. as 160-163, 166, etc.) 


340 THE TIEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 131. 


Proposition 131. This Kingdom embraces the visible reign of 
Jesus, the Christ, here on earth. 


Compare Props. 81, 82, 83. The idea of a Theocracy as involved 
in the Theocratic-Davidic arrangement, God ruling in and through 
David’s Son ; the covenant and the promises based on it relating to 
David's throne and Kingdom (Props. 49, 111, 114, 116, 117, 122); 
in brief, the entire analogy of prediction demands a visible reign. 


Obs. 1. So distinctly is this taught that no Jew, no Christian believer, 
no one who read the Scriptures doubted this, wvti the Alexandrian system 
evolved a series of doctrines, under the notion of exalting the truth and 
the Son, in which the throne promised to David’s Son was transformed into 
a throne in the third heaven. What influence the heathen mythology had 
at first in shaping and urging such views cannot be fully determined, but 
that it exerted some is self-evident in the similarity of views on various 
points, as witnessed e.g. in the introduction of Platonic ideas and doc- 
trines. ccl. His., His. of Religions, Treatises on Dog. Theol. and Sys. 
Diy., etc., clearly indicate not only the change, but also the motives which 
led to it. When the change, however, was once made from the ancient 
simplicity, it rapidly intrenched itself in the Church as more in accord with 
the rising Papacy and an alleged advanced improvement. 


Having abundantly presented the Jewish and early Church view—having already 
shown that the doctrine of such a visible reign was universally received by, and perpetu- 
ated in, the churches established under apostolic authority—it is not requisite to repeat 
our statements and quotations. Even the heathen (Kurtz, Sac. His., p. 273) entertained 
the belief that some great monarch thus reigning would bring back the golden age. The 
Apocryphal books (Stuart’s Com. Rev. Ap.) largely contain it. The Sybils (Stuart’s 
Com. Rev. Ap.) refer to it as an undoubted hope, thus indicating how widespread was the 
opinion. It is to be regretted that spiritualizing and unbelief have, in a great measure, 
rooted out this eminently Scriptural truth—the former, either by substituting a spiritual 
Coming and reign or by locating the same in the past or present ; the latter by deliber- 
ately rejecting it, as e.g. some Rationalistic Jews who tell us that the only Messiah they 
look for is ‘* political emancipation.” But such a substitution and rejection (1) ignores 
the plain Scriptural language, (2) the covenanted and historical connection, (3) the fact of a 
continuous faith introduced into the Christian Church through the return of a once dead, 
crucified Messiah, etc. The student will observe the following particulars : (1) The 
Jewish and ancient expectations, as instanced e.g. Barnes Com. on Matt. 2 : 2; (2) this 
expectation based on the covenanted restoration of the Theocratic rule in the person of 
David's Son ; (3) this confirmed by the plain grammatical sense of prediction and promise ; 
(4) the opinion of the disciples, Acts 1:6 who preached the Kingdom ; (5) the language 
of the apostles and their labors, instead of removing the view only increased it, as evi- 
denced in the primitive belief ; (6) this continuity required by the general analogy of the 
Record, the facts as they existed, and the restoration of the identical Theocratic ordering 
overthrown ; (7) the postponement of the personal reign to Sec. Advent, instead of vitiating 
a fulfilment, only teaches.us the more forcibly how it will be realized. Knapp (Ch. Theol.) 
and others admit that such a personal visible reign was firmly believed in until the day 
of Pentecost, but that after that period a spiritual reign was only taught. This, however, 
makes (1) the very preachers of the Kingdom ignorant and misleading teachers ; (2) the 


f 


| 
> 


6 


eoP. 131. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 341 


grammatical sense of covenant and prophecy to be discarded, without any express revela- 
tion ; (3) Jesus Himself to conceal the truth and leave His disciples in gross error ; 
(4) God to employ a sense (i.e. grammatical) which is not intended to be fulfilled, thus 
making Him chargeable with misleading ; (5) and that the apostles, if they were led to 
change their views (which is inferred and remains unproven), were utterly unable to 
proclaim such a change among the churches established by them as to influence to belief 
in the same. 


Obs. 2. Having in previous Propositions shown with sufficient distinct- 
ness that David’s Son, Jesus in His humanity, must, if the prophecies are 
fulfilled, appear in a visible reign ; that He does thus manifest Himself to 
the sight of all, it is unnecessary (as coming Propositions will materially 
add reasons for our doctrine to those already given) to enter into a detailed 
argument, since it is nowhere asserted that the visibility thus exhibited 
shall ever be withdrawn, and since the denial of such a visible reign is one 
of pure inference. No one, that we are aware of, has ever yet presented a 
passage of Scripture to prove the invisibility of the reign in the future. It 
is wrongfully inferred that the Divine Sovereignty (Props. 79 and 80) 
embraces this Kingdom, and upon this inference alone is based the opposi- 
tion to our view, thus overlooking that this specially predicted Theocratic 
reign on David’s throne is promised to ‘‘ the Son of Man,’’ see Prop. 81. 
Seeing the foundation of the denial of our doctrine, which has been 
examined in detail and refuted, it is only requisite to notice the peculiar 
ideas which originate from a forgetting or ignoring of this covenanted 
Kingdom.’ ‘The following illustrations will suffice. 


1 The fact of a visible return (if admitted) itself indicates the purpose of a visible 
reign, for the visible Advent is undoubtedly intended for establishing and administering 
His Kingdom. Why thus appear in visible glory, if not, as visibly present, to enter upon 
His covenanted, oath-bound Theocratic Kingdom? Why then—if a spiritual presence 
and reign is alone intended—is “‘ the appearing and Kingdom” linked together? Why is 
the visible appearance of Jesus something directly asserted, as e.g. in the passages relat- 
ing to ‘‘ the Son of Man’’ (the glorified Man) and ‘‘the Son of David ” (glorified) indica- 
tive of a then present human personality? Why is it declared as something that must 
necessarily exist, if the Scriptures are to be fulfilled, as e.g. in John 1:51: “ Ye shall 
see” (at that time) ‘‘the heaven open and the angels of God ascending and descending 
upon the Son of Man’’? Fausset (Com. Dan. 7:13) justly observes: “‘‘ Son of Man’ 
expresses His visible state, formerly in His humiliation, hereafter in His exaltation.” A. 
little reflection ougbt to convince us that if His stay on earth at the First Advent as Som 
of Man included His personal, visible presence, so precisely at the Second Advent and stay 
on earth must the visible presence and reign be embraced because He then also comes and 
reigns as the Son of Man and Son of David. This is a sufficient answer to Dr. Keith’s 
_ Objection (Har. of Prophecy, p. 28), who admits a visible Coming, but rejects a visible 
‘Yreign (without proof, saving his own assertion). 


Obs. 3. To indicate how persons in their eagerness to deny a visible, 
personal reign on earth of Christ allow themselves to use unwarranted 
language (even to deny the personal return to the earth), language which 
they themselves contradict, we refer e.g. to Barnes, Com. on 1 Thess. 
4: 16, where in his remarks he says: ‘‘ There is no intimation here of ‘a 
personal reign’ of Christ upon earth. Indeed, there is no evidence that He 
will return to the earth at all,’ and then he proceeds to place Christ, the 
saints, the wicked, the living, and the dead in “‘ the regions of the ar.” 
This sounds very much like one of the old monkish legends, and is un- 
worthy of so ablea man. We need not in reply direct attention to Zech. 
14 : 4, where it is said that Christ’s feet shall touch the Mt. of Olives, etc., 


342 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 181. 
for his own commentary contains an abundant refutation of his words. 
Thus e.g. in his Com. on Acts 3 : 21, he says: ‘‘ Until; this word implies _ 
that He should then return to the earth ;’’ and then to guard his theory. 
after such an admission adds: ‘‘ but it does not imply that He would not 
again ascend to heaven.’ Precisely so, and it does not imply that He will, 
after His return, leaye again. This is added to the Bible by our opponents, 
because the Scriptures close with the personal Advent, His dwelling with 
man, etc., and leave Jesus the Christ here on the earth. Neither Barnes nor 
any other writer has been able to adduce a single passage to support their 
theory of Christ’s Sec. Advent and immediate return to heaven. Yea, 
more than this, Barnes and others like him, forgetting their objections to 
our doctrine, do, when adverting to the renewed earth, admit that. Christ 
may personally be present, as e.g. Barnes, Com. on Rey., ch. 21 : 3, “It 
is not said that this would be on the earth, although that may be, for itis — 
possible that the earth, as well as other worlds, may yet become the abode of 
the Redeemed,’’ comp. hisjremarks on chs. 21 and 22, and 2 Pet. 3 : 13, 
etc., which, in his usual style, may denote this or that, or may not denote 
it. The concessions, such as they are, unwillingly forced from him, are all 
that are required to prove a looseness and vagueness very different from the 
consistent, logical interpretation of the early Church. 


We turn from such vacillating and contradictory statements to others who express 
this visibility as the early Church taught. Thus, e.g. Dr. Increase Mather (Pres. of Har- 
vard Uniy.), in his Mys. of Israel’s Salvation, pointedly says : ‘‘ Christ did never actually 
deny His having such a visible glorious Kingdom upon earth as that which His disciples 
looked for ; only He corrected their error as to the time of this Kingdom’s appearing. 
Christ did not say to them that there should never be any such restoration of the King- 
dom to Israel as their thoughts were running upon ; only He telleth them that the times 
and seasons were not for them to know; thereby acknowledging that sucha Kingdom 
should indeed be as they did, from the holy prophets, expect. Herein was their error, 
not in expecting a glorious appearing of the Kingdom of God, but in that they made 4 
account that this would be immediately.’’ And in his Dis. on Faith he remarks, when the ll 
seventh trumpet sounds: ‘‘ Then will his visible Kingdom appear in the greatest glory; _ 
when, also, there will be a personal reign and residence of Christ in this lower world.”’ ; 


Obs, 4. In the discussion of this personal return and reign it is sadden- 
ing to find good persons placing themselves on the judgment seat, and 
dogmatically deciding what it is possible or impossible for God to perform. 
This characteristic is even exhibited in the title-page of some books, as e.g. 
we read: ‘‘ The personal reign of Christ during the Millennium proved fo 
be wmpossible, by James C. L. Carson.” ‘This title-page is sufficiently in- 
dicative of the spirit of the work, and, we doubt not, if the writer had lived 
previous to the First Advent, he could with equal propriety, greater force, — 
and with many of the same arguments, have proved zt impossible for the Son 
of God to come, as He did, in humiliation, suffering, and death. The fact 
is, that the leading objection urged against our doctrine, viz., that it is a 
lowering, etc., of the majesty of Christ, is precisely the same urged by the 
ancient Celsus against the First Advent of Jesus, viz., that it could not be 
credited that a divine Being should assume humanity, suffer, etc., because 
all this would be a virtual degradation. The old apologists replied that the 
work He performed, the precious characteristics manifested, the results 
that followed, etc.—these exalted and glorified such an Advent. So when 
we are attacked by the same unbelieving argument, fortified by the vivid 
and glorious predictions, believing in the blessed design and results of this 


ROP. 131. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 343 


reign, we point to the faithful sayings of God and their fulfilment, thus 
simply accepting of the Divine utterances without attempting to alter them 
or to apologize in their behalf. Precisely the same objection, in another 
form, is levelled by infidels against the Incarnation and Life of Jesus 
Christ, on the ground that such a Creator and Lord of the universe— 
including unnumbered worlds—could not possibly degrade Himself to 
make this, so small a planet, the scene of His special manifestations, etc. 
It is well known how our opponents meet such an objection, but the iden- 
tical reasoning thus produced by them favors our own view, and is fatal to 
their objections against us (comp. Props. 203 and 204). 

The reader need not be advised that we have many learned men, professed critics, 
who speak of this reign of Christ as ‘‘ a Messianic fiction”’ or ‘‘ a Christianized Messianic 
expectation,’’ admirably adapted to sustain the faith of the Primitive Church, but utterly 
unworthy of serious reception in this the more enlightened age of the world. We need 
not be surprised, therefore, that a writer (Westm. Review, Oct., 1861, art. 5) declares that 
the Apoc. ‘‘ proclaims to all ages the intense reality, the frenzied fanaticism, the splendid 
superstition and Berserker transport of our great dreamer of this glorious vision, the St. 
John of Patmos, the author of the Ch. Apocalypse.”’ 


Obs. 5. It becomes painful to notice, in the objections levelled against 
us, the serious and unfounded change of ‘‘ carnal,’’ ‘‘ fleshly,”’ etc. Hav- 
ing already warned brethren how careful they ought to be in the use of 
such phraseology in designating the personal reign of Christ, lest they be 
jinally found guilty of accusing God’s arrangements, the Divine Purpose 
itself, of carnality, attention may be briefly called to the manner in which 
this is done. Most excellent writers, such as Rev. Philip (Devot. Guides, 
vol. 2, p. 287), as well as a host of inferior ones, speak of it as ‘‘ carnal 
and vulgar,’’ under the assumption of superior piety, humility, sanctity, 
and honoring of Christ, and claim that, under the influence of love, etc., 
they wish for no such reign, but only a spiritual reign, etc. Without 
detracting from these brethren, or calling their honesty or piety into 
question, it may be well to examine this assumption, which is weil calcu- 
lated to beguile and mislead the inquiring. It may be in place to ask what 
piety, humility, etc., includes. Does it consist im rejecting holy cove- 
nanted promises, 12 denying to Christ what the Spirit ascribes to Him? 
Without attempting to institute a comparison, we may point to that long 
line of eminent worthies, whose praise is in the churches, who reverently 
and humbly receive the Divine Record on the subject just as we do, and 
exhibited in their lives and deaths as true piety, devotedness (many of 
them martyrs for the truth) as any of their opponents, and in view of all 
this, ought such a plea to be instituted? It is simply an evasion of argu- 
ment, and, if employed by any one, is a sure indication of weakness. The 
question between us is not the persoral piety, etc. of the adherents of one 
or another theory or doctrine (for as we see in all denominations, the Spirit 
of God can, notwithstanding error more or less entertained, produce His 
fruits in various classes on the common ground of faith in Jesus), but it 
consists 72 an appeal to the Word of God to ascertain what the Spirit has 
recorded. Hence all such reasoning is not only irrevelant but painful to a 
man of candor.! This subject will be continued under Prop. 177, so that, 
for the present, it may be suggested that if the Mull. descriptions are 
verified as they read ; if the personal presence of Christ and His associated 
rulers is vouchsafed ; if the reign is not merely an external civil and re- 
ligious one, but includes righteousness, wisdom, love, etc., in all their 


344 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 131. 


aspects ; if the design of it is to fill the earth with God’s glory, ete., then 
the charge of carnality fails, for the reign and Kingdom is materially 
different from that exhibited in the efforts of Gentile domination. 

1 Intense bigotry sometimes also appears under the guise of piety, and comparatively 
few persons have escaped its smooth, velvety vindictiveness. ‘To prostitute the profes- 
sion of piety either to hide our own weakness or condemn others, is undoubtedly unwor- 
thy of a believer. But in view of some persons being influenced by this feature, aided 
by the plea that the doctrine of the personal Coming is of no practical value, it may be 
well for such to notice that our views, if properly entertained, have a decided practical 
value, and tend to develop piety, as seen, e.g. in urging obedience, 1 John 2 : 28 ; holi- 
ness, 1 John 3:3; good works, Matt. 16:27; Rev. 22:12; patience, James 5:7, 8; 
Heb. 10 : 36, 37 ; sobriety, 1 Pet. 1 : 16; temperance, Phil. 4 :5 ; heavenly-mindedness, 
Phil. 3 : 20, 21 ; watchfulness, Luke 12 : 35-37 ; mortification of sin, Col. 3 : 4, 5; godly 
living, Tit. 2 :11-13; brotherly love, 1 Thess. 3 : 13; exhortation to sinners, Acts 
3 : 19-22, ete. (given in detail in the Christian Intelligencer, 1864). Here, indeed, is practi- 
cal religion urged by the motive of the Coming of Jesus Christ, a motive so distasteful to 
those who profess to make so much of practical religion. Surely, God does not mistake 
when He presents a motive before us! The reader will compare Prop. 183. 


Obs. 6. Briefly, the feeble efforts at presenting proof against us drawn 
from Scripture may be dismissed with a few words. Thus e.g, Ralston 
(On the Apoc., p. 164 and 165) gives two reasons for rejecting the personal 
reign of Christ. The first is, that we walk by faith and not by sight (2 
Cor. 5:7), and the Apostle said, 2 Cor. 5 : 16, ‘‘ Yea, though we have 
known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more.’’ 
But if we are to understand the passage in the line intimated, then it 
proves too much, and would make out that there will be no Sec, Advent, 
and that the angels and the Apostles were mistaken in their announce- 
ments. To press the passage in this direction is far worse than despised 
‘‘literalism.”’ The second is, that the Saviour is at God’s right hand 
‘* forever,’ and will not interfere with the work of the Spirit in applying 
the atonement, quoting John 16 : 7-11; Heb. 10 : 12, 13; 1 Cor. 15 : 24 
26; Acts 2:34, 35; Acts 3:21. To this we reply—(1) by comparing 
Scripture with Scripture we ascertain the Spirit’s meaning of this ‘ for- 
ever ;’ (2) if thus unduly pressed, it is hostile to the Sec. Advent itself ; 
(3) the Scriptures quoted do not sustain his theory, hmiting the stay 
until Wis return ; (4) and the work of the Spirit is not limited but in- 
creased by this Personal Coming and reign. Dr. Brown, Christ’s Sec. 
Coming, ch. 5, introduces the same, and urges that our view calls for 
another dispensation. Hxactly so, as we shall show (Props. 137, 138, 140, 
167, etc.) farther on, for if the Theocratic-Davidic throne and Kingdom 
are re-established as predicted, if the Abrahamic-Davidic Covenant is ever 
fulfilled as written, there must be, in the very nature of the case, a new 
dispensation or ordering of things. The rest of the objections presented 
by Brown are met under various Propositions, so that they need no mention 
here. One of the most recent writers, Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 467, ete.) 
gives the following reasons against it: 1. Because it is not mentioned in 
Rey. 20 : 1-6. Reply: If it had been specifically mentioned, such men- 
tion, just as that of the resurrection, would have met with the same treat- 
ment of spiritualistic interpretation as the preceding immediate context 
(ch. 19) of the Advent did at his hands. But, it is stated in the promise of 
the reign of Christ and His saints, for the reign evidently is to be under- 
stood of the same f¢hat is specially promised to and predicted of Jesus 
as David’s Son, Therefore, to ascertain what that reign is, a com- 


- a 


Prop. 131.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 345 


parison of prophecy and covenant is necessary, and the question can only 
be decided in the light thus afforded. Thus e.g. a comparison of Cove- 
nant, Zech. 14, Dan. 7, Isa. 25, and Rev. 20 : 1-6, is alone sufficient to 
decide the kind of reign intended. Whoever can spiritualize Zech. 14 
away will, of course, find Rev. 20:1-6 undecisive. 2. The Advent of 
Christ, Rev. 19, is an ideal representation—a visionary spectacle, repre- 
senting a certain agency, etc. Suppose it is symbolic, which we grant, the 
question still returns, Whom does it represent—ideal personages or agencies, 
or real personages or agencies? The vision of the beast, prophet, etc., 
represents real actors, etc.—this he admits. So this vision of Christ and 
of His saints must also; this, too, he is willing to concede to a certain 
extent, ‘viz., that it is illustrative of the agency of the Church and of 
Christ’s agency invisibly through the Church, claiming that the horse, 
attendants, splendor, sharp sword is indicative of the ideal. He therefore 
mixes up in confusion the ideal and the real, and entirely overlooks the 
main, leading fact that it is a vision of an Advent, a Coming from heaven. 
Under this vision, like that of the other visions, a real, actual occurrence is 
represented, and that is the Coming of an irresistible, conquering Christ, 
and with Him the Coming of the saints. This is the simple construction 
put upon the passage by the early Church, and it is one that must com- 
mend itself to the reflecting mind. For, how comes it that one portion of 
the vision, under the spiritualistic interpretation, viz., that of the armies 
of heaven, is made to refer 22s76ly to the saints or Church, and the chief 
personage in the vision is made only to appear invisibly? By what rule of 
interpretation is one party, as the beast, and another party, as the Church, 
made to be present visibly, and the third party, spoken of in the same 
— connection, without the least intimation of a change of condition, etc., is 
made to appear an actor invisibly ? The answer is, solely to save a theory 
from a fatal objection. 3. That such a personal Coming would assume 
‘“an incongruous mixture of the two states of humiliation and glory.” 
Reply : To make out such a mixture he presumes to judge what is right 
and proper for the Lord to do, overlooking both that this Advent in no 
shape or form intimates humilhation, dut triwmph, exaltation, and glory ; 
and that he himself previously spoke of the Mill. age in the most elevated 
terms of eulogy. It is simply presumptuous for believers to pen a sentence 
like the following : ‘‘ When Jesus entered on His state of glory He could no 
longer dwell on earth and make Himself visible to men.’’ Why not? Per- 
haps Fairbairn knows, or has heard the reason of His absence to be that He 
awaits the period of His manifestation, a work having in the mean time to 
be accomplished, and that when He comes this work will be perfected, ete. 
The objection is based on the same noticed, Obs. 2 and 3, above. The 
admission, however, that he makes, as we will prove hereafter, is alone 
sufficient to overthrow his theory, viz., that Christ will come ‘* only when 
He comes to make all things new, and stamps them with the perfection of His 
Divine work, then will the world be prepared as the house of the glory of the 
Lord.’’ As our argument all along shows, we also hold that when Christ 
comes the renewing, transforming, recreating power lodged in Him will be 
exhibited, and logically—without calling into question a single passage In 
its naked, plain, grammatical meaning—prove that this will be witnessed_77 
the Millennium, seeing also that nothing short of this power can possibly 
affect it. 4. Fairbairn’s next objection is, that the acts specially associated 
with the Sec. Advent belong to an age subsequent to the Millennium. 


346 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 131. 


Among these he specifies the general resurrection, the final judgment, 
and the Bride’s marriage with the Lamb. But this remains wnproven, 
and he asswmes them to be thus future. See e.g. Props. 120, 121, 132, 
133, 134, 137, 140, etc., for our scriptural evidence to the contrary. ‘The 
reference to the Bride’s marriage will be answered in Props. 169, 150, 146, 
etc. But we may well put against Fairbairn’s wewarranted postponement 
for one thousand years of the Marriage announced in Rey. 19, the simple 
Pre-Millennial announcement of the Spirit, Rev. 19 : 7, ‘‘ Let us be glad 
and rejoice, and give honor to Him ; for the marriage of the Lamb.is come.”’ 
This to us is authoritative, and we reverently receive it as crushing to all 
such theorizing built on a specious spiritualizing of Scripture. Our 
reasons, as the reader must have observed, lie deeper than mere inferences 
from isolated passages, or mere deductions from a portion of Scripture 
stripped of its grammatical meaning ; they are founded in the solemnly, 
oath-attested Covenant, in the plain, grammatical meaning of the Word, in 
the general analogy of the Scriptures, and in the accredited faith of the 
apostolic churches. 


The objections urged have only force when a single passage is considered isolated 
and pressed to the exclusion of others explanatory of order, time, etc. They do not suffi- 
ciently discriminate between the work that Jesus now performs and that which is attrib- 
uted to Him at His Coming. They also forget that they themselves admit that when 
Jesus comes His enemies will be judged and overcome ; that He now exercises forbear- 
ance and mercy, which shall give place to wrath ; that such an overcoming and exhibition 
of vengeance is associated with a Pre-Mill. Coming ; that even when He comes, such is 
His union with the Father, ‘‘ the right hand of power” ever pertains to Him ; that in 
thus Coming He does not forsake, as God, the Divine Sovereignty lodged in Him, ete. 
Such admissions and approximations certainly should largely conciliate objectors. Our 
whole argument indicates that when David’s Son, as the Son cf Man, comes, God Him- 
self in and through Him condescends to rule in the determined Theocratic manner ; but 
this does not interfere with the Divine Sovereignty (which Luther meant when he said : 
‘* The right hand of God is everywhere,’’ and Dr. Seiss denotes when affirming : ‘‘ The 
Son of Man is as much at the right hand of God in Coming to judge the world,” etc.). 
In this discussion it is highly important to observe the connection that one passage sus- 
tains to others, Thus, e.g. Heb. 1:8 is sometimes quoted as if in opposition to our 
views, but this is incorrectly done. This application of Ps. 45 : 6, 7 to the Messiah indi- 
cates how the entire Psalm is to be taken, and which, as will be shown hereafter, relates 
to the future, when “ thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things,” etc. (comp. Rev. 
19, etc.). Besides this, in the very same epistle, ch. 2 : 5-9, the dominion is not yet 
given to David’s Son (but will be. Comp, Props. 81, 82, 83, 84), thus showing us not to 
press one passage to the exclusion of others. 


Obs. 7. Some (esteemed brethren) who frankly admit and earnestly 
advocate the Pre-Millennial Personal Advent, still express themselves 
timidly, illogically, and unscripturally in reference to the personal reign of 
Christ here on the earth. Some few advocating, after HisSec. Advent, His 
withdrawal to the third heaven, from whence He reigns (some stating that 
He may occasionally visit the earth and appear to men) ; others have a 
withdrawal into the air or upper regions, or into the New Jerusalem, also 
located in the air or above the earth. This is done by some under a mis- 
apprehension of the Covenant, and to whom the Kingdom is specially 
promised, and with the idea of honoring the God in Christ ; while others 
do it under the supposition that such a view will make our doctrine more 
palatable to others—that such a concession is harmless and will induce 
others the more readily to embrace a Pre-Mill. Coming. But allow us here 
to enter our earnest, solemn protest against all such diluting processes which 


PRop. 131.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 347 


only weaken our doctrine ; all such adulteration of truth to render it more 
acceptable to others, which only are hailed as evidences of weakness and 
illogical connection. ‘This subject is too sacred, too precious, too intimate- 
ly related fo the honor of Christ to be either lightly esteemed or made the 
sport of mere conjecture. Hvery position assigned to Jesus in this King- 
dom ought to have a ‘‘ thus saith the Lord” for its support, and not the 
play of human fancy about the propriety of this and that spoken concern- 
ing it. We esteem this continued personal presence of Christ the crowning 
glory of our system, an essential element of its strength. If the reader has 
carefully noticed the Covenant promises over which we have passed he 
must have arrived at the conclusion that, 77 the grammatical meaning is 
retained, the promises of God require that the reign of Christ and of His 
saints should be a continued visible one. Bickersteth and many writers 
assign, as reasons for our belief, passages of Scripture which, if ever ful- 
filled, demand such a personal presence. ‘These indeed apply forcibly, but 
with the Apostolic Fathers we ground our belief even on, if possible, a 
_surer, stronger foundation (because plainer), when we say that the utter- 
ances of the Covenant are all based on the idea of a personal presence. The 
central point of the Davidic Covenant is this : that Christ, as David’s Son, 
the promised seed, shall reign on David’s throne and in David’s Kingdom ; 
and therefore the very language on the face of it conveys the important 
notion, that in consequence of this, He, as David’s Son and Lord, must be 
and 1s visibly present. Such a presence is even taken for granted, is 
assumed as a self-evident fact, needing no special demonstration. For 
how else is Abraham’s seed to inherit the land, or David’s seed to inherit 
his throne? To transfer David’s throne or Christ’s inheritance to the air 
or to the third heaven is simply to make the Covenant and promises nell 
and void, seeing that that inheritance, throne, and Kingdom is here on the 
earth, and not in the air or the third heaven. And when the Bible repre- 
sents this Inheritor and King to come to this earth to claim His cove- 
nanted right, and leaves Him here in possession of it, that man certainly 
takes a@ great liberty who places David’s Son elsewhere than in His inheri- 
tance and Kingdom. No one, that we have thus far read, pretends even 
to give a single passage to prove such a return, but simply infers it from 
considerations of his own. How could such a return to heaven, or with- 
drawal from the earth, possibly be a fulfilment of the Covenant to David 
that His Son should reign on His throne forever? And would this fulfil 
the Prophets, who, with one voice, declare that David’s Son shall reign 
gloriously in Jerusalem, the seat of David’s throne, in the midst of the 
Jewish nation, over the nations of the earth? No! we dare not thus 
neutralize the precious promises of God. This perversion of Covenant and 
promise arises from not clearly apprehending what Kingdom is promised 
to Jesus as Son of Man, as David’s Son, and that the humanity of Jesus is 
to sustain this Kingship, the Divine being united with Him in this The- 
ocratic relationship (see Props. 81, 82, 83, 200, etc.) he Divine in 
Christ, whatever it may perform in the exercise of Divine Sovereignty in 
the universe, is associated with ‘‘ the man ordained’ to exhibit. a perfect, 
visible Theocratic government. Let us repeat: Christ is not to come again 
simply as the Son of God (that relationship to the Father is indeed indis- 
pensably requisite to make provision for salvation, to perfect it, and to 
establish the Theocracy in a permanent form), but pre-eminently and 
significantly (as the repeated promises to and name of Son of Man fully 


348 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 181. 


indicate) as the Son of Man, for the latter is the relationship specifically 
demanded in the Covenant to be visibly shown and acknowledged to be such 
by all. Does the Covenant and its promises remain satisfied by a mere 
visit, as it were, to the predicted inheritance? Such theories, refined to 
suit the taste of unbelief, or weak faith, were wtterly unknown to the early 
Church, whose strong faith firmly grasped and clung to the Covenant in 
this particular, believing that the underlying idea in it embraced a con- 
tinual personal presence. We confess an admiration of the men, who, now 
the objects of witticisms and ridicule from infidels and even professed 
believers, thus accepted, with Abrahamic and Davidic faith, of the Covenant 
as it reads, and received the voice of the Prophets as they also read, and 
boldly and unequivocally avowed their belief in such a precious presence ; 
enforcing it by the predictions that Christ should return and dwell and 
reign in Jerusalem, having rebuilt the ruined tabernacle of David in 
majesty ; that He shall rule in it gloriously, making it the place of His 
throne ; that the restored Jewish nation, as well as the saints, shall see Him 
in His glory ; that all nations shall at Jerusalem acknowledge His suprem- 
acy, etc. In all this, no matter what man may say, there is, at least, @ 
regular and consistent fulfilment of the Word of God. With them we 
regard this very presence as a necessary adjunct to redemption, inasmuch as 
redemption is to be perfected by the Second Adam in this Theocratic rela- 
tion. While He is carrying on the Divine Purpose intended by this 
Theocratic-Davidic government, viz., to redeem the race as a race from the 
curse, He should also, at the same time and in the same place where man fell, 
exhibit in Himself, as the Head and in a corporate body of His brethren, 
perfected salvation. By Christ’s salvation is not meant that He is to be 
saved from sin (for He was without sin, otherwise the sacrifice of Himself 
would have been imperfect and unavailing, and death also would have had 
dominion over Him), but that as Abraham’s seed, assuming flesh for our 
sakes, with its weakness, imperfections (ie. natural, subject to disease, 
sleep, etc.), liability to the corruption of death, He now exhibits in Him- 
self as man a complete deliverance from all those evils voluntarily assumed, 
and thus a triumph over our enemies, an impressive representation of the 
power of holiness united with the love of the Father, @ Second Adam, in 
whose person incarnation is glorified. For we must ever keep in mind 
that Christ is not only ‘‘ the Second Adam,’’ because a similarity is implied 
between Christ and the redeemed, resembling that between Adam and his 
descendants, in that, as death is transmitted by the first Adam, so life is 
bestowed through the Second Adam (‘‘ As in Adam all die, so in Christ 
shall all be made alive,”’ etc.), but He is also designated such because in 
Himself, as man, is to be exhibited ‘‘ the image of God,”’ defaced by the fall 
of the first Adam ; and hence, as a necessary connection with that image, 
the dominion originally granted to the first Adam is also in Him restored. 
Theologians, of almost every class, concede such a restoration. ‘Therefore, 
it is eminently proper and requisite that in the person of Christ, through 
whom the race is to be redeemed, should be shown, as that Second Adam, 
the complete restoration of all that the first Adam forfeited ; among others, 
including the restoration and retention of the forfeited inheritance (which 
led to those covenant promises that Christ should inherit the land, etc.), 
the restoration and retention of the dominion or kingly power, which was 
forfeited as well as moral rectitude, the immortality of man, and the per- 
petuation of the race in a state of innocency and purity. However, to do 


7 PROP. 131.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 349 


and manifest this requires the personal presence of the Second Adam in 
His restored inheritance and dominion, in order that not only the promises 
may be verified, but that the most ample, actual, experimental proof may 
thus be afforded in the person of the Redeemer, the Head of the body, that 
in Him, our second living Head, we have attained unto all (not a part) 
that the first Adam (and we through him) forfeited by sin. This Second 
Adam thus stands forth in our system a revealed representative of God, 
such as the first Adam was designed to become had he not fallen. This 
Davyid’s Son, crowned with greater glory because of His unbroken union 
with the Divine, occupies, as Restorer, Adam’s place ; and if so, how can 
we, how dare we separate His presence from the place thus restored? This is 
shadowed forth in Ps. 8 and Heb. 2, and is justly claimed by us as the 
crowning feature in redemption. For without a personal Second Adam 
present, redemption itself 1s vncomplete, imperfect. 

Seeing what completed redemption requires, and that Jesus the Christ is the one 
through whom, at His Sec. Advent, it is to be perfected, we cling to those promises relat- 
ing to the future with earnest faith, believing that all things relating to the Christ, as 
recorded in Moses and the prophets, will be as literally fulfilled in the future as they 
have been in the past (Luke 24 : 44; 18 : 31; 22 : 37, etc.). The student, of course, 
will understand that our argument does not imply that Jesus Christ is constantly visible 
to all, i.e. continually seated in regal state, receiving homage. For His Rulership con- 
stantly exerted, His Majesty visibly manifested in enduring enthronement may (as now 
witnessed in earthly rulers) require stated periods when He shall publicly exhibit Him- 
self on State occasions. We only mean that His Kingship is exerted on earth, and the 
place of central power and manifestation (Prop. 168) is on Mt. Zion, where David’s 
throne was located. This King may even, for aught we know, frequently visit other 
parts of the universe, but without diminishing His earthly Theocratic relationship. To 
our brethren, who are so reluctant to admit Christ’s personal reign on the earth, but insist 
that it is over the earth, we, once for all, say that the Messianic Kingdom is the restoration 
of an overthrown but covenanted Theocracy, in which the personality of the Ruler and His 
visibility and accessibility to the nation was an essential factor. The highest element of 
a Theocracy (such as covenauted to David) is that God condescends, in perfect union 
with David’s Son, to act here on earth as earthly Ruler, and if this, the chiefest, most 
important feature, is stricken out, it is no longer the tabernacle of David restored in his 
Son, or the covenanted, predicted Theocracy, and God has failed to set up a Theocracy as 
announced. (Comp. Props. 82, 122, 201, 202, 206, and 207.) 


Obs. 8. Our argument is cumulative, and to avoid undue repeating we 
pass by the prophetical reasoning to be drawn from Dan., chs. 2, 7, etc., 
that the outward, external, visible world-dominion which the Chaldean 
monarch contemplated was to be realized fully in the Messiah. We also 
leave unnoticed the numerous predictions which emphatically declare the 
visible reign of Jesus here on earth, for they will all be brought forth 
under various following Propositions. It is in the very nature of « mant- 
fested Theocracy that there should be (as already foreshown in the past 
Theocratic arrangement), not simply faith, but sight. Dr. Brown (Christ’s 
Sec. Com., P. 2, ch. 5) emphatically declares that there is ‘‘ no Millennial 
mixture of faith and sight.’’ He takes to task Brookes’s saying, that *‘ in 
the Millennial state there will be an open vision of Christ,’ and that ‘' it 
will be a dispensation in which the saints will continually have personal 
access to Christ.’’ He censures Elliott for teaching a ‘‘ visibly manifested ”’ 
conjunction of the earthly and heavenly Jerusalem ; he condemns Lord for 
saying that the nations have access to the glorified (symbolized by the open 
gates, etc.), and that ‘‘ they are never to be without the visible presence of 
God; that its gates are never shut, and that the nations are to enjoy wn- 


350 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 181. 


interrupted access to the glorified.”? He ridicules Birks, McNeile, Bicker- 
steth, and Maitland for teaching such a visible revelation and such an 
access to the city, such a ‘‘ seeing the Lord of Hosts manifested in the 
human nature of Jesus reigning in Mt. Zion,”’ such a visible manifestation 
of glory that impresses the nations, and such a change in dispensation 
that sight shall also be introduced. Of course any one who denies that the 
sight of Jesus (Zech. 12:10; Ezek. 20 : 35) will influence the future 
conversion of the Jews; who rejects the seeing of Matt. 23 : 395 Zech. 
14 : 1, etc. ; who finds xo place in his system of theology for the everlasting 
Covenant of David; who spiritualizes Jerusalem, Mt. Zion, etc., and 
denies a future incoming dispensational change—can find nothing of 
sight, no matter how plainly presented. 


Do not men, in their bitter attempt to disparage this visible reign of Jesus, run some 
danger of being ultimately found to degrade God’s own appointments? In such a case 
can ignorance be pleaded, when they fully admit that the grammatical sense indeed teaches 
it, but claim that another (spiritual) sense is intended. The whole matter depends, as 
our entire argument shows, on the system of interpretation adopted. ‘This reminds us 
how recent efforts are made to weaken our claim to a literal fulfilment of prophecy. The 
editor of The Luth. Observer (Feb. 28th, 1879) says : ‘‘ The Methodist makes this remark : 
‘ The Pre-Millenarians say that the prophecies of Christ’s First Coming were literally ful- 
filled.’ It would be more accurate to say that they were exactly fulfilled. This will admit 
of a little amplification. The prophecies of Christ’s First Coming were not literally ful- 
filled in the sense in which the Jews understood them, which was that He would set up 
a temporal Kingdom when He came. They were, however, actually and really fulfilled 
in their true spiritual sense, that He would establish a spiritual Kingdom. This is now 
universally accepted as the true sense of the prophecies respecting Christ’s First Coming. 
Why should we not, therefore, predicate from this, that the prophecies concerning the 
Second Coming are also to be understood in a spiritual, and not in a literal and material, 
sense? Especially, since the predictions and expectations of all who have believed in a 
literal Second Coming and temporal Kingdom, during more than eighteen hundred yéars, 
have been proved by events to be erroneous.’’ We reaffirm that the prophecies pertain- 
ing to the First Advent, birth, life, sufferings, crucifixion, death, resurrection, and 
ascension were literally verified, and this ewact literal fulfilment is used against unbelief to 
identify the Messiah. We reaffirm that the reason why the Messianic Kingdom was not 
set up at the First Advent was owing to the non-repentance of the nation and its rejec- 
tion of the Messiah, and that consequently (as we have shown in detail) the Kingdom 
was postponed to the Sec. Advent, with which the prophecies agree. We reaffirm that this 
postponement holds good, as the general analogy teaches, until the Second Advent is 
realized, and that the alleged ‘‘ spiritual Kingdom’’ does not meet the conditions either of 
covenant and prophecy. We reaffirm that this spiritual application is not universal (as 
the history of the doctrine incontrovertibly proves), but is now generally held by the 
professing Church, thus fulfilling the predicted lack of faith. We reaffirm that the 
expectations based on chronological data (even given by our opponents) has nothing to do 
with the grammatical or spiritual sense of the prophecies, which must stand on their own 
merits, and that if it were otherwise, and The Methodist’s assertions were correct, then 
there can be no future literal, personal Advent at all. And we affirm (1) that the proph- 
ecies relating to the First Advent brought a literal Coming of the Messiah, and not a spirit- 
ual one ; and (2) that the predictions relating to the Second Advent, being given in the 
same intended sense (for no discrimination is made), will also bring us a literal, personal 
Coming of the Messiah. Simple consistency demands such a faith. ' 

A few words in relation to Barbour’s theory (Z’hree Worlds) of Christ’s necessary in- 
visibility because He has a spiritual body. Admitting fully, because a spiritual body is 
one under the complete control of the Spirit, that Jesus can be visible or invisible at 
pleasure, and that He can be visible to some and invisible to others (illustrated in Paul 
and his company, Elisha and his servant), yet Barbour goes too far when he says that no 
other but saints shall see Him as He is, i.e. glorified. He appeared in His glory to 
mortal man (e.g. Paul and Daniel and Stephen and John), and the prophets and New 
Test. unite in predicting that He shall come in His glory, and it is this very glory, tre- 
mendous majesty of appearance, that shall confound His enemies, prove irresistible to 


a 


Prop. 131.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 351 


the Jews, and secure the allegiance of the nations. The Jews in the flesh see Him “ face 
to face.” In His thief-like Coming this glory is veiled, for the intention of this stage of 
the Coming is one hidden from the world. But even in this stage He comes glorified, as 
His glorification is essential to the work that He then undertakes to perform—as we shall 
hereafter describe in detail. It is at the open Parousia that the glory—hitherto revealed 
only to the saints resurrected and translated—is manifested in transcendent power. The 
spirituality does not forbid the visibility of Jesus, as is plainly seen in His Coming being 
likened to the visibility of the lightning itself. While thus visibly manifesting Himself, it 
is also true that this very majesty may be veiled to some extent from mortals, and that 
the glorified saints are alone capable to behold His full glory. Some attempt to particu- 
larize, but we must be satisfied with the glimpses obtained, which indicate that the reality 
will exceed the fondest anticipations of believers and impress with profound reverence 
the nations of the earth. We think that Barbour is misled by his spiritualistic theory 
(which practically ignores the Kingdom as covenanted and predicted, and substitutes for it a 
spiritual one, which is a refinement of the Church-Kingdom view) and by his harvest 
theory (which, as we shall show in another place, is untenable and violates the plainest 
Scriptures). It is sufficient to say that his making the present time the period when 
** the Son of Man” is actually personally present, is a perversion of the phrase ‘‘ Son of 
Man’’ (which is expressive, not of a spiritual presence, but of His humanity), and of the 
phrase ‘‘ day of the Son of Man” (which, e.g. Luke 17 : 22, is expressive of a visible pres- 
ence), and of ‘‘ the days of Noah” (making the Coming to be equivalent to the same, 
when Jesus only makes those days expressive of the conduct of men preceding His own 
Coming, likening His Parousia to the suddenness of the flood), etc. The fact is, that 
this forcing a meaning out of passages which they do not bear on their face, is met by 
the simplest declarations concerning the visibility of this Jesus at His Sec. Advent. 
Take e.g. “‘ the times of refreshing (reanimation) from the presence of the Lord,’’ Acts 


-3:19, and after noticing (see Prop. 144) how this is linked with the sending of Jesus, 


etc., ‘‘the presence’’ or ‘‘ face” does not simply mean that the Lord is the author of the 
same ‘‘ refreshing,’’ but that it results from His actual, visible presence, for the usage of 
“*face’’ in the New Test. (as instanced by Barnes, Com. loci) in Mark 1 : 2; Luke 1 : 76, 
and 2 : 31, denotes a real, visible presence. It is frequently thus employed, as e.g. Matt. 
11:10; Luke 7:27; Matt. 18:10; 1 Cor. 13 : 12, etc., and the context evidences that 
this usage of the word is to be observed. We confess that the simple faith of the early 
Church, as previously expressed by us, is far more consistent with covenant and predic- 
tion than such refined interpretations. 

The Origenistic, spiritualistic interpretation finds one of its extremes in the Sweden- 
borgian theory (e.g. in Apoc. Revealed, vol. 2, s. 664, and index, or Hayden’s Art. ‘‘ New 
Jerusalem,” in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop.), making the Kingship of Jesus to “ sig- 
nify divine truth,” His Sec. Advent to be a revealing of truth, and consequently all, in- 
cluding the Kingdom itself (now even claimed to be manifested), is ‘‘ spiritual.” To make 
out such a theory, and others somewhat similar, everything pertaining to covenant and 


‘prophecy must be spiritualized. We protest against such a perversion of the grammati- 


cal sense, adopting the language of Dean Alford (WN. T., vol. 2, p. 362), who thus writes 
against spiritualizing the promises and departing from the Primitive Church view : ‘‘ But 
I have again and again raised my earnest protest against evading the plain sense of the 
words, and spiritualizing in the midst of plain declaration of fact. That the Lord will 
come in person to this our earth ; that His risen elect will reign with Him here and 
judge ; that during that blessed reign the power of evil will be bound, and the glorious 
prophecies of peace and truth on earth find their accomplishment ; this is my firm per- 
Suasion, and not mine alone, but that of multitudes of Christ’s waiting people, as it was 
that of the His. Primitive Apostolic Church before controversy blinded the eyes of the 
Fathers to the light of prophecy.’”’ We conclude, therefore, with Dr. Schmucker (xp. of 
Rev.), that (in view of this Messianic Theocratic Kingdom following on the territory, etc., 
of the four universal monarchies of Dan. 2 and 7—comp. Prop. 160), ‘‘ Now as the preced- 
ing four are temporal monarchies, homogeneity compels us to consider the fifth empire one 
of the same nature ; or otherwise these prophecies would appear an impenetrable riddle, 
and the words without a certain signification, of no use to the Church.” Many writers, 
who fail to fully grasp the covenanted force of this Kingdom and its Theocratic-Davidic 
nature, still hold to this ‘‘ glorious reign of Christ on earth with His saints, so often 
promised in Scripture” (so e.g. Milton, Prose Works, vol. 4, p. 484, who applies Dan. 
fete) Ps) 202 S, 9: Rev. 2°: 25-27 ; Ps. 110 35, 6; Isa; 9:7; Luke 1 : 32,33 ; Matt. 
19 : 28; Rev. 20 : 1-7, etc., to this period), and take the accessibility and the visibility 
of the King as something inseparable from the reign. 


352 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 182. 


Proposition 132. Zhis view of the Kingdom confirmed by the 
JSudgeship of Chrest. 


The Judgeship of Jesus establishes our doctrine of the Kingdom, 
the Pre-Mill. Advent, and His continued personal presence as the 
King. Intending to show that Judgeship and Kingship are in 
Scripture egwivalent terms, it follows that if they are such, then, 
since the Kingship is specifically promised to Jesus Christ as the 
Son of Man, made thus necessary by the covenant, so also the 
Judgeship ought to be expressed. Thisisdone. He is the Judge 
because He is ‘‘the man ordained,’ Acts 17:31.’ Some the- 
ologians tell us that the reason why the Father thus constituted 
Jesus the Judge is (Knapp’s Ch. Theol., p. 542) ‘‘ because He is 
man and knows from His own experience all the sufferings and 
infirmities to which our nature is exposed, and can therefore be 
compassionate and indulgent.’’ But the reader can see a far deeper 
reason, grounded on the Covenant. It is said, ‘* The Hather 
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son ; 
that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father,” 
John 5 : 22, 23, and in verse 27 it is added: ‘‘ and hath given Him 
authority to execute judgment also, because He is the Son of 
Man.’ Why the Son of Man? Because to this Son of Man as 
David’s Son ts promised the Kingdom, and Judgeship being 
included in the promised Theocratic-Davidic government, the 
Father only judges through this Son. The promises based on the 
covenant require such authority to be given to and to be manifested 
through the Covenanted Seed. Hence, as the second Adam re- 
covering the dominion lost by the first Adam; as the woman’s 
seed who is to crush the serpent’s head ; as the promised seed of 
Abraham who is to inherit the land, possess the gate of His 
enemies, and make all nations blessed; as the Son of David who 
is to reign so gloriously over the earth; as the God-man who 
perfects salvation through a Theocratic ordering—it is indispen- 
sably necessary for Him to occupy such a position to meet the pre- 
determined plan of Redemption. 


Obs. 1. Before entering into a discussion of this interesting and delight- 
ful subject it is proper to say that no single doctrine is perhaps so greatly 
misapprehended as this one ; for which we are indebted to the originators 
of monkery and to the schoolmen. Multitudes, embracing even talented 
and able divines, instead of confining themselves to scriptural representa- 
tions to ascertain the mind of the Spirit, are content to accept of the 
interpretations drawn from the writings of monks, mystics, etc., or from 


PRop. 182. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 303 


false systems of philosophy, human imagination, heathen mythology, 
descriptions of poetry, paintings, modern definitions of Judge, etc.! The 
early Church, and that band of witnesses which taught the Pre-Mill, 
Advent and the personal reign of Christ here on earth, have assumed the 
responsibility of explaining the Judgeship of Christ in one way ; those 
who reject that Advent and reign have taken the responsibility of teaching 
it quite differently. in view of our accountability in handling the Word, 
we shall endeavor carefully to base every step in our examination of this 
important matter upon that infallible Guide, and each one is required, as 
Luther so forcibly taught, to exercise the right of judgment in determin- 
ing whether the Scriptures contain what we assert. 

1 It is painful to notice in reading history how the promises referring to the Judgeship 
of Christ have been even prostituted to the basest of purposes ; men, and bodies of men, 
arrogating to themselves the prerogatives of Christ or His work. ‘Thus to illustrate : 
How blasphemously Pizarro and his followers used the Scripture, ‘‘ Arise, O Lord! and 


judge thine own cause,’’ on the memorable Saturday, Nov. 16th, 1532, preparatory to the 
horrible massacre of Peruvians. Such extremes, unfortunately, are not rare. 


Obs, 2. It seems to the writer that a simple striking fact, frequently 
repeated in the Scriptures, ought to be sufficient of itself to cause the 
student to reject the prevailing Popish notion of the Judgeship, or at least 
to induce him, if an advocate of it, to a renewed examination. It is this: 
the Prophets describe this Judgeship—the exercise of it—as a matter of 
congratulation and rejoicing, and not, as it would be if it only denoted 
judicial investigation of character, a subject of dread or apprehension. 
Thus e.g. Ps. 67:4, ‘‘ O let the nations be glad, and sing for joy; for 
Thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the nations wpon earth.”’ 
Comp. Ps. 96 : 10-13; Ps. 98 : 5-9, etc. It is represented as a joyful event 
by the Spirit; one which will cause exultation and happiness, and this 
only becomes apparent if we understand it to embrace the reign, Kingdom 
of Jesus. 

For the very best of men, assured of ultimate salvation, have reason to apprehend a 
judicial investigation lest, owing to sinfulness, unworthiness, neglect, etc., their reward, 
to say the least, be proportionally lessened. See how scripturally Bh. Heber has ex- 
pressed himself in the familiar hymn *‘ Lo He comes with clouds descending ;’’ so also 
Charles Wesley, Baxter, and others. When the judgments of Christ are manifested, and 
(Ps. 68, etc.) ‘* the wicked perish at the presence of God,’’ then “‘ let the righteous be glad ; 
let then, rejoice before God ; yea, let them exceedingly rejoice.’’ 


Obs. 3. Jesus Christ is the Judge, Acts 17:31; Matt. 24:30; Rom. 
m4: 9,10; John 5:22; Acts 10:40; Matt. 25:31, etc. The question 
that we are to propose and answer is this: Are we to understand by this 
Judgeship that Christ on/y sits in a judicial capacity to determine cases ; 
that as Judge He only presides in a tribunal of justice to decide respecting 
the innocence or guilt of men ; or, is far more embraced in this term, such 
as judicial, legislative, and executive action, a supreme power, Kingly rule? 
If we take the Bible idea of Judge, instead of the restricted, more modern 
sense engrafted upon it, there is no difficulty in replying that ¢he latter 
isintended. By reference to the Judges that God raised up to “‘ judge 
Tsrael”’ (such as Gideon, Samson, Jephthah, Eli, Samuel, etc.), it is found. 
that their office consisted in enforcing the Theocratic rule, in executing the 
laws, subduing enemies, punishing evildoers, and promoting the prosperity 
of the nation. They were rulers, ruling over the nation in order to advance 


354 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 132. 


its interests (Judges 2 : 16-19, etc.). When Moses judged the people he 
acted as a Ruler, making known and executing the laws of God; and 
when he followed Jethro’s advice to make other Judges, it is expressly said 
that he ‘‘ made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of 
hundreds, rales of fifties, and rulers of tens, and they judged the people,”’ 
etc. (Ex. 18 : 14-26). Dr. Clarke, Com. Pref. to Judges, says: ‘* The 
persons called Judges, ‘ shophetim,’ were the heads or chiefs of the Israel- 
ites who governed the Hebrew Republic (Theocracy) from the days of 
Moses and Joshua till the time of Saul. The word Judge is not to be 
taken here in its usual signification, 1.e. one who determines controversies 
and denounces the judgment of the law in criminal cases, but one who 
directs and rules a state or nation with Sovereign power, administers justice, 
makes peace or war, and leads the armies of the people over whom he 
presides.' Horne (Jntrod., vol. 2, p. 42) says : ‘‘ The authority of the 
Judges was not inferior to that which was afterward exercised by the Kings ; 
it extended to peace and war. ‘They decided causes without appeal, but 
they had no power to enact new laws or to impose new burdens upon the 
people. ‘They were protectors of the laws, defenders of religion, and 
avengers of crimes.’’ The same idea is noticeable when the Jews requested 
a King, they called his ruling a judging. In 1 Sam. 8 : 5, 6, 20, ‘‘ all the 
elders of Israel”? said ‘’ make us a King to gudge us.’’ ‘* We will have a 
king over us, that we also may be like other nations, and that our king 
may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.”’? Judgeship was 
therefore regarded as the equivalent of rulership, of kingly rule ; and how 
largely this idea is incorporated with Scripture will appear in the quota- 
tions that will follow. From the use of the word already stated, it is a 
just conclusion, drawn by the early Church and many eminent writers,’ that 
when Jesus is represented to be revealed as the Judge, we are not to under- 
stand that He only presides as a Jurist to pronounce innocent or guilty, as 
the case may be, but that He rules in a princely manner, exercises a kingly 
office, is revealed as King of kings, Sovereign of the world, and that His 
Judgeship, being Theocratic, consists in exercising all the powers of a Su- 
preme Governor, legislative and executive as well as judicial, so that the 
acts of His Judgeship shall be manifested in issuing His decrees, executing 
His laws, punishing offenders, rewarding the faithful, and carrying on 
the Divine Theocratic ordering of His Kingdom. In other words, the 
Judgeship is identical with the predicted reign of Christ, commencing with 
the Millennial era—an age inaugurated and carried on by the most astonish- 
ing manifestations of Sovereign power, judicial, legislative, and executive. 


1 He adds : “ Officers with the same powers and nearly with the same name were estab- 
lished by the Tyrians in New Tyre. The Carthaginian Sufetes appear to have been the 
same as the Hebrew Shophetim ; as were also the Archons among the Athenians and the 
Dictators among the ancient Romans,”’ ete. Kurtz, Sac. His., s. 64, obs. 3, after giving 
them through life judicial and magistratic power, allies them with the prophets, and adds : 
‘* They were prophets in action ; they, consequently, merely resemble in name, but not 
in other respects, the Suffetes of the Carthaginians and the Dikastai of the Tyrians.”’ 
See Calmet, Kitto, Watson, Hn. Relig. Knowledge, Smith’s Bib. Dic.,. M’Clintock and 
Strong’s Cyclop., Herzog, etc. Grotius compares the government, of the Hebrews under 
the judges to that of Gaul, Germany, and Britain before the Romans changed it. Godwin, 
in his ‘‘ Moses and Aaron,” compares them to the Roman Dictators. Prof. Bush (Mill, 
p. 129), after referring to Scriptures which show that judging is equivalent to ruling, 
applies the same to the phrase in Rev. 20 : 4, ‘‘ that by judgment being given to those 
that sat on thrones is meant that they received authority to reign and govern, or the right 
of exercising judgment according to the Hebrew sense of the word ‘ judge,’ which is 


PROP. 132. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 300 


equivalent to that of reigning, or putting forth the judicial and executive acts of the 
governing power.” So also Wines (Com. on the Laws, p. 538) remarks : ‘‘ Upon the whole, 
there can be no reasonable doubt that, as the Lacedemonians had their Kings, the Athe- 
nians their Archons, and the Romans their Consuls, so, according to the constitution of 
Moses, the Hebrews were to have their general judges or governors of the whole repub- 
lic.’’ Compare Michaelis (Com. on Laws, art. 53), who makes a similar declaration. 

® The student will notice that when Absalom (2 Sam. 15 : 4) conspired to become a 
king, he said, ‘‘ Oh that I were made Judge in the land,’’ etc.; that Paul (Acts 24 : 10) 
called the Governor Felix a Judge, and that Daniel (9 : 21) uses the phrase “ our judges 
who judged us,” to denote the magistrates, rulers, and kings of the nation. 

3 As e.g. Mede, Bickersteth, Brookes, McNeile, Noel ; in brief, nearly all Mill. writers 
have excellent remarks, Among these Dr. Seiss gives an admirable discourse, in Last 
Times, on the Judgment. D.N. Lord, Winthrop, Shimeall, Duffield, and others give clear 
conceptions of Judgeship, etc. 


Obs. 4. To confirm this position there are numerous converging argu- 
ments. 1. It is linked with His Advent and His Kingdom, as in 2 Tim. 
4:1, “who shall judge the quick and the dead at His appearing and His 
Kingdom.’ After His appearing is His Kingdom, and judging is con- 
nected with both. 2. The Coming of the Lord to judge is wnited with 
the Covenant and made synonymous with reigning, as in 1 Chron. 16 : 14— 
19 and 31-33. 3. The ‘‘ judgment seat’? of 2 Cor. 5:10, upon which 
Christ sits, is translated, Acts 12:21, ‘‘throne.”’' And in comparing 
Scripture, it is found that when the Son of Man does this judging, He is 
represented as seated, not on the Father’s throne, but His own throne—that 
is, the one He inherits in virtue of being David’s Son. ‘To indicate how 
the Spirit so accurately distinguishes between those thrones it is only 
necessary to consider Matt. 25 : 31, ‘* He shall sit upon the throne of His 
glory,’’ compared with Rev. 3: 21, where the Father’s throne,in heaven 
is distinguished from ‘‘ my throne’’—a distinction made requisite by the 
Covenant to David. Whatever of Sovereignty may be displayed by the 
Divine on the Father’s throne, we must bear in mind, as constantly essential, 
that as the throne covenanted to Jesus Christ belongs to Him as the Son of 
Man, those allusions to ‘‘ My throne,’’ ‘‘ His throne,’’ etc., have undoubted 
reference to His humanity, and therefore must be, in the nature of the 
case, understood as separate and distinct from the throne in the third 
heaven.” The references must correspond with the covenant and predic- 
tions of the prophets. 4. Many prophetical passages unite this Judgeship 
with the general one of government, as Ps. 9 : 7,8; Ps. 96:10, 13; Ps. 
82:8, etc. So that, as a multitude of predictions of this kind evidence, 
reigning, ruling, governing, and judging are regarded as synonymes, so 
that all our concordances give as one of its distinctive meanings, ‘‘ to rule, 
govern, or reign.’’ 5. This judging, as our argument demands, is united 
with predictions of Christ’s sitting upon David's throne. Thus e.g. 
Isa, 9: 6,75; Isa. 16 :5; Jer. 33:15. The prophets plainly declare that 
when the revealed King, David’s Son and Lord, re-establishes the cove- 
nanted thrcne and Kingdom, He is manifested as the Judge of Israel and 
of the nations. 6. This Judgeship is also united with the restoration of 
the Jewish nation, with which the Davidic throne is united, as e.g. 
Jer, 23 : 5-8, etc. %. Saints are co-heirs with Jesus in this Judgeship, for 
they are to judge with Him on earth. But the passages explanatory of. 
this Judgeship (comp. Prop. 154) represent it as equivalent to the posses- 
sion of authority, rulership, or kingship. 8. There is no act ascribed to 
this Kingly office of Christ, but what is also identified with this Judgeship, 


306 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 1382. 


both in Coming and Kingdom. In the delineation of the Mill. era, the 
latter forms a prominent feature of it. We give a few illustrations : 
When the majesty of God in Zion is declared, the gathering of His saints, 
and the issuing forth of a tempestuous fire is announced, Ps. 50, it is 
added : ‘‘ He shall call to the heavens from above and to the earth, that 
He may judge His people’’—i.e. re-enter that Theocratical predicted rela- 
tionship—‘‘ and the heavens shall declare His righteousness, for God is 
Judge Himself.’ That this refers to Christ is evident from Micah 5 : 1, 
where Jesus is designated ‘‘ the Judge of Israel,’’ from the delegating of 
this judging to Him by the Father, from the Oneness of Father and Son, 
and from the same things being pointedly ascribed to the Son. In the 
light of this, many passages present a forcible meaning, as in Ps. 94, 
‘*O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth ; O God, to whom vengeance 
belongeth, show Thyself. Lift up Thyself, Zhow Judge of the earth.” 
Reading on, we ascertain that this revelation of this Judge is desired, that 
the wicked may not triumph, that the righteous and the inheritance may 
be delivered, and that the throne of iniquity may be overthrown and His 
own be substituted. So in Ps. 7, where prayer is offered for deliverance 
from enemies, and a firm trust is expressed that God will arise and save 
the upright and punish the wicked, it is said: *‘ the Lord shall judge the 
people,’ ** God judyeth the righteous.’’ And what this denotes is appar- 
ent from Ps. 9, for, after evincing the desire to praise and rejoice in God, 
the reason is assigned : ‘‘ when mine enemies are turned back, they shall 
fall and perish at thy presence. For Thou hast maintained my right and 
my cause (i.e. the covenanted); Thow satest in the throne judging right.”’ 
Notice, too, that this is done when the Psalmist is ‘‘ lifted up from the 
gates of death (res.), that I may show forth all thy praise in the gates of the 
daughter of Zion,’’ etc. The student can readily find an abundance of 
such allusions, a rich golden vein in the prophetic mine. As e.g. in that 
class of Psalms (96, 97, 98, etc.) which begin with ‘‘ the Lord reigneth,’’ 
and then describe the exaltation of the saints, the utter removal of 
wickedness, etc., and generally incorporate or conclude with expressions re- 
ferring to the Coming of the Lord ‘*‘ to judge the earth ; with righteous- 
ness shall He yudge the world, and the people with equity,’ etc. The same 
strain is found in Jer. 23 : 5-8; Isa. 30 : 18, 19, etc., so that, as ancient 
and modern writers have correctly observed, the Millennial descriptions 
either contain or are preceded or followed by representations of this Judge- 
ship. is judicial power shall be especially exercised, when this age is to 
be ushered in, against the nations of the earth ; His legislative, executive, and 
judicial power inthe restoration of His own people and establishment of His 
Kingdom, in the complete subjugation of all nations to His supremacy, 
and in the binding of Satan ; all the attributes of Judgeship will be exhib- 
ited in the administrations of His government in that era, so-that all the 
righteous shall, as the Psalmist predicts, rejoice and be glad in His Judge- 
ship ; and at the close of this age the Judge’s power will, in a striking 
manner, be manifested in the raising of the wicked dead, the confirming 
of their sentence, the final and eternal overthrow of all wickedness, and the 
continued everlasting security and blessedness of His people. 9. The word 


- 


‘* judgment ’’ is employed, as concordances show, to designate ‘‘ the govern- — 


ing power of Christ,’ and in this hight many passages become significant 
of the future rule of Christ, as eg. Isa. 42:4; Ps. 76:9; Ps. 94: 1d, 
etc. This arises from the fact that ‘‘ judgment’’ itself is derived from 


Brag: 


PRopP. 182. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 307 


‘determined ’’—this kingly office of Christ being covenanted, predeter- 
mined.* 10. Christ is revealed as King and as Judge, the terms being 
convertible, at the time of the Pre-Millenial harvest. Compare the parable 
_ of Tares and Wheat with Rev. 14, Joel 3, Rev. 19, etc. 11. In Rev. 11, 
at the time (under last trumpet) the Sovereignty of the world is given to 
Christ, as part of His Kingly office, judging is announced. 12. A variety 
of additional reasons will be given under the judging of the saints, the 
Judgment Day, the Day of Christ, etc., so that we must conclude that the 
phrase * the Judge of srael’’ is equivalent to ‘ the King of Israel ;’’ “ the 
righteous Judge,’’ to that of ** the righteous King,” or “a King shall reign 
im righteousness,’’ to that of ** He shall judge the world in righteousness.” 


1 Storrs (Bible Examiner, Aug., 1862, p. 427, etc.) makes ‘‘ the Judgment seat of Christ” 
equivalent to ‘‘ the form of administering the government and laws ordained.’’ This is 
correct (it being the Theocratic-Davidic ordering, etc.), but when he afterward makes it 
equivalent to ‘‘ the word of Christ’’ by which (John 12 : 48) we are judged, he mistakes. 
That word, indeed, is included, but this judgment seat or throne includes far more, viz., 
the form of Theocratic government then instituted under the rulership of Jesus. The 
word previously spoken only qualifies or condemns for participation in this Kingdom of 
Christ. The idea connected with the judgment seat or throne is simply that of authori- 
tative utterance and ordering. 

? R. Maton (/srael’s Redemp.), in reference to thé Kingdom specifically promised to 
Jesus, says: “ We may justly doubt whether our Saviour hath as yet executed the office 
of King.” Admitting His rule in the Church, etc., he adds: “ Yet, that He doeth not 
now reign in that Kingdom which He shall govern as man, and consequently in that of 
which the prophets spake, His own words in Rev. 3 : 21 do clearly prove : ‘ To him that 
overcometh I will grant to sit with me in my throne,’ etc., from whence it follows that 
the throne which He here calls His own, and which He hath not yet received (Heb. 2 : 8, 
10, 12, 13), must needs belong to Him as man , because the place where He now sits is 
the Father’s throne, a throne in which He has no proper interest but as God. Again, it 
follows that seeing He is now in His Father’s throne, therefore neither is this the time 
nor the place in which His own throne is to be erected.” ‘The critical student need not 
be reminded that in addition to this throne, which He inherits as David’s Son, there is 
also the Theocratic relationship, which makes this throne the-Father’s as well as that of the 
Son, for itis God ruling in and through this Son. The Scriptures only distinguish be- 
tween the general Divine Sovereignty over the universe and this special, particular rule 
here on earth. Comp. Props. 80, 81, 82, 84, and 85. Also Props. 199, 200, ete. 

3 This is indicated in Rom. 14 : 9, ‘‘ to this end Christ both died and rose, and revived that 
He might be Lord (or exercise Lordship over both dead and living ones) both of the dead and 
living’—Luke using the same word, ch. 22 : 25, to denote the exercise of royal authority 
by Gentile kings. With this is to be united the idea presented by Gesenius : ‘‘ The ideas 
of ruling and judgment are closely allied, not only in Oriental practice and policy, but also 
in their languages.’’ Dr. Clarke, Com. on Lev. 26, remarks: “Judgments ‘ shephatim’ 
from ‘ shapat,’ to distinguish, regulate, and determine—meaning those things that God 
has determined that men shall pursue,’’ or that He Himself will execute. 


Obs. 5. The modern usage of the words ‘‘ Judge’’ and ‘‘ Judgment” 
have misled many in comprehending this subject, so that some assert, as 
Priest, that they cannot see how the Millennial period and judgment can 
be blended. A reference to any concordance would explain the matter, for 
those words are used in a variety of ways, as in trying a cause, discerning, 
reckoning, as well as in ruling, governing, etc., and the meaning to be at- 
tached to the word in any particular case must be determined by the con- 
text, general analogy—in brief, by the laws controlling language, giving 
the preference in all cases to scriptural usage. Because ‘‘ judge’’ is em- 
ployed to designate judicial action, that is no reason for discarding the ad- 
ditional meanings attached to it by the Word of Ged. In this discussion 

it is sufficient to notice that Judgeship is ascribed to the Kingly, Sovereign 


358 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 182. 


power of God and of His Son, and that whatever of judgment there has 
been in the past or is going on now, or attends us at death, or at the resur- 
rection, or in the Coming Kingdom, etc.,' it does not affect our line of 
argument, but confirms it, because all this is represented as an exertion of 
Divine Sovereignty. The question that we are to decide is not whether 
judicial action belongs to the station of a judge—this is admitted by all— 
but whether, when Christ 7s revealed as Judge, this Judgeship is not an 
equivalent to His Kingly rule. ‘This we think is already conclusively 
proven, and therefore those writers who fail to discriminate in this par- 
ticular make a serious mistake which materially concerns the interpreta- 
tion of a large portion of Scripture. The Judgeship of Christ is not only 
perfectly consistent with the glory and blessedness of the Millennial 
period, but cndispensably necessary to secure it. And in this connection 
it may be added, that the proof of Christ’s Judgeship as given by Paul, 
viz., Acts 17 : 31, ‘‘ whereof He hath given assurance unto all men in that 
He hath raised Him from the dead,’’ is precisely the identical proof re- 
quired by the covenant to show that David’s Son is to reign as ‘* the man 
ordained” in the immortal manner predicted. ‘The duration of this Judge- 
ship is of such a nature that it cannot be predicated of mortal man ; 
whereas in His glorified humanity, never more subject to death, He is 
abundantly able to verify the promises relating to His Judgeship or King- 
ship.? 


1 There have been judgments in the past of Jewish and Gentile nations and individ- 
uals, judgments in acts of condemnation or of justification, judgments at death, and there 
will be judgments at the resurrection, at the translation, at the awarding of positions, 
etc., but all these of a judicial nature affecting nations or individuals, past or present, 
do not remove the extent of judgeship ascribed to Christ, and which is to be specifically 
exerted in His Coming Kingdom. The theories of national, individual, and believer’s 
judgment, however they may be incorporated, do not lessen the force of this future specific 
judgeship of Jesus. Our argument is only concerned with the latter, and hence the view 
respecting the destiny of man being fixed in this life or in Hades, etc., does not alter the 
force of our reasoning. 

” This enables us to appreciate the definitions that are usually given to the Day of 
Judgment. Thus, e.g. in the Relig. Encyc., Art. ‘‘ Judgment” (Day of ), it is asserted that 
this ‘‘is that important period which shall terminate the present dispensation of grace 
toward the fallen race of Adam, put an end to time,” etc. This needs no special remark, 
seeing that it confines judging exclusively to judicial action, misconceives the object and 
tendency of judgment (which is to bless the race of Adam), and boldly limits time when 
the Scriptures extend it (comp. next Prop. and e.g. 140, 152, 159, etc.). This writer, 
however, presents a singular inconsistency that may be noticed : in the same art., Dan. 
7:10, is quoted as then fulfilled, viz., at this limited Day of Judgment, but in sec. 3 the 
saints are carefully placed ‘‘ not on earth, but forever in heaven,” thus flatly contradicting 
Daniel’s statements that after the books are opened, the judgment has set, etc., the King- 
dom of the saints is here on the earth. The plainest predictions must bend before this 
Popish theory. This position of ours enables us with ease to refute the objections urged 
against our doctrine. Thus, e.g. Dr. Lindsay (Art. ‘‘ Mill.” in Ency. Brit.), entirely over- 
looking, or not understanding, our doctrine, asserts: ‘‘ That, on the Millenarian hypoth- 
esis, there can be no judgment of the righteous whatever, for they, having been once 
admitted to reign with Christ can never after that be placed for trial at His bar.’’ This 
objection is based on the supposition (unproven) that there is only one limited manifes- 
tation of judgment at the close of the Millennium. We prove, however, a Pre-Mill. Com- 
ing of the Judge, a Millennial judging, and a Post-Millennial judgment. It is Lindsay’s 
theory that really produces the grave objection, viz., that saints that have been thousands 
of years reigning in heaven, etc., shall at the end of the Millennium be subjected to a 
judicial investigation. We have no long interval between the Advent and judging as he 
incorrectly ascribes to our doctrine, and hence his objections have no force against us. 
In reference to the judicial judgment of the saints, who are co-heirs with Christ, and the 
intermediate state, see Props. 135 and 136. 


ee 


Prop. 182. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 359 


Obs. 6. The concessions made by writers when not directly opposing us 
are decidedly in our favor. Thus, to illustrate from a popular Commenta- 
tor: Barnes, Com., is unwilling to admit that Christ’s ruling with a rod 
of iron (judging), Rev. 19, denotes His Sovereign power exerted at His per- 
sonal Coming. He refers it rather to providential movements, spiritual 
power, by which all things shall be subdued, etc. In Rev. 2: 27, how- 
ever, When coming to the same promise given to the saints, a difficulty 
presents itself, viz., that it would be unreasonable and against fact to 
ascribe such power now to the saints. He therefore correctly applies this 
ruling with a rod of iron to the period of the judgment. After showing 
that the phraseology denotes ‘*‘ a power that is firm and invincible,’’ that 
‘“no power can oppose His rule,’’? and that ‘‘ the enemies of His govern- 
ment would be destroyed,” he adds: ‘‘ the speaker does not intimate when 
this will be, but all that is said here would be applicable to that time when 
the Son of God will come to judge the world, and when His saints will be as- 
sociated with Him in His triumphs.’ Taking this admission given by 
an opponent, it follows that the Son of Man and the saints enter upon 
this ruling with a rod of iron personally at the beginning of the Millen- 
nium, for at that period the Spirit locates it in Rev. 19, and in Ps. 2 it is 
also associated with the manifestation of ‘‘ the King’’ in Zion. 

1 Barnes, realizing that he was making a concession fatal to his own theory, endeavors 
to gloss it over by asserting that ‘‘ the rewards promised refer to heaven,’’ and then adds : 
“Tf so, then this passage should not be adduced as having any reference to an imaginary 
personal reign of the Saviour and of the saints on the earth.” ‘To this we reply : It can- 
not be referred to an imaginary ruling of the nations, breaking them in pieces, etc., in 
heaven, for (1) this ruling with a rod of iron, etc., is expressly located here on earth and not 
in heaven ; (2) the nations broken, etc., are on the earth and not in heaven ; (3) Jesus 
and the saints are represented (as e.g. Zech. 14) as being on earth and not in the third 
heaven when this work is accomplished ; (4) he himself admits as much in the extract 
given, when applying it to the Sec. Advent, which takes place on earth ; (5) that he added 
the gloss above, well knowing that his theory, in view of such an interpretation, required 
such bolstering to give it an appearance of consistency ; (6) our doctrine requires no such 
vain support, being entirely dependent on the unmistakable analogy given by the Spirit. 
For the fact that the ruling with the rod of iron is stated to occur under the last trumpet, 
to precede the Millennium, etc., is amply sufficient for our faith, without our attempt- 
ing, for the sake of opinion, to change the locality and time designated by the Spirit. 
The reader will notice, too, that Barnes’s expression ‘‘ the Son of God will come to judge 


the world,” while true of Christ, is not the scriptural usage, as can be seen in Props. 81, 
82, 83, 84, 85, 89, ete. 


Obs. 7. This judging is connected with the casting out of Satan. This 
might be argued from Rev. 19 with the following context, and the general 
tenor of Millennial descriptions indicating freedom from evil, etc., but we 
confine ourselves briefly to John 12:31. When Christ came to suffer and 
die under the provisions made for Redemption, He did not assume the 
character of Judge or King. Yet He says: “‘ Now is the judgment of this 
world ; now shall the Prince of this world be cast out,’’ and this is stated 
in connection with His death, by which this would be brought about, and 
He (as David’s Son), by the accompanying resurrection, would become the 
one of whom ‘‘ we have heard out of the law that Christ abideth forever.’’ 
Here the future is spoken of as present (Prop. 65, Obs. 9), His death being 
merely provisionary, for Jesus expressly declares in the same chapter that 
He came not to judge the world ; down to the present time there has been no 
such judgment, and Satan has not yet been cast out. That a meaning is 
not forced out of the passage is evident from what Barnes, /oci, says of it: 


360 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 132. 


he referring its fulfilment to the Future Day of Judgment and explaining 
its reference to the death as follows: ‘‘ Now is approaching the decisive 
scene, the eventful period—the crisis—when t¢ shall be determined who shall 
rule this world.’’ The reader, however, is reminded that this judgment 
and this casting out of Satan thus linked together, the Spirit informs us, is 
fulfilled at a Pre-Mill. Advent, when Satan himself is bound and confined. 
Then the Sovereignty, justly claimed by the Son in virtue of covenanted 
relationship and obedience unto a triumphant death, is publicly assumed. 
What the Spirit has thus joined together and located in fulfilment, it is 
daring for us to separate. | 


Obs. 8. It is no wonder that infidels treat this subject with scorn when 
it is handled, wildly and outrageously, by otherwise able Christian writers, 
such as e.g. Reuss. In Reuss’s. His. Ch. Theol. of the Apos. Age, he. 
frankly admits that the Evangelists clearly teach the views that we enter- 
tain, such as the personal Coming of Christ, the idea of judging, saying of 
the latter, ‘‘ the Apostles especially, as a recompense of their devotedness, 
shall sit as judges judging the twelve tribes of Israel, and ¢hen the King- 
dom shall commence,”’ etc. He emphatically declares that ‘‘ these repre- 
sentations are clear and simple ; they have nothing equivocal about them,”’ 
etc. ‘‘ It is evident that the narrators, who serve as our guides, took every 
word literally, and had not a shadow of doubt in reference to the matter.” 
Then Reuss adds that, because of their Judaistic, Rabbinical correspondence, 
‘* grave doubts arise, and zt seems impossvble that Jesus should have repeated 
that which the most ordinary Rabbi had long preached in the synagogue.’’ 
The result to which Reuss comes, after traducing the faith of the Evange- 
lists and the sense grammatically expressed by Jesus, is to reject the plain 
““unequivocal’’ teaching, and search out and fasten upon it ‘‘ a@ meaning 
different from that which at first suggests itself.’ This meaning he finds 
in death, resurrection, etc., opening a wide door for mystical applications, 
thus manufacturing a pliant mortar to daub over the promises ; for he re- 
marks under this meaning: ‘‘ the seats of honor may well be dismissed 
from the dogmatic explanation of the Gospel prophecy,’’ etc. In this total 
misapprehension of judgment he places Jesus above ‘* the delusive imagina- 
tion of the prophet,’ etc., not seeing that he is actually pulling down most 
precious material with one hand while endeavoring to build up inferior 
stuff with the other ; that he is engaged in destroying the credibility of the 
narrators ; in making Christ’s language, knowing their views, an accom- 
modation, deception, etc. If we understand the utterances of Jesus in 
their true grammatical relation, then, according to Reuss, He ‘‘ seems here 
suddenly to give expression to the most visionary hopes as to the immediate 
future—hopes based not upon an estimate of the natural progress of events, 
but upon the wildest dreams of fanatic patriots among his countrymen Do 
we really find, side by side, with predictions ratified by the event and sig- 
nally proving the exactness of His knowledge of the future, an error so 
monstrous that the lie direct is given by history to the most solemn promise 
of the Saviour?’ The “ lie’’ is all in Reuss’s imagination, and arises 
from his basing all fulfilment upon his own ‘‘ estimate of the natural 
progress of eyents,’’? and overlooking the postponement of the Kingdom. 
Leaving the discussion of the particular promise alluded to by him to the 
Prop. (154) on the Reign of the Saints, we may say that Christ will take 
care of the fulfilment of His promises respecting judging, and that His 


Prop. 182. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 261 


romises are not to be measured by past fulfilment, but left to the period 
indicated by the Spirit. Alas! how painful to meet such unbelief in such 
men—unbelief which, perhaps honestly intends to exalt Christ, but vir- 
tually condemns His language and Celittles the faith of His followers. The 
whole theory of this class is this : we are not to understand the Word as i¢ 
reads—if we do it leads to “ Judazstic’’ notions—but we must ‘‘ spiritwal- 
ize the letter’ and ‘‘ idealize the picture of the coming age.’’ Spiritualiz- 
ing even covenants, it causes no surprise to see the mystical results. 


The student is reminded that, although our doctrine has been held by the Primitive 
Church and many eminent men, works devoted to systematic theology, and which profess 
to enter into details of opinion, never enter into a discussion of this Judgeship of Christ 
so as to include the Millenarian view. This omission is noticeable even in the most recent 
(as e.g. Hodge’s), and this evident ignoring of it seems to indicate a fear to place it in 
juxtaposition to their own theory. ‘To say the least, it is misleading to many of their 
readers. It is allowable to point out a serious inaccuracy into which so careful a writer 
as Hagenbach (fis. of Doc.) has fallen. In sec. 77, speaking of ‘‘ the general judgment,”’ 
he writes just as if all believers from a.p. 70 to a.p. 254 held to it in a modern sense. An 
uninformed reader would be left by this statement under a wrong, unhistorical impres- 
sion. The fact is just the reverse—the immense majority believed in the manner of judg- 
ment as delineated by us in this and following propositions. 'These are only specimens 
of the injustice done to our view in professed scholarly exhibitions of doctrine, some- 
times the result of misinformation, and sometimes that of prejudice. 


362 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 183. 


Proposition 133. This view of the Kingdom is confirmed by 
“the Day of Judgment.” 


If the monkish view of the day of judgment, now so prevalent 
even among Protestants, is correct, then it follows that, it being 
deemed the period of the winding up, or ending, of all sublunary 
things, no place can be found for such a Kingdom after it. But, 
on the other hand, if 7¢ can be conclusively shown that this day of 
judgment is connected with, enters into, and follows through the 
Millennial era, Zen it materially aids in supporting our view of the 


Covenanted Kingdom. That it does this is already evidenced by 


preceding Propositions, but the Spirit affords us in the Word addi- 
tional reasons to sustain our belief. 


Obs. 1. Again the reader is reminded that the Jewish and Early Church 
doctrine of the Judgment Day is something very different from the Popish 
doctrine now so generally entertained. ‘The notion of an assize, a universal 
gathering of dead and living, pious and wicked, before a tribunal at which 
character is to be tested, etc., was developed in the Church several cen- 
turies later, in the form now held by many writers. On all sides are to be 
found utterances concerning the judgment utterly unknown, and com- 
pletely antagonistic to the doctrine once held by the Church. 'The modern 
writers, with here and there an exception, express the same hostility to 
the ancient view. ‘Take a recent author, Dr. Bascom, in his Sermons, 1 
series, sec. 11, ‘‘ The Judgment,’’ most eloquently indorses the Popish 
view, calling it ‘‘ a day concluding the world’s existence,’ ‘‘a day which 
shall wrap ¢he wniverse of man in writhing distortions and dash to pieces 
the structure of nature,’’ etc., and adding : ‘‘ This day ¢erminates alike the 
dispensations and dealings of heaven i relation to our fallen planet.”’ 
Such quotations might almost be indefinitely multiplied, as evidence of the 
widespread and falsely extravagant representations of the Word of God on 
this point ; but they are not needed, as every reader must be more or less 
acquainted with their sad existence. 


Obs. 2. Our views (Millenarian) respecting judgment are almost invari- 
ably misrepresented (with some honorable exceptions, as Barnes, Brown, 
Fairbairn) by our opposers ; and in xo work specially written against us 
is exhibited a candid statement of our scriptural position.’ Some writers, 
as one in Presby. Quarterly Review, 1853, so pervert our doctrine as to 
make it imply that we hold Rev. 20 : 11-15 to precede the Mill. age, which 
no one does. In a recent commentary, only so much, and that incidental, 
of our argument is given that the writer felt able to refute, while the lead- 
ing reasons presented by us were totally ignored. Even so ignorant (will 
not say designedly) are some writers that our doctrine of the Judgment is 


PRopP. 133. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 363 


classed with that of the Millerites, when the fact is that the Millerite doc- 
trine on the subject is identical with their own, and bears no resemblance 
whatever to ours, Another class of writers, more insidious, attack our 
- doctrine under a professed harmony, which is a mere jumbling together of 
passages, without discriminating between the time of their fulfilment.? The 
truth is, that in looking over a large number of works opposed to us, not 
one (unless Dr. Brown’s of Glasgow can be called an exception, which it is 
not) takes up our Scriptural reasons given and endeavors fo show that these 
Scriptures are to be understood differently, as e.g. that our view of the 
Judgeship of Christ, of the Judgment Day, and of their connection with 
the Millennium, is erroneous. Instead of a comparison of Scripture, and 
founding an opinion on the mind of the Spirit as thus presented, the proof 
alleged is entirely inferential and indirect. Thus, to illustrate: Steele 
(Hssay on Ch. Kingdom, Bib. Sac. Nov. 1849), Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming), 
Beattie (Dis. on Mill. State), Waldegrave (Lec. on N. T. Mill.), Barnes 
(Com.), etc., all without exception take it for granted (without meeting 
and answering our arguments concerning the passages quoted), that e.g. 
Matt. 25 (and Scriptures which simply allege the Coming of Christ to 
judgment and which affirm that all men shall be judged without assigning 
the order or time), must necessarily mean to judicially judge ‘“‘ all man- 
kind,’’ ‘‘ the entire race,’’ at the same time, so that ‘‘ the whole number of 
the saved and the whole number of the lost, in two vast assemblies, meets owr 
eyes,’ ‘* the generations of men ceese,’’ etc. Leaving the reader to consult 
Mill. authors who have reviewed those works in detail (as Lord’s Lit. and 
Theol. Journal, etc.), for a minute consideration of each passage assigned, it 
is only requisite to give an illustration of this mode of handling the Word 
of God, seeing that the main objection urged by them (viz., that all the 
righteous and all the wicked will be judged together at the same time) is 
fully answered by our adopted line of argument. In illustration we 
select 2 Cor. 5 : 9-21: “‘ For we must all appear before the judgment seat 
of Christ, that every one,’’ etc. Now it is affirmed that this teaching, that 
‘‘ all appear,”’ etc., it includes all at the same time. But this is not con- 
tained in the passage ; and this Scripture itself must be interpreted in the 
light of others. ‘To put on the words ‘“‘ all”? ‘‘ every one” an emphasis to 
include the time, if applied to other Scripture, would be absurd, as e.g. 
1 Cor. 15 : 22, etc.* All shall appear before His Throne (judgment seat is 
translated throne, Acts 12 : 21), but at different periods, as e.g. before the 
Mill. age and at its close—(we leave the proof in our regular order of argu- 
ment). Without discussing what critics tell us the words here denote, 1m- 
plying not merely a standing, etc., before the throne, but a being mani- 
fested to receive the stations, positions, rewards, proportionate to their 
deeds, etc., the attention of our opponents is called to a certain weakness 
in their argument. They frequently censure us for bringing the saints 
back before this very throne to receive stations of honor, kingship, and 
priesthood, that they may reign, pronouncing it derogatory, degrading, 
etc., after the honor, bliss, and glory enjoyed. They evidently forget this 
objection, when they bring those same saints before this same throne to 


* Such a pressure put upon the word “‘all’’ reminds us of the destructive critical 
_ remarks on Luke 2:1, ete. Credner pushed the “ all flesh” of Joel to the extreme that 
it must mean all beasts as well as men—even locusts (quoted by Fairbairn, On Proph., 
p. 100). 


364 TIIE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 133. 


undergo a judicial investigation. Our view surely entails nothing so derog- 
atory upon them, for the very fact of the resurrection of the saints, thus 
counted worthy of it, and the non-resurrection of the wicked at the time 
of the first resurrection, counted unworthy of it, proves to us a pre-existing 
judgment. Our opponents have much to say, and truthfully, that the con- 
dition of the individual is determined, in some way even at death, and 
that his future destiny is shaped by the moral character then sustained, 
and that this must be the result of judgment exercised. If so, the question 
arises, Why subject these same parties—especially taking Brown’s, Barnes’s, 
etc. idea that the saints have been, many of them for centuries upon cen- 
turies, in the third heaven enjoying a development of glory indescribable, 
etc.—to be brought before a tribunal to undergo a scrutiny of character? 
This difficulty and others vanish only if we allow the legitimate meaning 
given to the original by commentators, which involves our idea, that the 
saints are manifested before that throne to be assigned their position as 
rulers inthe Kingdom, which apportionment is only done at the manifesta- 
tion of the Kingdom itself, and is proportioned to the deeds done in the 
body. Such a manifestation is one that we are led to expect. If the ob- 
jection is raised that Paul included in the word ‘‘ all’’ also the wicked, it 
can be readily granted, for they too at a certain period shall have their 
final condition awarded by Him who sits on that throne. If it can be 
shown that all are judged, whether at one time or at different times, the 
affirmation of the passage is amply sustained. All are raised from the dead, 
but each in his own order ; so also all shall stand before His throne, but 
each in his order. 


1 Every writer, without exception, opposed to us, conceals as much as possible our 
scriptural argqument—based on the meaning of Judge, Judgment-day, etc. A reader of 
such works alone could not possibly obtain @ correct idea of our scriptural proof. Many 
such opposers totally ignore our scriptural reasons, as if they did not exist, and ascribe 
to us views that we do not entertain. Alas! when controversy is so one-sided that it will 
not properly notice the arguments and reasons of opposers. Many works, as the candid 
student must allow, present a mere caricature of our doctrine. ‘This lack of candor is evi- 
dence of weakness. 

* Dr. Keith, who has given us many admirable things relating to prophecy, presents us 
a very unsatisfactory chapter (15) on ‘‘ the judgment of the dead ”’ (also on resurrection) 
in his Harmony of Prophecy. It is one thing to string together passages which may in 
some respects have a resemblance in phraseology, and it is quite another to prove that 
they are correctly taken, and relate to the same event or time. This is readily seen by his 
quoting things that precede the Mill. age, and linking them with things that follow that age, 
and then pronounce them as identical ; and it is also seen in his refusing to quote in the 
same connection passages which would conflict with the conclusion that he desires to 
arrive at as e.g. *‘ the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were 
ended,’’ etc. The Harmony is, after all, Dr. Keith’s and not divine ; evincing an ignoring 
of judgeship previous to, during, and at the close of the Mill. day. Surely, the passages 
referring to judgment preceding the Millennium cannot without unwarranted license and 
violence be located at itsclose. Indebted as we may be to the author for valuable sugges- 
tions, it is simply duty to protest against so misleading a perversion. 


Obs. 3. The Judgment Day is inseparably linked with the personal pres- 
ence of the Judge, and therefore, as we proceed, it is unnecessary to repeat 
what all admit. Itis very essential to our doctrine to find the judgment 
united with the Coming of the Son of Man. Mede (Works, B. 3, p. 762) 
long ago observed.* that Dan. 7 contains ‘‘ The mother teat of Scripture, 
whence the Jews grounded the name and expectation of the Great Day of 
Judgment.’ In following Propositions the Jewish view of ‘‘ the Day of 


Prop. 133. ] TIE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 369 


Judgment” and ‘‘ the Day of the Great Judgment,”’ will be given, includ- 
ing and associated with the personal coming of the Messiah and of ‘‘ His 
day.’’ Is it not singular, to say the least, that if the Jews were mistaken 
in identifying the Day of Judgment with the Coming of the Son of Man 
in Daniel, and with the reign of the Messiah, that Jesus and the Apostles, 
by adopting and using the very phraseology current among the Jews, should 
thus confirm the Jewish usage of the phrases? Our opposers, as Stuart, 
Barnes, etc., concede that in the N. 'T. the phrases ‘‘ the Day of Judg- 
ment,’’ ** the Judgment of the Great Day,’’ embraces this personal Coming 
of the Messiah ; and this concession, as far as it goes, is important, and 
may well cause us to ask, Does it not include mwch more, even the associa- 
tion with the reign of David’s Son during the blessed Mill. period described 
by the prophets and believed in by the Jews? The facts (1) that the 
phrases originated with Jewish believers, and (2) that they are employed 
without the least intimation that they are to be understood differently, cer- 
tainly ought to have some weight with the student. 

1 Mede’s argument is the following : ‘‘ The Kingdom of the Son of Man and the saints 
of the Most High, in Daniel, begins when the Great Judgment sits. The Kingdom in 
the Apocalypse, wherein the saints reign with Christ a thousand years, is the same with 
the Kingdom of the Son of Man and the saints of the Most High in Daniel. Ergo, it also 
begins at the Great Judgment.” After fortifying this by various reasons, he thus con- 
cludes : ‘‘ Now, if this be sufficiently proved, that the one thousand years begin with the 
Day of Judgment, it will appear further out of the Apocalypse, that the Judgment is not 
consummate till they be ended ; for Gog and Magog’s destruction and the universal 
resurrection are not till then, therefore the whole thousand years are included in the Day of 
_dudgment.”’ ‘‘ Hence it will follow, that whatsoever Scripture speaks of a Kingdom of Christ 
to be at His second appearing or at the destruction of Antichrist, it must needs be the 
same which Daniel saw should be at that time, and so, consequently, be the Kingdom of a 
thousand years, which the Apocalypse includes between the beginning and consummation 
of the Great Judgment. Hrgo, That in Luke 17, from v. 20 to the end. And that in Luke 
19 : 11-15 inclusively. And that in Luke 21:31. And that in 2 Tim. 4:1.” ‘ By 
these we may understand the rest, taking this for sure ground, that this expression of the 
‘Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven’ so often inculcated in the New Test., is 


taken from, and hath reference to, the prophecy of Daniel, being nowhere else found in 
the Old 'Test.’’ (Works, b. 4., epis. 15). 


Obs. 4. The Judgment Day is designated, Acts 17 : 31, ‘“‘He hath ap- 
pointed a day wherein He will judge the world in righteousness,”’ etc.’ By 
this is evidently meant that a fixed, determined time has been set apart, 
which, by way of eminence, is called ‘‘ the Day of Judgment,”’ in which 
Christ shall be revealed as the Judge. It is variously presented, as in 
Rom. 2:16; 1 Thess.5 ;2; 1Cor.1:8,etc. Itis called ‘‘a day,’”’ which 
in the largeness of prophecy does not indicate an ordinary day, or even a 
brief period of time, but may include a long, extended time. ‘The word is 
employed to denote time indefinitely, as ‘‘ the day of trouble,”’ ‘‘ the day of 
adversity,’ ‘‘the day of prosperity,’’ etc. Again, it is used to designate 
definite periods, either short or long, as e.g. the siz days of creation are 
called ‘‘ day” Gen. 2:4; the forty years in the wilderness are named, 
Heb. 3:8; Ps. 95:8, ‘‘ the day of temptation ;’’ the times of the Mes- 
siah are called by the prophets ‘‘ that day,’’ ‘‘ the day of the Lord,” as 
Isa. 24 : 25, 26; Zech. 14, etc.; ‘‘ the day of salvation,’’ 2 Cor. 6: 2, ‘‘ the 
day,’’ Heb. 3: 7, 13; Ps. 118 : 24, etc., are admitted to embrace an entire 
dispensation. It is well known that prophecy speaks of events occurring 
‘‘in that day,’’ which the fulfilment shows occupied hundreds of years in 
fulfilling. Reference might be made to other passages, such as John 8 : 56 ; 


366 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 133. 


1 Cor.5:5; Deut. 33:12, etc., all showing this usage by the Spirit. 
Therefore, in approaching a subject like this, the student’s attention should 
at once be directed to the applicability of this feature to the Day of Judg- 
ment, especially since it was thus understood by the pious Jews.” 


1 Some (as Universalists, Swedenborgians, etc.) are anxious to make out that this refers 
to the present dispensation, saying that the word ‘‘ appointed’’ means “‘ to establish, 
ratify, confirm,’’ etc. But this view is opposed to the decided opinion of eminent lexicog- 
raphers, Schleusner, Bretchneider, etc., who render it ‘‘ to appoint or fix beforehand, 
to ordain,” etc. Even if the attempted meaning would be substituted, it would not 
materially modify the idea, for then it would indicate that God has already ratified, con- 
firmed, or established this day, predicted by the prophets, by raising Jesus Christ from 
the dead and by the bestowal of the power of judgment. Then a great future event 
would, in view of its certainty and the preparation made in its behalf, be spoken of as 
present. For a specimen of spiritualizing and application to the present, see Art. ‘‘ Agap- 
emone, or Abode of Love,’ in Appleton’s Cyclop. Swedenborgians (as e.g. Noble’s 
Appeal) hold that “ the last Judgment” has taken place in the spiritual world in the year 
1757, and Swedenborg (Works ‘‘On the Last Judgment’’) asserts that ‘‘ it has been 
granted me to see with my own eyes that the last judgment is now accomplished.’’ But 
misled by the ecclesiastical term ‘‘ last judgment,’’ he forgets in his alleged seeing to weave 
iato his vision the necessary adjuncts, forerunners and accompaniments pertaining to 
judgment as delineated by Scripture. Pressense (The Early Days of Christianity, p. 286, 
foot-note) incorrectly affirms: ‘‘ The judgment is called parousia, 1 Thess. 2:19; see 
2 Tim, 4 : 1, where it is said that Christ will judge the quick and dead at His appearing.’’ 
The parousia introduces the judgment and many other things, including the Kingdom, 
and is never called the judgment, as Popish and some Protestant theology take for 
granted. > 

» Kven so, as various authors have noticed, the Spirit employs the word ‘‘ hour” to 
denote extended time, and our translators have rendered it ‘‘ season’’ and ‘‘ time’’ as in 
John 5 : 35; 2 Cor. 8:8; Philem. 5:15; 1 John 2:18. Comp. Abdiel’s Essays, p. 83, 
and Sirr’s First Res., p. 74, etc. Sirr notices how the Scriptures speak of ‘‘ a day of judg- 
ment’’ and of ‘* the day of judgment,” and presents some interesting remarks. Augustine 
(City of God, b. 20, c. 1) long ago said : ‘* No one who reads the Scriptures, however neg- 
ligently, need be told that in them ‘day’ is customarily used for ‘time.’ ”’ Oosterzee 
(Ch. Dog., vol. 2, p. 798) gives the Millenarian, ancient, and modern view, when, after 
specifying the Pre-Millennial Sec. Advent, he remarks : ‘‘ The whole Dispensation, which 
now begins, is a Dispensation of Judgment ; and if this dispensation is spoken of as a day,” 
it is self-evident that here a prophetic day (Ps. 90 : 4; 2 Pet. 3 : 8) is to be *‘ thought of, 
a day of undefined duration.” The reader will find additional reasons for our position 
under Props. 134, 137, 138, 139 and 140. Lange (Com. on ‘‘ Parable of the Net’) says; 
‘** From the circumstance that those to whom the process of separation is intrusted, are 
said to sit down on the shore and to gather out the good, we infer that the day of judg- 
ment will be a season of judgment, or an won (age) in the appearing of Christ.” In the 
‘* Bremen Lectures’ (p. 244), Lange writes of “ the One Day which is as great as one thou- 
sand years.’’ Richter’s Erklarte Haus Bibel, tom. 6, p. 1134, says : ‘‘ The Universal Judg- 
ment begins with the return of Christ, and continues during the one thousand years, until 
the Lord proclaims the final decision. There are, therefore, not two Universal Judg- 
ments, one before and one after the one thousand years’ Kingdom, but the whole is one 
Universal Judgment.’’ Many such references from commentators and others might be 
quoted, but these illustrations will suffice. One other, given by Dr. Craven in his excel- 
lent paper on “ The Judgment” (read before “The Proph. Convention’’), may be profit- 
ably repeated, since it shows that our opponents fully concede the force of our reasoning. 
Prof. Dr. Glasgow (The Apoc. Transl. and Explained, pp. 511 and 514) receives Mede’s 
interpretation making the judgment a thousand years. Speaking of the Judgment Day, 
he says : ‘‘ Now in the text (Rev. 20 : 12) there is nothing said whatever of the length of 
time to be occupied ; but popular thinkers, with a presumption equal to their ignorance 
—a sinful presumption—fix it down to a human day of twenty-four or twelve hours. 
Learned theologians, expositors, and enlightened preachers are more cautious. Of these, I 
cannot find one (and I have searched libraries) making the time a human day or any 
brief human period.’’ ‘* There seems much more rationality in the interpretation given 
by Mede, that the time of judgment is a thousand human years, than in that of those who, 
without a shred of scriptural authority, restrict it to a human day, or some such little 
space of secular time. ‘ One day,’ says Peter, ‘is with the Lord as a thousand years.’ 


Lea 


PROP. 133. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 367 


“Whitby quibbles idly about the word ‘as.’ The very minimum of meanirg that can be 


taken from this is, that a day in God’s reckoning of Hisown works is as a thousand years 
of human reckoning.” He appeals to the scriptural usage of ‘‘ day,’’ and adds: ‘‘ The 
other terms—a season, a harvest, ete.—render a human day impossible, and it appears 
equally impossible when we consider the work and the means.’’ Surely, such statements, 
from such a source, ought to have weight. 


Obs. 5. The scholastic or eccles. terms ‘‘ the Last Judgment,’’ Dr. Knapp 
(Ch. Theol., p. 542) frankly says is not employed in the New Test., and 
that the phrases ‘‘ the last day”’ or ‘‘ last days’ are not ‘‘ used exclusively 
with reference fo the end of the world. 'They often designate merely the 
future, coming days—e.g. 2 Tim. 3:1; 2 Pet.3:3. They sometimes also 
denote the last period of the world, or, the times of the Messiah, e.g. 
Heb. 1 : 2; 1 Pet. 1 : 20,” etc. Such concessions could be multiplied, but 
are unnecessary. ‘The Jewish and Early Church view is abundantly sus- 
tained by the opinions of eminent writers of various classes. ‘l'o illus- 
trate: John Wesley, Sev. on Rom. 14: 10 (Works), says: ‘‘ The time 
termed by the Prophet ‘ the great and terrible day’ is usually in Scripture 
styled the Day of the Lord. The space from the creation of man upon the 
earth, to the end of all things, is the day of the sons of men; the time 
that is now passing over us is properly our day ; when this is ended, the 
day of the Lord will begin. But who can say how long it will continue? 
‘With the Lord one day is a thousand years, and a thousand years as one 


day,’ 2 Pet. 8:8. And from this very expression, some of the ancient 


fathers drew that inference, that, what is commonly called the Day of 
Judgment would indeed be a thousand years ; and it seems they did not go 
beyond the truth ; nay, probably they did not come up to it,’’ etc. He 
affirms that what is done at the Judgment Day could not possibly be con- 
fined zo less than a thousand years. Bh. Newton (Diss. on Proph., vol. 2, 
p. 377), speaking of the Seventh Millenary, remarks: ‘‘ According to tra- 
dition too, these thousand years of the reign of Christ and the saints are 
‘the great Day of Judgment ;? in the morning or beginning whereof shall 
be the coming of Christ in flaming fire, and the particular judgment of 
Antichrist and the first resurrection ; and in ¢he evening or conclusion 
whereof shall be the general resurrection of the dead.’”’* Now let us pro- 
ceed to ascertain the correctness of such inferences, and see whether they 
are not abundantly sustained by the direct testimony of the Word. 

1 The reader is referred to works of Farmer, Bickersteth, Seiss, Cunningham, Goodwin, 


Lord, McNeile, Noel, Cox, Brookes, Taylor, and others for additional opinions all favoring 
this view. 


Obs. 6. Peter certainly knew the Jewish view of the Messiah’s Judge- 
ship, the Day of Judgment,’ etc., and yet he in the plainest possible 
manner confirms the truthfulness of it. In 2 Pet. 3:7, 8 he introduces 
the Coming of the Saviour and the reservation of the heavens and earth 
unto fire ‘“‘ against the Day of Judgment and the perdition of ungodly 
men,’’ and then adds: ‘‘ But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, 
that one day 1s with the Lord as a thousand years and a thousand years as 
one day.’’ Having just mentioned ‘‘ the Day of Judgment,’ he guards the 
expression by the words following, lest it should be limited to ashort period, 
or even to a literal day. Foreseeing, by the Spirit, this very error into 
which multitudes have fallen, he cautions us that this ‘‘ day’’ of which he 
writes, may include, at least, a thousand years. ‘The expression quoted, 


368 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. - [PRop. 183. 


in its twofold application to time, certainly conveys the idea that we are 
not to limit its duration to a brief period ; and when the same Spirit in- 
cludes, in what the Prophets call ‘‘ the day,’’ the thousand years of Rey. 20, 
then the amplitude of ‘‘ the day’’ is verified. In accord with this, in 
Heb. 4 : 1-11, the great Sabbatism, the Rest or Sabbath day remaining for 
God’s children, is called ‘‘ a day.’’ And in Rom. 13 : 12 it is said, ‘‘ the 
night is far spent, the day is at hand,” in which the nature of the two ages 
is described, the one of trial and the other of light and glory ; and the 
duration of time is embraced, the night being this dispensation, and the 
day the coming age or dispensation.? Now if we turn to the Prophets 
they with one accord term ‘‘ the day,’’ ‘* His day,’’ ‘‘ that day,’’ etc., the 
very period of time in which the Lord comes to judge or reign—to inflict 
judgments on the nations as well as to sit as “‘ the Judge of Jsrael’’—the 
entire Millennial era being thus designated.* From all this, we are fully 
warranted to conclude that ‘‘ the Day of Judgment’ simply denotes a time 
of judgment, and embraces within its limits the Millennium, a long period 
of time. This is corroborated by the Judgeship of Christ being equivalent 
to His Kingly rule; by the Millennial era being frequently designated 
‘‘the day’’ in which the Judgeship of Christ is to be manifested ; by the 
acts of the King at the commencement, duration, and close of the period, 
and by the reasons assigned in the Propositions following.* 


! This subject is so fruitful that we add another testimony : Joseph Mede, whom our 
opponents, as Prof. Bush, pronounce to be “‘ one of the profoundest biblical scholars of the 
English Church,’ says: ‘‘ It is to be remembered that the Jews, who gave to this time the 
title of Day of Judgment and from whom our Saviour and the apostles took it, never under- 


stood thereby anything but a time of many years’ continuance.’’ See Rabbinical references — 


given by Wetstein, loci. Lederer ( Nathaniel, Jan., 1871) shows that the Jews entertained 
the doctrine of a coming day of judgment, and that Paul and the New Test. incorporated 
the idea, it being taught in the Old Test., from whence they derived it, This was done in 
opposition to a view entertained by some (in Mishna) of an annular judgment, which 
last, as other Rabbis asserted, was not to be found in the Old Test. 

* Commentators generally admit this distinction of time; so e.g. even Barnes loci, 
when he makes the night the time under the Gospel and the day “ the glory of redemp- 
tion in heaven,” etc. The reader may notice how such an admission of ‘‘ the night’’ is 
directly opposed to his theory of the Millennium, for that, too, then would be ‘“‘ night,” 
In Ps. 89 : 4 (Sep.) and Ps. 90:4, a thousand years are represented as a watch in the 
night, and if we take that view of time given by the Holy Spirit, we may well call the 
entire period of the world’s existence, from the curse down, the night (comp. Prop. 139). 

° Take, e.g. Isa. 2: 12, and Alexander, Com. loci, renders it ‘‘ an appointed time for 
the manifestation of His (Jehovah’s) power.’’ So Coce., Jun., J. D. Mich. “ has it 
appointed ” or as Hitzig ‘‘ hold a day,’’ or as Gesenius, ‘‘ hold a judgment day.’’ The 
student will observe the connection, ‘‘the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day,” not 
for a brief period, certainly. 

4 It is interesting to note how Mede (Works, B. 3, p. 611) paraphrases 2 Pet. 3:8: 
‘** But whereas I mentioned the day of judgment, lest ye might mistake it for a short day 
or a day of few hours, I would not, beloved, have you ignorant that one day is with the 
Lord as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day.” Then remarking that the 
style and sentiment is that of the Jewish doctors, he adds: ‘‘ The words are commonly 
taken as an argument why God should not be thought slack in His promise (which fol- 
lows in the next verse), but the first Fathers took it otherwise, and besides it proves it 
not. For the question is not whether the time be long or short in respect of God, but 
whether it be long or short in respect of us, otherwise not only a thousand years but an 
hundred thousand years are in the eyes of God no more than one day is to us, and so it 
would not seem long to God if the day of judgment would be deferred till then,’’ ete. 


Obs. 7. A few additional illustrations may be in place to strengthen our 
position, and to show the general analogy of Scripture. In Zech. 14, im 


Prop. 133. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 369 


“the day’ that the Lord and His saints come, when His judgments are 
poured out upon the nations, and Christ is ‘* King over all the earth,’’ the 
phrase “‘in that day” includes not only the entire age, but the acts of 
Christ preceding and during its continuance, the overthrow of His enemies, 


the deliverance of His people, and the reign with its results, Joel 3 in- 


- forms us that “ in the day of the Lord’’ the nations shall be gathered, the 


mighty ones come down, the nations are to be judged, the people of God 
to be delivered, Jerusalem to be exalted, etc. ‘he revelation of Christ as 
Judge embraces both wrath and mercy—wrath to His enemies, mercy to 
His saints and Jewish nation, and through them to the spared of the 


nations, This period of time, called ‘‘ the day of the Lord,’’ which the 


Spirit afterward (as we shall show) more specifically names ‘‘ the day of 
the Lord Jesus Christ,’’ embraces this Judgeship, exhibiting in its acts not 
merely the exercise of judicial power, but all the attributes of a Sovereign. 
Zeph. 3 designates ‘‘ the day’’ when the Lord shall ‘‘ rise up to the prey,”’ 
when He shall ** gather the nations’? to pour upon them His anger. ‘‘ Jn 
that day’’ His ‘‘ holy mountain’’ shall be established ; ‘‘ the remnant of 
Israel’’ shall be restored and become holy; ‘‘ the King of Israel, even the 
Lord, shall be in the midst of thee ;’’ and blessedness and glory are promised 
‘at that time’ and ‘‘ in that day,’’ such as we find alone in Millennial pre- 
dictions. Thus the Spirit joins together the Judging and the Day; and 
we do not feel at hberty to disconnect what is thus united. Finding Jesus 
revealed as the Judge at the period of the harvest (which is proven to be 
Pre-Mill.) ; at the time the Jast (seventh) trumpet sounds (which is also 
Pre-Mill.) ; at the time His Kingdom also comes ; at the time His enemies 
are to be destroyed and His people enjoy a glorious deliverance, etc.; and 
when we find that to this Judgeship is ascribed the blessedness of that 
Kingdom and dominion which is to follow; that that Judgeship is de- 
scribed as continuously exercised ; that the period of time in which it is 
exerted is designated according to prophetical usage ‘‘ the day,’’ etc.—it is 
simply to be incredulous and illogical to ascribe to ‘‘ the Day of Judgment’’ 
the ordinary Popish view. Weare forbidden fo limit and degrade it in this 
manner, seeing that the results of a continued judging are witnessed in the 
glory of the Millennium ; that the most triumphant (however terrible to the © 
wicked) declarations respecting it, as the means by which all evil shall be 

rooted out and happiness be restored, are given ; that it is the instrumen- 

tality by which all the events, so tremendous to the ungodly and so blessed 

to the righteous, shall be accomplished. This imparts to it a higher, 

nobler aspect, befitting the descriptions of it, than that of the opposite, 

prevailing view. In this day the kingly power of Christ is exerted, not 

in a day of assize, apprehension, terror, awful solemnity arising from mere 

judicial investigation of character, but in behalf of His own people. This 

is the testimony of the Prophets, that this day comes for deliverance, for 

glorious redemption. It is true, that in it the enemies of God shall perish 


(hence fearful to them), but it is equally true that in it God’s people shall 


be delivered from those enemies, and be rewarded with peace, joy, etc. In 
brief, this judgment day or period manifests the Divine Rule of David's 


_ Son and Lord, on David’s throne, and the judgment or rule bestowed upon 


the saints of the Most High. The Spirit thus gives a sublimity to the ad- 
ministrations of the Judge and of the Judgment Day, making vt an object 
of desire and hope to the righteous, meeting and verifying the predictions 
concerning it, and binding the promises of God identified with 1t in @ con- 


370 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 183. 


sistent, harmonious union. Our faith accepts of the simple fact that the 
government in this Coming Kingdom of King Jesus and His saints, which 
is to subject all to the predicted 'heocratic rule and dominion, is designated 
as ‘‘ the judgment,’’ and the period of its exercise is called *‘ the day,”’ the 
time, etc. Our faith too receives the additional fact, that it is a cove- 
nanted, ‘‘ appointed’’ period in which David’s Son is to exhibit both His 
majesty and power. It is promised to Him as David’s Son, as Son of 
Man, and if we desire to know when it will occur, what events will trans- 
pire, what results will be worked out, what its duration is, etc., we have 
only to open the Prophets who predict and describe it, without largely 
drawing on monkish imagination or old paintings to make out a picture of 
it. ‘The announcement comes to us in the simplest form, that a period of 
time is appointed in which Jesus will be revealed as the Judge, the King, 
assume the visible Judgeship or Rulership of the World, and the events 
connected therewith, such as the resurrection of the saints, the overthrow 
of enemies, the restoration of the Jewish nation, the subjugation of all 
people, the binding of Satan, the rewarding of the righteous, the fulfil- 
ment of Mill. predictions, etc., indicate a lengthy period. To this opinion 
the Early Church, which received its interpretation of the prophets from 
inspired men, bowed, and we find abundant reasons for doing the same, 
and thus remaining in ‘‘ the old paths.”’ It is a precious truth that 
Christ judges for purposes of Redemption, and that the Judgment Day 
embraces Lvedemption in its highest form. 


This enables us to appreciate the reason why the early Church so earnestly and 
gladly looked for ‘‘ the Day of Judgment,”’ as a means of release from all evil, and of 
exaltation in power. Thus e.g. Archb. Tillotson (Ser. on “ The Day of Judgment,’’ Mark 
13 : 32, 33) notices that the early Christians constantly looked for it, insisted upon a 
continued preparation for it, in order that blessed deliverance might be experienced. 
Their views of Christ’s judging, the Apostles’ judging, the saints’ judging, and of the day 
or time of judgment, necessarily made it an object of delightful faith and hope, and they 
could literally receive and say, Ps. 96 : 10-13 ; 67:4, and 98 :4-9. Alas! how per- 
verted has all this become under the vain substitutions of men. (Comp. e.g. 2 Pet. 
a 12.) 

In conclusion, it may be well to reply to an objection urged by Dr. Brown (Ch. See. 
Com., p. 267) as follows: ‘‘ At what part of the great Judgment Day do the myriads of 
mankind who live during the Millennium come in to be judged? Nowhere. They were 
not in being to be included in the acts of the morning, and share in the resurrection-glory 
then awarded. The mid-day acts of government and rule are no judicial] trial of and de- 
cision upon their personal character tor eternity ; and the closing act of all, at the end of 
the Millennium, which is the evening of the day, cannot take them in—the saints among 
them at least—for it is a judgment of the wicked only. The scheme, in fact, makes no 
provision for their being judged at all.’ The doctor evidently overlooked the opinion of 
many Pre-Millenarians expressed in their works, and of those quoted by himself. If 
nothing were intimated in the Scriptures whatever on the subject, it would have no weight 
in deciding the question respecting such judgment, for the simple reason that we antici- 
pate entering a new dispensation, in which there will be an expression given of the Divine 
Will (see Prop. 167) on many points now either obscure or not broached. But we have 
sufficient intimations, finding judicial judgment in the Mill. age, and every Millenarian 
nearly speaks of it as found e.g. in Isa. 65 ; Zech. 14 ; Isa. 60, etc. Then again we have 
judicial judgments inflicted at the end of the little season, Rev. 20. Then again, as 
stated in the conclusion of Rev. 20, we have a general raising of the dead, including those 
who died in the Mill. age, embracing the righteous and wicked, with the exception (as we 
have shown) of those who may have been translated without death, for it is the expressed 
view of Millenarians that such translations will be far more extensive in this incoming 
dispensation than in preceding ones (and this necessarily includes judicial judgment). 
Such an objection could not be urged if the objector would observe the nature of the 
Kingdom introduced, the Theocratic form, which, of necessity includes in its ordering and 
practical form not only the legislative and the executive, but likewise judicial action. 


Prop. 133. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM.' Bye 


Lange, Com. Rev., 20 : 4, 5, expresses himself thus : ‘‘ In general, however, the entire con 
is to be conceived of as an zon of separations and eliminations in an ethical and a cos- 
mical sense, separations and eliminations such as are necessary to make manifest and to 
complete the ideal regulations of life. Of judgments of damnation between the judg- 
ment upon Antichrist and the judgment upon Satan, there can be no question ; the refer- 
ence (i.e. to judgment) can be only to a critical government and management, preparatory 
to the final consummation. ‘The whole won is a crisis which occasions the visible appear- 
ance of the Heaven on earth ; the whole won is the great Last Day.”’ 


372 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 184. 


Proposition 134. Our view of Judgment (and as a consequence 
that also of the Kingdom) is fully sustained by the passage of 
Scripture, Matt. 25 : 31-46. 


This passage, employed by our opponents to prove a general, uni- 
versal assize (the Popish view), is supposed to be the strongest, and 
wholly incontrovertible. Our argument, therefore, would be incom- 
plete, if we did not bestow upon it special attention, and con- 
clusively show that it forms an irresistible evidence in our favor. 
Let us take this very Scripture (so much relied on, as hostile to our 
doctrine) and compare it with other passages referring to God’s 
revealed purposes at the same period of time, and it will be found 
in complete harmony with our teaching. ‘To avoid misapprehension, 
it may be proper to repeat that our doctrine firmly accepts of the 
truth that all men are to be judged, and that their eternal condition 
(saving that of the heathen) will depend on their acceptance or rejec- 
tion of the commands of God in Christ (and their personal appli- 
cation), but we reassert that such a judgment is not necessarily 
simultaneous, for part of it is Pre-Millennial, part Millennial, and 
part Post-Millennial. Pre-Millennial, as it affects the righteous, 
the overthrow of the living wicked, and the carrying into postpone- 
ment the non-resurrection of the wicked dead until the close of the 
one thousand years ; Millennial, as it affects the establishment of 
the Kingdom, the restoration of the Jews,. the apportioning of 
positions, the execution and progress of the divine government ; 
Post-Millennial, when ‘‘ the rest of the dead,’’ and Satan himself, 
are judged. | 


Some announce this passage to self-evidently teach a great ‘‘ Day of Assize,’’ ‘‘ a 
Judicial Day of Judgment,”’ in which all that ever lived on earth down to the Sec. Advent 
(so e.g. Edwards’s His. Redemp., and others)are brought before Jesus Christ (who acts in 
the capacity of a jurist) to be tried, either to be justified or condemned, and their des- 
tiny for eternity to be determined. But if so self-evident they overlook the historical 
fact that for several centuries it received an interpretation exceedingly antagonistic to 
this claimed obvious opinion. The Primitive Millenarianism (Props. 71-75) never enter- 
tained such an inconsistent view, and it was only in opposition to its direct teaching that 
the prevailing notion respecting it arose. Some recent commentators profess to give the 
Pre-Millenarian interpretation, but very carefully leave out our main, leading reasons for 
applying it as we do, and then, with this multilation before them, undertake its refuta- 
tion ! 

We have called this a ‘‘ Popish view.’’ We give a recent Roman Catholic interpreta- 
tion : Dr. Rutter, in his Life of Jesus, ch. 126, affirms that the Son of Man shall “ sit upon 
a bright cloud as the seat of His majesty ;’’ that the ‘‘ all nations” include “ all man- 
kind ;’ that this gathering ‘‘ will probably take place near Jertsalem in the Valley of 
Josaphet,’’ where will be separated ‘‘ the elect from the reprobate, the sheep, i.e. the 
just” will ‘‘ be taken up into the clouds to meet Him as described by St. Paul, 1 Thess, 


s 


» 


Prop. 134. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 8373 


4:16 ;” the reprobate, i.e. the goats, will be left on earth to receive their eternal doom ; 
that the inheritance is given in view of good works, and that the wicked are cast to hell 
for neglect of such works ; both conditions are eternal. Now compare with this numerous 
Protestant versions (ase.g. Pres. Edwards’s view, His. of Redemp., Barnes's Com. loci, and 
hundreds of others), and they are identical in spirit and application. Dr. Rutter applies it 
but mildly in comparison with many of his predecessors and their followers in Protestant 
churches. 


Obs. 1. Those who apply this passage to a general assize can only do so 
by taking for granted two suppositions, which are, in order to make out 
their sense, engrafted upon it. (1) It is supposed that the ‘‘ all nations”’ 
mean ‘‘ all the generations of men that ever existed ;’’? but this is a mere 
inference, and, being unproven, is a mere begging of the question. (2) In 
order to sustain the first supposition, it is conjectured that this necessarily 
implies a previous resurrection of all the dead ; but this also is mere infer- 
ence, unsupported by a particle of proof. 


Some (as Thomas, Homil. Com. loci) not only thus locate the fulfilment at the Sec. 
Advent in a general assize with a previous general resurrection, but make out of it a con- 
tinuous judgment, now progressing, becoming more ‘‘ intensely conscious’’ at death, and 
“intensified” at the day of judgment. A supposition advanced by some is the follow- 
ing : The Parable of the Virgins is fulfilled at the beginning of the one thousand years ; 
the Parable of the Talents following, at the beginning and during and at the end of the 
one thousand years ; and this passage, referring to the sheep and goats, at the end of the 
one thousand years. But this needs no refutation, being self-contradictory, as appears 
under this and various Propositions. Another view entertained by a few may be briefiy 
dismissed, viz., that this Scripture was fulfilled at the destruction of Jerusalem. Sucha 
gathering, separation, assignment of reward and punishment, was not there witnessed 
and experienced. It is only those who strive to rid themselves of a personal Sec. Advent, 
etc., that present it. We only now say that in ch. 24 we have the conclusion presented 
of the Second Advent, and warnings given to urge to faithfulness and watchfulness for the 
same. ‘Then follow three parables in reference to the identical Sec. Advent mentioned in 
the context ; and these are presented to illustrate and enforce the same. We have three 
distinctive peculiarities pertaining to that Advent pointed out and impressed, viz., 1. The 
Parable of the Virgins, indicative of the judgment (separation) of the Church at the thief- 
like Coming (first stage—see Prop. 130) of Jesus ; comp. Prop. 181. 2. The Parable of 
the Talents, enforcing the idea of the judgment of believers in order to the bestowment 
of reward, station, rank in the Kingdom ; comp. Prop. 135. 3. The judgment of the 
nations at the open manifestation of that Advent. Thus a strictly logical and chronolog- 
ical order that unites these descriptions is preserved. 


Obs. 2. Observe the various particulars of the passage, and its harmony 
with our position. 

1. The context. The intimate connections with the preceding state- 
ments of chs. 24 and 25 must be noticed, embracing a series of events from 
the tribulation of the Jews during the times of the Gentiles down to the 
Sec. Advent, without giving the slightest hint of a Millennial era prior to 
the Advent. The shading of trial, the continued and culminated wicked- 
ness, the waiting, the probation, the mixed conditiun of the Church, the 
prolonged absence of the King, the Advent at atime of unbelief as in the 
days of Noah—all in this epitome of history is opposed to the notion of a 
previous existing Millennium. Hence the interpretation given to this 
Scripture must correspond with the context.’ 

2. The interpretation must naturally connect itself with the preceding 
thought, for a glance will show that v. 31 is closely allied with it. Now 
what is that leading idea with which this passage stands associated ? . It 1s 
that of rulership, kingship, an inheriting of a Kingdom ; the position in 


374 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 1384. 


the same being dependent on the use of talents committed to us, bringing 
more or less of station or complete rejection. Now this kingship, as the 
analogy of Scripture shows, is Millennial, and therefore any application 
to Post-Millennial times is certainly erroneous.’ 

3. This Coming of the ‘‘Son of Man,”’ all (excepting a few) admit, 
refers to His personal Coming (comp. Props. 82 to 84, and 121 to 130). 
There is only one future Advent of Jesus delineated in the Scriptures, and 
that is Pre-Millennial.* 

4, This ‘‘Son of Man” shall come in His “‘ glory’? (with which com- 
pare e.g. Matt. 16 : 27 and 26: 64; Mark 8:38; Luke 9:26), This 
‘“‘ glory” is asserted in Mill. descriptions, as e.g. Isa. 60:1, 2, 19; 2:19, 
21; 85:2; 40:53 62: 2, etce., and therefore fully accords. 

5. At this Coming ‘‘ then shall He sit upon the throne of His glory,’’ or 
‘¢upon His glorious throne.’? The stress of ‘‘ then’’ is indicative that 
He then—now, at that time—assumes His throne. In the consideration of 
this throne, then occupied, certainly the covenanted throne belonging to 
Him as the Son of Man should be regarded. Having passed over this in 
detail (Props. 49, 81-83, 122, etc.), it is amply sufficient to direct attention 
to such passages as Matt. 19 : 28; Rev. 3 : 21, and to the Millennial predic- 
tions which declare that David’s Son shall reign'on Dayid’s throne, ete. 
We only now desire to show that the language is 7m harmony with our posi- 
tion on covenanted ground. 

6. At this Coming, a Kingdom is also exhibited for, v. 34, the righteous 
inherit a Kingdom (comp. 2 Tim. 4:1; 2 Thess. 1:5; 2 Pet. 1: 1a) 
After the delineations of this Kingdom in the Millennial period (demand- 
ing the Supernatural to be directly exercised in order to secure its estab- 
lishment and blessings), and such references as Luke 22 : 28-30, there 
should be no difficulty, provided the general tenor of the passage admits, 
to identify the period indicated. 

?. At this Advent, ‘‘ before Him shall be gathered all nations.’’ The 
question before us is this: Does the “ all nations’’ include ‘‘ the dead,”’ 
or only diving nations? In deciding this point we have the following: (1). 
Nothing is said of ‘‘ the dead.’’ ‘To say that they are denoted is inferred 
from the fact that this passage is. made—wrongfully—to synchronize with 
Rev. 20 : 11-15.* (2) The word translated ‘‘ nations” is never, according 
to the uniform testimony of critics and scholars, used to designate ‘‘ the 
dead,’’ unless this be a solitary exception. This fact, certainly, ought to 
influence the student to hesitate in accepting such an alleged exception, 
without the most positive proof that it really forms one. (3) The word 
is employed to denote living, existing nations, and almost exclusively 
“Gentile” nations.° (4) The Spirit gives us abundant testimony that pre- 
cisely such a gathering of living nations shall take place just before the 
Mill. age commences, and that there shall be doth an Advent and judging. 
Let the reader compare ‘‘ the beast and the kings of the earth and their 
armies’ of Rev. 19 : 17-20, ‘‘ the kings of the earth and of the whole world” 
gathered of Rev. 16 : 13-16, the ‘‘all flesh’’ of Isa. 66 : 15-21, ‘‘ the 
nations gathered and kingdoms assembled’? of Zeph. 3 : 8-20, ‘‘ the mighty 
men, all the men of war, the Gentiles, all ye heathen gathered’’ of 
Joel 3 : 9-21, etc., and he will find ¢his identical period of time fully pre- 
sented. (6) National judgments are only poured out upon living, existing 
nations, and not upon the dead who are devoid of any organization be- 
longing to the idea of nation or state. Nations are punished or rewarded 


oS = ee 


slit — = = 


«s 
il a a 


_ 
= 


Prop. 134. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 375 


here on the earth Pre-Millennial, as seene.g. Zech. 14. (7) As there is no 
statement that any of these nations arose from the dead, so there is none 
that any part of them descended from heaven to be judged ; the language, 
provided no previous theory is made to influence it, simply describing 
nations here on the earth, in some way, gathered together at the Sec. Ad- 
vent. (8) The phrase ‘‘ a// nations’’ does not by any means include every 
individual, much less the generations past deceased, as is seen by the usage 
of Scripture, ase.g. Matt. 28 :19; Luke 21:24; Matt. 24 : 9-14, etc.°® 
(9) The ¢es¢ itself, as applied, certainly does not include ‘‘ all flesh,’? much 
less ‘‘ all the past dead,’’ because it only is applicable to adults,and not to 
children, to nations having access to the truth and to believers, and not to 
barbarous and ignorant nations. 

8. The separation, as of sheep from goats, is the same figure used i” con- 
nection with Millennial predictions, as can be seen in Ezek. 34 : 17, etc.; 
Zech. 10:3. That the Mill. erais ushered in by a previous distinguishing 
between parties and a final parting of them is abundantly shown. (Comp. 
e.g. Props. 65, 86, 90, 115, 123, etc.). 

9. The fime of inheriting the Kingdom gives us another decided reason 
for its Pre-Millennial interpretation. It has been shown in detail, under 
various Props. (90, 121, 154, etc.), that when the Son of Man comes ac- 
cording to Daniel and others (which is Pre-Mill.), that then the actual 
possession—the inheritance—of a Kingdom is given to the righteous. We 
read of no inheriting the Kingdom after the 1000 years, and for the simple 
reason that the inheritors of a Kingdom have all been previously secured. 
(Comp. Props. 86, 118, 130, 142, 153, etc.) 

10. The inheriting of a ‘* Kingdom prepared for you from the founda- 
tion of the world’’ again favors our position (comp. Prop. 2). For, if it 
refers to a Kingdom designed for them in the beginning, it must corre- 
spond with the covenant and the promises based thereon ; or if it applies, 
that this world when formed was designed and appointed for this King- 
dom, then the Second Adamic reign is introduced by this overthrow of 
wickedness and elevation of the righteous here on the earth. In either 
case it is a Kingdom over living nations, after a restoration of the Jews, 
etc., making it a Kingdom just the reverse of that portrayed by those who 
insist upon a general assize. (Comp. Props. 81-105.) 

11. He judges asa King, as a Shepherd ; and these things are asserted 
of the Mill. reign, as e.g. Zech. 14, Ezek. 34 : 23, etc. (Comp. 
Prop. 132.) 

12. The Pre-Mill. judgment, as we have shown, is not one of barbarous, 
heathen nations who have not heard the Gospel, as is seen e.g. in Isa. 
66:19. If this passage teaches the same judgment, it must correspond 
with it. ‘This is decisively given in the test of worthiness, for it can only 
apply to those who had an opportunity to know Christ, and manifest their 
regard for Him practically through His members. Now all this most ac- 
curately corresponds with the condition of the persecuted church, and the 
character and position of the nations represented to be confederated 
against Christ, jast previous to the Millenium.’ 

13. The ¢est itself is irresistibly in favor of a Pre-Millennial judgment, 
and under the circumstances advocated by us. Observe the following par- 
ticulars : (1) The connection (see preceding 2), with the parable of the 
talents is obvious, and, without a change, we have a@ continued illustration 
of the assignment of rewards in rulership in the future Kingdom. Now 


376 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 1384. 


the apportionment of stations, rank, authority, is not dependent on appro- 
priating Christ by faith, but as a resultant of such faith, faithfulness in 
the use of the talents committed to us—every one being judged according 
to his deeds (comp. Prop. 135). The Saviour, therefore, iz accord with the 
general analogy of the Scripture on the subject, declares that when He 
comes with His saints in glory to set up His Kingdom, out of the nations 
those who exhibited a living faith by active deeds of sympathy and assist- 
ance shall—with those that preceded them (for the time here delineated is 
not connected with the first or secret stage of the Advent, but with the last 
or open Parousia)—inherit (i.e. be kings in) a Kingdom. It is a direct 
lesson of encouragement to those who live during the period of Antichrist 
in the persecution of the Church, to exercise charity, for which they shall 
be rewarded. Uence it follows that the test presented is precisely the one 
needed to ascertain, not who would be saved (for that is not the train of 
thought, although connected with it), but who would inherit a Kingdom or 
gain an actual, real rulership in it.* (2) He tells us who at that time, 
viz., the living ‘‘ righteous’’ (for those who died in the tribulation under 
Antichrist as martyrs, also obtain Kingship or inherit, Rey. 20 : 4-6), 
shall thus inherit (not unbelievers, but ‘‘ sheep’’ and ‘‘ righteous,’’ expres- 
sions employed only in behalf of believers). And this inheriting results 
from their believing in His promises and appropriating them in practical 
obedience, as e.g. Matt. 10 : 40-42; Mark 9:41, etc. (3), The ‘‘ my 
brethren’’ (whether it apply to living and dead, i.e. those who survived, or 
perished in the persecution) shows that saints were ministered unto by 
fellow-believers, as enjoined e.g. Heb. 6:10. ‘‘ For God is not unright- 
eous fo forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed toward 
His name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister.’’® 
(4) This exhibition of practical charity is obligatory upon the believer, and 
the entire absence of it, as evidenced in mere professors and unbelievers, 
results not merely in loss of rulership, but in sad punishment and the cut- 
ting off from ‘‘ eternal life,’’ because it forms the most positive proof that 
a living faith in Jesus, which produces ‘‘ the mind,”’ etc., which was in 
Him, is lacking. (5) This divine utterance being designed for instruction 
and to urge to deeds of charity, the idea is prominently and forcibly set 
forth that anything thus done to a believer is done to Christ Himself. 
The manner of presenting this only enforces His previous teaching, 
Matt. 10 : 40-42." (6) The saints, true believers, who bring forth good 
deeds, are the only ones who inherit this Kingdom. Outside of this pas- 
sage this is uniformly taught (ase.g. Rom. 8 : 17; James 2:5; Col. 3: 24; 
1 Thess..2) 2125 2 Thess. 1:5; 2 Pet. 1:: 11; 1 Cor. 6 + 9)eteaeee 
therefore, we must interpret to maintain a proper unity—viz., that those 
who inherit are saints. This inheriting is true of the past saints, the 
martyr saints, the living saints, who shall be accounted worthy of it.’ (7) 
We are not at liberty, in order to remove supposed difficulties, to make a 
variety of classes or introduce other parties than those expressly mentioned. 
The passage brings before us the living nations, and these (Gentile nations) 
are divided into two parties by the divine test. The ‘‘ brethren’’ referred 
to, as the usage (e.g. John 20:17; Heb. 2:11, etc.) of the word uni- 
formly teaches, with the additional emphasis on ‘‘ My’’ (Luke 8 : 21; 
Matt. 12 : 50, ete.), are, not the Jews (as Kelly, etc.), but Christians, 
believers in Jesus, and may refer to martyrs, deceased saints, and living 
believers before Him." 


Prop. 184. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 377 


14. Our position is confirmed by the condition in which the children of 
God are found just previous to, and at, this open Parousia, viz., one of sore 
trial and severe persecution (comp. Props. 160, 161, and 162). It will in- 
deed be a time in which “ the righteous,’’ ‘‘ the sheep,’’ the ‘‘ brethren’’ 
of Christ, shall, under the terrible pressure of Antichrist, be ‘‘a hun- 
wered,” ‘““thirsiy,’’ ‘‘ strangers,’’ “‘naked,”’ * sick,’? and. ‘in. prison.’’ 
This is a judgment of believers under trial and of their persecutors (as 
other passages when compared unmistakably show), and Jesus selects it as 
a salient illustration how the principle in the Parable of the Talents will be 
evidenced at that period. Many of our opponents freely admit this Pre- 
Mill. persecution of the Church, with which we, however, -link the per- 
sonal Sec. Advent, and thus introduce the requisite harmony between the 
predictions. 

15. The wicked are removed (‘‘ depart from me’’) from the presence of 
the King. ‘This accords with Pre-Mill. predictions, that the wicked shall 
thus be rooted out, etc. (thus e.g. Rev. chs. 14 and 19, Mal. 4, Ps. 3%, 
etc.). Besides this, although Edwards, and others, have Jesus only to ap- 
pear in the air, and not on the earth (with which only compare Zech. 
14: 4, etc.), and are very positive in asserting that the King immediately 
after this general assize returns to the third heaven, yet we find nothing in 
the passage (and nowhere else in the Bible) of such a return. The Script- 
ures leave, at His Sec. Advent, David’s Son here, just as the covenant de- 
mands, removing the wicked from Him. 

16. The wicked are represented as cast into ‘‘a fire.’”’ Now precisely 
this will occur at the Pre-Mill. Advent of Jesus. The reader is urged to 
compare e.g. on this point, Rev. 19 : 20; Dan. 7: 10,11; Isa. 66 : 15, 16, 
24; Mal. 4: 1-3, ete. Fire, as indicating the vengeance of God, is fre- 
quently predicted as belonging to the introduction of the Kingdom or the 
Mill. blessedness. 

17. The student will especially notice, what inevitably decides this Script- 
ure to be an irresistible argument on our side, viz., that this fire is ‘* pre- 
pared for the devil and his angels.’’ At this Advent of the King, the fire 
is only ‘‘ prepared’’ for them, and while some others are cast in, they (the 
devil and his angels) are not then cast into it. This extremely and inten- 
tionally guarded expression of the Saviour most fully corroborates our Pre- 
Mill. application, since in Rev. 20: 10 Satan is cast into ¢his very fire 
(thus ‘* prepared’’ for Him), in which the wicked were placed before the 
one thousand years; for attention is called to the fact that it is the same 
fire by adding, ‘‘ where the beast and the false prophet are.’’ With which 
period (Pre- or Post-Mill.) does the language of Jesus correspond? ‘The 
only consistent answer is, certainly, that the Pre-Mill. one must be denoted ; 
for after the Millennium only does Satan and his angels hear company with 
those accounted worthy of being cast into ‘‘ the lake of fire’ a thousand 
years previously.” 

18. The destiny is unalterable. At the close of the Mill. era, these rep- 
resentatives of wickedness continue in ‘‘ the fire’’ (under the vernigeance of 
God) into which they were cast, as is seen hy comparing Rev. 19 : 20 with 
Rev. 20:10. The non-inheriting of the Kingdom, their doom, is irrevo- 
cably fixed. | 

19. The reward of “ the righteous’ is e¢ernal. Thus, in the Mill. pre- 
dictions, immortality, perpetual freedom from evil, continued Kingship, 
never-ending glory and blessedness, are predicated of the saints. 


378 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 134, 


Thus in every particular a remarkable correspondence is found between 
this passage and the Pre-Mill. prophecies, so that, on the strength of analogy, 
perfect accordance with all the utterances of the Spirit, we can justly claim 
it as corroborative of our doctrine—essential, in fact, for the introduction of 
the Kingdom. The saints that come with Jesus, as other passages show, 
participate in this judgment, for they have obtained a priority of rulership 
or Judgeship, and the intended dealing of King Jesus with the nations, as 
preparatory to the establishment of His Kingdom, is thus briefly and 
powerfully stated in the line of thought suggested by the manner in which 
rulership is secured in it.™ 


1 This is an important feature, and is violated by able men. Milton (Prose Works, 
vol, 4, p. 487, Lange, Com. loci) locates its fulfilment after the one thousand years, after 
the reign of the saints. But there are insuperable difficulties in its reception. Alford, 
N. T. loci, justly sees that this judgment cannot possibly be applied to the dead saints 
of the past, and hence—unable to locate it properly in time—he also applies it to a gen- 
eral judgment after the one thousand years, after the Millennial Kingdom, making it 
parallel with Rev, 20:11-15. (The concession made by Alford in the 3d ed. of the 
N. Test.—and perverted by some of our opponents—that he declined full confidence in 
his exegesis of portions of Matt. 25, is readily explained by the simple fact that his own 
exegesis does not fit into his continuously expressed Pre-Millennial Advent of Christ and 
its results.* Unable to meet the difficulties, he does not discard—as some suppose—his 
Millenarian views, but expresses his inability to reconcile the prophetic facts. This con- 
cession, instead of deterring others, should only stimulate us to renewed research and 
study.) In this opinion several Pre-Millenarians concur (comp. Lange, loci). Olshausen, 
Steir, and others present the same ; but this is a grave mistake, for, as we shall show, the 
dead are not mentioned, the fire is Pre-Millennial, the inheriting is Pre-Millennial, the 
nations gathered is Pre-Millennial, the entire representation, as contrasted with other 
Scripture, forbids it, as well as the duration of the reign and Kingdom when once estab- 
lished. It may also be remarked that during the Millennial age “ the brethren’”’ are not 
‘“‘ in prison” or “ naked,’’ etc., because then the saints possess the Kingdom, and priva- 
tion and suffering are excluded, Satan also being bound. ‘‘ The little season’’ also does 
not bring forth such results as to effect the continued happiness of ‘‘ the saints.’’ Even 
such a judicious writer as Judge Jones (Notes, p. 323) is somewhat in doubt as to the 
location of this passage, for, after a reference to Matt. 25 : 31-46, he says: ‘‘ Not that we 
suppose the judgment of the nations described in the latter passage will immediately suc- 
ceed upon the Advent described in the former of these passages (Matt. 24 : 30, 31 ; Mark 
12 : 26, 27; Luke 21:27). On the contrary, there may be a very long interval between 
them, to be filled up with the greatest imaginable events. All the things predicted by 
the Apostle John, from Rev. 19 : 11 to the end of the 20th chapter, even the judgment of 
all the dead, may intervene. On this point we affirm nothing.’’ This, however, only 
introduces confusion, and unnecessarily creates difficulties. 

? This apples to several classes of interpreters. (1) To those who hold the Whitbyan 
theory, admitting a Mill. era, but locate the fulfilment of this passage after the same, and 
have this rulership, inheriting of Kingdom, in the third heaven (with which comp. Prop. 
158). (2) To some Pre-Millenarians (e.g. mentioned in preceding note) who locate this 
judgment scene after the one thousand years, although they have a reign of the saints to 
precede during the Mill. era. (3) To all others who locate the fulfilment at the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, or who spiritualize it, or who ignore the inheriting of the Kingdom, 
etc. For the context shows us that this inheriting is the resultant of conduct during the 
personal absence of the Master, and must—as other Scripture teaches—be realized as a 
reward of services at the return of the Lord. Logical consistency demands and enforces 
our position. 

3 Many affirm that after Jesus comes for and with His saints, He then returns to the 
third heaven, but this also is inferred. It is nowhere taught, and the passages from 
which it is deduced (as e.g. Rev. 21, 1 Thess. 4 : 17, etc.) are shown, under appropriate 
Props., to be opposed to it. It is simply adding to the Word that which is not directly 
taught, just as if the inheritance and reign of David’s Son and of the saints was in the 
third heaven and not on the earth. 

4 The student who is advanced in our doctrine sees a reason, a remarkable fitness, why 
Jesus does not say a word respecting ‘‘ the dead.’’ The period here described synchro- 
nizes with Rey. 19 : 15-21, and applies, therefore, only to living nations. The righteous 


Prop. 134. ] ‘THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 379 


dead” have been previously raised up (Rev., chs. 11 and 14. Comp. Props. 125-129) 
being in the armies—the saints—who come with Him to this scene of judgment ; after- 
ward the holy dead who endured the tribulation are raised, but the rest of the dead not 
until the one thousand years are ended. Hence the righteous dead and the wicked dead 
are not included in this prediction (it being an exact parallel with Zech. 14, Rev. 19, etc.), 
which is to be verified at the open Advent of Jesus and His saints, the latter participat- 
ing in the judgment. Thus no contradiction between the predictions, but harmony 
exists. Besides, in Rev. 20 : 11-15 the dead and not the living are specifically mentioned, 
which is intentional in order to preserve unity. 

> Lord (Lit. and Theol. Journal, July, 1851, p. 38), in his reply to Brown, remarks: “ It 
is used in two relations: first, to denote the Gentile nations in contradistinction from 
the Israelites ; and next, to denote the inhabitants of the world without consideration to 
which of those classes they belong.’’ We add, for the consideration of the advanced 
student, that the Spirit purposely here gives the word applicable to ‘‘ Gentile’’ nations, 
because these are the very nations arrayed against the Jews and against the Christ just 
previous to the Mill. era. A striking consistency, so requisite to the truth, is thus main- 
tained. Comp. e.g. on the usage of the word efhnos, Bush in Anastasis, p. 295; Dr. 
Cooper in Essay The Judgment, etc., who show in detail that it is rendered ‘‘ Gentiles,’’ 
or ‘‘ nations,’’ or “ heathen,’’ or “ people,’ and applied to the living. 

6 It is a matter of surprise that scholarly men should so persistently insist upon the 
literal universality of “ all,’’ when it is so frequently used in Scripture (and all languages) 
to denote generality or many, a large number, etc., as e.g. Matt. 3:5; Ex.9:6; Zeph. 
feria; 1 Chron. 14°: 17 ; Matt. 21°: 26, and'10 : 32;John 3: 26.; 2 Tim: 1: 15, ete. The 
same men, however, when pressed by Universalists in this direction, are very ready to 
concede this meaning of “all,’’ and plead in its behalf with vigor. 

7 Tt is here in the test itse/f that writers and commentators involve themselves in so great 
difficulties, that they are utterly unable to locate its fulfilment without either doing vio- 
lence to unity of prediction or presenting their views with extreme hesitation and doubt, 
or refusing to assign its order of realization. After laboring for years in doubt which ap- 
plication to receive, the clue (viz., the judgment of believers which is of works, see Prop. 
135), which removes all the perplexities of the order of fulfilment was joyfully ob- 
tained and will be given under 13. Of course the Post-Mill. notion (as in Barnes Com. 
loci) including all the righteous dead and living, and also all the wicked dead and living, 
is utterly opposed to the test, and consequently must be rejected. But able writers who 
cling to the Pre-Mill. Advent, etc., are in a self-imposed embarrassment on this point. 
Olshausen, Steir, Alford, Keil, and others, looking at the test, cannot see how it is applica- 
ble to those who are justified and saved by faith in Christ, and in endeavoring to steer 
away from the Romish idea of being saved by works, fall themselves into erroneous inter- 
pretation. Some make these nations to consist of heathen unbelievers, some of whom, 
although ignorant, through kindness of heart and pity show mercy to believers, and 
through the exercise of Divine Sovereignty are saved. Others more specifically confine 
them to nations in contact with Christianity (professedly Christianized, but unbelieving) 
because such only have the opportunity of being tested by the standard of sympathy and 
assistance toward believers in their midst. Some make it partly, others wholly para- 
bolic. A popular view is presented by Fowle (Contemp. Review, May, 1872, p. 730), who 
makes it to relate to all mankind and to present a test not “ of personal relationship to 
Himself (Jesus), but of simple human kindness on the part of those who never heard His 
name.” Now all the well-meant ideas of Olshausen, ete. in this direction only confirms 
the Romish and Humanitarian views, viz., that we can be saved either by works or the 
proper exhibition of sympathy and charity, and with all their efforts they raise up un- 
believers, who (through the exercise of tender compassion, etc.) are elevated to a king- 
ship with the saints who have appropriated and confessed Christ. (The gloss that some 
throw in to preserve theological consistency, that it is not “the sheep’”’ out of those 
nations, but the saints who come with Him who inherit, is opposed, as we shall show, to 
the drift of the passage.) 

8 Notice the entire context : in Matt. 24 we have a direct reference to the personal Sec. 
Advent and cautions for watchfulness ; this is followed by a warning respecting the secret 
stage of the Advent in the Parable of the Virgins ; then a teaching concerning the deter- 
mined ground on which rulership is bestowed ; and this is followed by stating what will 
take place at the open, revealed Advent. The principle thus enforced does not, there- 
fore, give the slightest foundation to the opinion that man is saved solely through his 
works or exhibition of humanity, seeing that it leaves the teaching respecting the condi- 
tion of faith in, and justification through, Christ untouched, directing attention only to 
the reward of those who already are believers or profess to be such, and the destiny of 


380 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 184. 


those who evidence neither works nor faith in Jesus, Thus interpreted in the line of 
thought, its teaching is in consistency with all that is said respecting justifying faith, the 
necessity of good works, and the doom of the impenitent. it also does not interfere with 
the select and superior rank of “ the first-fruits’’ (144,000) or with e.g. the special admin- 
istrations of the apostles (on the twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel), be- 
cause a variety of station and rank will be introduced into the incoming Theocracy. 

9 Some (Cooper, Essay on Judgment) think that by these ‘‘ brethren’’ are meant the 
Jews, who are brethren according to the flesh (Rom. 9 : 5, etc.). This makes a good 
interpretation and application, seeing that at this very period just preceding the open 
Parousia in glory, the Jews will also be terribly persecuted. Hence any exhibition of 
faith in God’s Word which leads to the extension of sympathy and aid to them in their 
dire distress will be acceptable to the King, and will be rewarded. 

© Some commentators assume that enlightened Christians, true followers of Jesus, are 
not thus addressed, because none of them could be so ignorant as to forget the plain 
teaching of Jesus in ch. 10 : 40-42, and therefore they could not put in the plea of 
verses 37-39, or be unaware of the fact that their deeds of love have been actuated by 
love to and for Christ. But this takes it for granted that this identical plea will then be 
employed, and overlooks the fact that our Saviour—in view of the best believers forget- 
ting the motives of action, etc.—only impressively enforces the idea of obedience to His 
previous teaching, especially in doing good, and illustrates how even the smallest thing 
(like a drink of water), which at the time might not be ranked by us as a very spiritual or 
pious act, will not lose its reward. The simple scriptural truth presented is this, that 
for everything done (even for every word spoken) we shall receive our reward, however 
forgetful of the fact we may be, and however unconscious at the time of its possessing 
any special merit. Our Teacher in the illustration shows this effectively, and the great 
truth brought out is the oft-repeated (but oft-neglected) one, that in honoring the least of 
His brethren we honor Him. ‘The design of our Lord is not to exhibit His followers as 
“jenorant,’’ but do enforce this truth in a most impressive manner, and thus encourage to 
a practical performance of duty and love, in order that the future station of the believer 
may be enhanced, and that he may “ suffer no loss.” 

1 This does not interfere with the extraordinary privilege and exclusiveness of the 
144,000, Rev. 14, that precedes the harvest, who occupy a higher and nearer position and 
rank with the Christ, for in the Coming Theocracy—as Jesus Himself teaches and as 
analogy informs us—there will be gradations of rank. (Comp. Props. 118, 153, 169, 154.) 
We hold, therefore, with Lactantius, Euthymius, Grotius, and many others, that be- 
lievers are thus rewarded agreeably to the general analogy, and reject that view which 
makes those rewarded to be unconverted persons. So we cannot receive the view that 
confines this to the Mill. age, because (aside from the completion of the inheritors Pre- 
Millennial) according to Mill. promises the saints are not thus distressed or persecuted, 
making sympathy and aid necessary. Besides, the Pre-Mill. jfire—see 17—decides the 
matter. 

12 Some make the ‘‘ sheep’’ to be the Jews (which makes a fair application, if no better 
existed), but we learn that the Jews then living do not inherit the Kingdom (they being 
converted under the sight and providence of the Christ), but, when restored, form a 
nation over which the twelve apostles rule. They are subjects, and not rulers, of the 
Kingdom, for, by their unbelief and rejection of the promised Messiah, they have put 
from them this high and tendered privilege. Others make the “ my brethren’’ to be 
either the Jews or the saints that have come with Jesus, but the passage shows that the 
same class taken out of these nations and placed at His right hand are addressed, and 
not others. Swormstedt (End of the World Near, p. 181) correctly applies this to a judg- 
ment of living nations, but falls into an error when he makes these ‘‘ righteous”’ to be- 
come merely ‘‘ the earthly subjects of Christ during His Mill. reign,” for it is expressly 
asserted of them that they—instead of being subjects—inherit a Kingdom, ‘The fact is 
that all then living among the nations who—whether Jew or Gentile—are believers in 
Jesus and exhibit the same by the practical test applied, will be associated: with the glori- 
fied saints that come with Jesus in the government of the destined world-wide Theocracy. 
That sympathy for and assistance tendered to the Jews when also suffering, shall like- 
wise be remembered and rewarded, is clearly taught in other places, but this does not 
affect our interpretation. 

138 This peculiar and distinctive phraseology seems to be given to meet the prevailing 
unbelief on the subject, as well as the widespread erroneous application of the passage, 
and yet it is sad to see opponents totally ignore this scriptural reason for our interpreta- 
tion, and repeat their suppositions about ‘‘ all nations,” ete., just as if it did not exist. 
This omission to meet our reasoning and at least to attempt an answer neutralizes the 


Sn ee 2 7 ee 


Prop. 184. ] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 381 


argument (if it may be thus called) of our opponents, who (all of them down to Dr. 
Hodge in his Sys. Div.—the last repeating Brown’s statements) quote Matt. 25 ; 31-46, 
as if it presented no difficulties to them (for they refuse to even look at them) ; and then 
coolly appropriate it without e.g. the least attempt to show what fire (Pre- or Post-Mil..) is 
denoted, identifying it, without explanation or meeting our objections, with the latter 
portion of Rev. 20. If they deem this satisfactory or even scholarly, they make a grave 
mistake. ‘This reason was presented by the writer to a number of Post-Millenarian min- 
isters, and they conceded that it was unanswerably in our favor. Several were so im- 
. pressed by the fact that they voluntarily promised to study the subject ; but that was the 
last of it, for they continue from their pulpits to give it, when referred to, the Popish 
explanation. 

Loughborough (Saints’ Inheritance, p. 65), to sustain the crude and unscriptural doctrine 
of the Seventh-Day Adventists respecting the saints possessing the Kingdom after the 
one thousand years (thus violating all order of fulfilment, etc.), says that the wicked cast 
into this fire cannot be consigned to it until after their resurrection, which Rev. 20 locates 
after the Millennial period. But this is to overlook the fact that the resurrection and 
the dead are not mentioned, that living nations are exclusively spoken of, and that, there- 
fore, the Spirit (as if to guard against such error) expressly states the fact that the living 
(not resurrected, but mortal beings) are cast into the fire preceding the Mill. age, as the 
expression (Rev. 19 : 20) ‘* cast alive into a lake of fire” positively teaches ; a confederation 
of mortal men, who are living at that time (and not after the one thousand years) experi- 
ence this treatment. 

14 Thus explained, in accordance with the general analogy on the subject, we see how 
this view sets aside the following errors of interpretation and application. (1) The pre- 
vailing one which applies it to a general or universal judgment ot all men, dead and liv- 
ing, although it is frankly admitted that the principle by which character isto be deter- 
mined is one not applicable to multitudes that have died. (2) The Swedenborgian applica- 
tion of judgment, which does not allow this to be a future action here on the earth. (3) All 
other theories which locate this in the past, or make it representative of something else 
than the language plainly expresses. (4) The idea that it is future but not Pre-Millen- 
nial, being expressive merely of the Divine action and procedure during the thousand 
years, which ignores a comparison of Scripture that inevitably makes it Pre-Millennial. 
(5) The view entertained by some former able Pre-Millenarian writers, as e.g. Bickersteth, 
who, in his Guide and also Promised Glory, thinks that there is a continuous fulfilment, 
the judgment here being comprehensive, embracing both the judgment at the beginning 
of the Mill. age (the resurrection of the just) and the judgment at the end of the age (the 
resurrection of the unjust), but this describes a judgment which occurs at one and the 
same time, and precisely such an one as numerous parallel passages declare is Pre-Mil- 
lennial. ‘The inheriting of a Kingdom, the sentence of the wicked, the gathering of 
nations—in brief, every point of the prophecy is corroborated as Pre-Millennial by other 
predictions and the general order of events. Brown (Christ's Sec. Advent, p. 265) says 
that Mede (Works, p. 841) and Birks adopt the view that Matt. 25 : 31, etc. denotes a 
continuous judgment, one part consummated at the beginning, and the other at the end, 
of the Mill. age, i.e. ‘* the sentence of absolution to continue all the time of the first res- 
urrection, that is, all the thousand years long. That, once ended and finished, and not 
before, he shall proceed to pronounce the sentence of condemnation upon such as are to 
be condemned.’’ But, as Dr. Brown justly observes, this is objectionable, as the impres- 
sion left by the prediction enforces a contemporaneous judgment ; and this, we assert, is 
proven by the fact that these wicked ones are cast into the Pre-Millennial lake of fire, Rev. 
19 : 20. 


Obs. 3. If it be thought that the Parable of Tares and Wheat teach other-. 
wise (a general, universal judgment), the reply is ready, that the time of 
the harvest (which we show to be Pre-Mill.) fixes the period of fulfil- 
ment, while the separation is not predicated of the dead tares or the past 
ripened wheat. Dr. Brown finds a defect in the parable because it is un- 
able to express the idea of a universal judgment including the past dead ; 
we, on the other hand, find no defect, but accurate correspondence with the 
predicted realization. The parable informs us nothing of the tares and 
wheat of former dispensations, nothing respecting the heathen, nothing 
concerning the separation of righteous and wicked at death, but refers us 


382 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 134, 


to the operation of the truth presented during the period between the two 
Advents, to a continuous intermingling of tares and wheat which shall be 
manifested when the harvest comes, and to the separation of the then exist- 
ing tares and wheat at the time of the harvest. Neither Hades nor Heaven 
is harvested, but this world, as it shall exist at the open Advent of the 
great Reaper. Thereis no intimation that either former tares or wheat are 
raised up to be mixed and then separated, while the burning of existing 
‘* tares’’? and the elevation of then living ‘‘ wheat’’ coincides with abun- 
dant Pre-Mill. prophecy. The consistency of our doctrine is seen in this: 
that after the one thousand years are ended the dead tares—‘‘ the rest of 
the dead,’’ who ‘‘ lived not again until the thousand years were finished,’’ 
are also raised up and their destiny awarded. | 

Birks (Lent Lec. for 1843, No. 7, note at end, approvingly quoted by Brown, Christ’s 
Sec. Coming, p. 270, note) has ‘‘ three decisive objections to the view which refers it to the 
judgment of living nations before the Millennium begins. First: The judgment of the 
living has been described in the previous parables.” (How this can be “ decisive” we 
fail to see, because if an important truth and a warning, the Saviour can repeat, seeing, 
especially, that the preceding portions deal with the Church, and this includes far more.) 
‘« Secondly: The nations not included in the Church are not all gathered together at the 
opening of the Millennium.” (How “decisive” this is will appear by noticing that it is 
based on two misapprehensions : (1) No nations are included in the Church, which is 
formed by a people gathered ow of all nations—comp. Props. 60-65 ; (2) the scriptural 
and a very common usage of the word ‘‘all,” in the sense of largely, generally, etc., is 
conveniently overlooked.) ‘‘ Thirdly : The sentence on the wicked is plainly not the sen- 
tence of present death, but of everlasting judgment which follows the close of the Millen- 
nium.’ (But we affirm this fixture of eternal destiny, and hold to no change from the 
Pre- Mill. entailed condition—both for the wicked and righteous. Thus the “ decisive ob- 
jections’’ become very indecisive.) Brown’s (Com. loci) objection that our reference to 
the Gentile nations because they are such as have not heard of God, is insufferable, has 
no force whatever, since we teach the reverse (e.g. Isa. 66 : 19), the entire narration evi- 
dencing that they are such as have access to the persecuted believers. 


Obs. 4. Having thus a judgment of living nations, if the dead generally 
are to be also judged, we should have, to give completeness, a portraiture 
of such a judgment of the dead. Now the judgment of Rev. 20 : 11-15, 
after the one thousand years, is o¢ one of living nations, but pre-eminently 
of ‘ the dead.’’ 'The dead only are mentioned, and who ever adds ‘‘ living 
nations’’ to it (in order to make out a universal judgment) is most certainly 
adding to the prophecy. Precisely such a judgment is required to fill out 
in due proportions what otherwise would be lacking, the order of the 
Divine procedure in the administration of justice. For, if we had no such 
direct prophecy of the judgment of ‘‘ the dead’’ at the ending of the Mill. 
era, it would justly be regarded as a grave defect in our system of faith. 
With it, we have a consonant whole. 


66 


_ Not even “‘all” the dead of past generations are thus included, but all “‘ the rest of 

the dead,’’ for the priority of the latter resurrection of the righteous (Prop. 127) and the 
exclusion of ‘‘ the rest of the dead ’’ until after the one thousand years, evidences this. 
It is sufficient for the student only to refer to Rev. 11 : 15-18 and he will see that under 
the last and Pre-Mill. trumpet such a judgment is exercised, and some of the dead 
rewarded, while in Rev. 20 : 11-15 the remainder are judged. 


Obs. 5. The disciples to whom this passage was addressed, preachers of 
the Kingdom and specially instructed, held to the Jewish views of the 
Judgment at the Coming of the Messiah, to be followed by a glorious Mes- 
sanic reign under the restored Theocratic-Davidic throne and Kingdom. 


ee ee ee ee ee 


Prop. 134. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 383 


The modern Popish view of judgment, followed by a winding up of all 
sublunary affairs, was something that they did not believe, and, impelled by 
covenant and prophecy, could not possibly credit. Now the language of 
Jesus—corresponding with the language of the prophets respecting the 
gathering of the nations and judgment at the Coming of the Lord—is ad- 
mirably adapted to confirm them in their Jewish views, being in strict ac- 
cordance therewith, introducing no element to discredit the same, or to 
render it doubtful. That it put no hindrance to their belief, but con- 
firmed it ; that it only strengthened them in the hope of a following Mes- 
sianic Kingdom, is self-evident from their expressed faith (as e.g. 
Acts 1:6). Surely if the prediction issuch as many moderns contend for, ° 
it ought to have had an opposite tendency. Then again, if the modern 
prevailing view (which we oppose) is the correct one, and is so easily ad- 
ducible (as affirmed) from the passage, how comes it that all the early 
churches, Kast and West (Props. 75, 76), entertained our doctrine and re- 
jected this one? Surely the Popish notion ought to have had very early 
advocates, if it be the correct one, seeing that the doctrine of the Judg- 
ment was a familiar one with the Primitive Christians, so that Polycarp 
(Zpis. Phil.) appeals to it : ‘‘ Who of you are ignorant of the judgment of 
God? Dowe not know that the saints shall judge the world, as Paul 
teaches?’ ‘This question suggests the difficulty to our opponents, 
which none of them have answered, viz., if all the saints are to assist in 
judging the world, how can they be judged simultaneously (as they infer 
from this passage) with the wicked—all men? The Early Church doc- 
trine involved no such glaring inconsistencies. 

Russell (Our Lord’s Return, p. 27) locates the judgment of Matt. 25 : 31-46 in and 
during the Millennium, but this is an erroneous innovation upon ancient and modern 
exegesis. While it is true—as we advocate in detail —that judging involves frequently more 
than mere judicial action, yet the scene and action here described are utterly opposed to 
his idea, as seen (1) in the gathering of the nations, which is Pre-Mill. ; (2) in the inherit- 
ing of the Kingdom, which is the same ; (3) in the location of the fire and the judgment 
pronounced, which also is the same ; (4) in the test applied, which is sustained by the 
condition of the Church at that period. ‘‘ The first-fruits’’ participate in this judging, 
and come with Jesus—Pre-Mill.—in order to partake in its honor, 


Obs. 6. At the conclusion (Props. 132 and 133) of a subject so impor- 
tant, it is proper to suggest what is requisite to neutralize the comparison 
of Scripture thus instituted, and indisputably prove the position of our op- 
ponents. 1. A specific passage, which teaches that there is but one general 
judgment, 2. A passage which directly affirms that all men, both the 
dead and living, will be judicially judged at the same time. 3. To show 
that the Bible statement, that all men will be judged, is not consistently 
met, if a judgment at various times includes all men. 4. A passage which 
asserts that the judgment of all men, dead or living, is after the Millen- 
nium. 5. To show that the judgment unto eternal life (resulting from 
faith in Jesus) is ¢dentical with a judgment according to works. 6. To 
prove that a Pre-Mill. resurrection (which some of them, as Prof. Stuart, 
fully admit, while others affirm a slight precedence in time of the righteous) 
does not necessarily 7xclude a prior judgment. 7%. To show that the Jew- 
ish and Karly Christian view of the Judgeship and of the Judgment Day is 
erroneous, and inconsistent with the prophets. 8. To indicate how it 
came to pass, that under the immediate teaching of the Apostles and the 
teachers appointed by them, the Primitive Church, almost universally, 


384 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 134. 


taught our doctrine. 9. To point out the Scriptures which affirm that 
God has revealed xo order of time in the judgment of mankind, as proph- 
ecy predicts. 10. To explain how the saints (being included in their * all’’) 
are both judged, and, according to promise, judging others at the same 
time. 11. That, according to their theory, the righteous are judged and 
rewarded at death, and then, after a long interval, must again be judicially 
tried ; which requires contirmation from Scripture. 12. How passages 
simply affirming a judgment, or stating that Christ will deny, be 
ashamed of, and disown the wicked, or alluding to the rewarding of right- 
eous and wicked at His Coming, or implying the certainty of judgment, or 
teaching, without expressing the order, the several destinies of the good 
and bad, ave sufficient to invalidate our position, seeing that ail these are 
firmly held by us. Such are some of the things which, we think, have 
not yet been met in the spirit of fairness and candor ; and our opinion is 
amply confirmed by the record found in books, articles, etc., written 
against us, which asswme their doctrine proven by quoting an abundance 
of passages relating to the judgment (which we also receive), and contain- 
ing no manner of specifications how or when they shall be verified. 

The following are the passages quoted against us by Brown (Christ's Sec. Coming, ch, 
11) in advocacy of a simulianeous judgment of all the righteous and wicked, and to ascer- 
tain their relevancy, the reader may refer to them : Matt. 10 : 32, 33; Mark 8 : 38; Rev. 
°21: 7,8; 22 : 12-15; Matt. 16 : 24-27; 7 : 21-23 ; 25:10; 25 : 31-46; 13 : 38-43; John 
5 : 28, 29; Acts 17:31; Rom. 2 : 5-16; 2 Cor. 5 : 9-11; 1 Cor. 4:5; 2 Thess. 1 : 6-10; 
1 Cor.:3 :12-15:; Col. 1 : 28; Heb. 13:17; 1 Thess. 2:19, 20; 1 John 2:28 5 4 aie 
Rev. 3:5;-1 Tim. 5 : 24, 25; Rom. 14:10, 12; 2 Pet. 3+7, 10,12; Rey. 20> tie ae 
2Tim.4:1. This array of Scripture utterly fails to sustain his inferences drawn from 


them, as the reader can readily see by comparing his deductions from them with the 
statements made by us. Lord and others have met these passages in detail, but the illus- 


trations and reasoning presented by us are amply sufficient to explain them. We call 


attention to Brown’s Com. on Matt. 25, where the reader can see for himself how unfairly 
he presents our views, leaving out the main reasons for our decided opinions. In his 
controversial work he deals largely in conflicting individual opinions (as if they did not 
exist, even more largely, on his side), and by an appeal to an alleged almost universal 
application, which, however, he fails to trace up to its true origin, the apostasy, and in 
view of various theories, suggesting difficulties instead of establishing his own doctrine 
and clearing it of embarrassments. We thus specially select Dr. Brown because he has 
been so highly eulogized as the ablest writer against us, whom Barnes (Com.), Hodge (Sys. 
Div.), and others confidently follow as authority. The reader will be interested in a con- 
cession may by Dr. Brown (Christ’s Sec. Com., p. 261), which our opponents try to con- 
ceal: ‘‘ There can be no doubt that the words ‘ judge’ and ‘ judgment’ are used in 
Scripture, both in the sense of exercising kingly rule and in the sense of inflicting public 
vengeance,’ but denies that these senses are intended when “‘ Christ will come to judge at 
the great day.’’ The student will observe how the words are employed in reference to 
Christ in the Old Test., and then how suddenly, according to Brown, they change their 
meaning and must be limited in the New Test., although it is expressly said that He 
comes as King and judges as the King, ete. 


ee 6 ee ee Se 


PRop. 135. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 385 


Proposition 1385. Lhe doctrine of the Kingdom in full accord 
with the Scriptural doctrine of the judgment of believers. 


The Theocratic Kingdom contemplating for its rulers, associated 
with the Christ, the saints, must necessarily make provision for the 
same by a present and future judgment of believers. By this 
method the requisite qualifications for future kingship and priest- 
hood are made manifest. 


Obs. 1. It is self-evident that any one accounted worthy of the better 
resurrection’’—that pre-eminent res. alone attributed to the righteous—and 
any one deemed holy enough for a translation at the Sec. Advent, must, 
in view of such a decided preference shown to them, be the subject of an 
antecedent judgment. How else can it be known that they possess the 
qualifications requisite for such honor and blessedness? Both the resur- 
rection and translation are represented as a sudden, instantaneous change, 
and demand a previous preparedness for the same. ‘The same is true of 
the saints coming with Jesus at His open Parousia, for ‘‘ all the saints’’ 
(Zech. 14:5) come with Him. To attain this honor, an antecedent esti- 
mate of character must have preceded. So also the saints are to be asso- 
ciated with Jesus in the judgment of the world (1 Cor. 6 : 2), for ‘‘ this 
honor have all the saints’? (Ps. 149: 9). This Judgeship necessarily im- 
plies the previous judgment of these saints in order to evidence their fit- 
ness for so high and responsible a position. 

It is a matter taken for granted in every system of theology that judgments are often 
manifested even in this world, and that an antecedent judgment determines the status of 
every one at death and in the intermediate state. The principle, therefore, is one fully 
recognized, and should consequently excite no surprise when thus applied by ourselves. 


Obs. 2. Pre Millenarians firmly hold that all men, both the righteous 
and wicked, will be judged, not only in this life but inthe future. ‘T’he pas- 
sages teaching this are numerous and emphatic, such e.g. as Heb. 9:27; 
Rom. 2 : 2-16; Matt. 12:36; 1 Pet. 4: 4,5, etc. But, as already shown, 
there is an order in this judgment, just as there is an order in the resur- 
rection. Take the expression ‘‘ As it is appointed unto men once to die, 
but after this the judgment,’’ and we have the universality of judicial 
action asserted, but nothing as to the order after death, the length of time 
elapsing, etc. To obtain a correct view of the latter, there must bea care- 
ful comparison of all the Scriptures relating to the subject. 


Obs. 3. Such a comparison reveals to us a singular statement, which at 
first thought might be deemed contradictory, but really presents a wonder- 
ful harmony, viz., it is said that believers shall not be judged hereafter, 
and again it is asserted that they will be judged. Now if we comprehend 
concerning what things they are not judged or are judged, a beautiful 


386 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 135, 


consistency runs through the language, deeply impressive. Let us turn 
first to the declarations that they are not judged. Jesus positively de- 
clares, John 5 : 24, ‘‘ Verily, verily I say unto you, He that heareth my 
word, and believeth on Him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall 
not come into condemnation ; but ts passed from death unto life.’ A mul- 
titude of critics and writers point out the fact that the original word ren- 
dered ‘‘ condemnation’’ is ‘‘ judgment,’’ and, therefore, properly trans- 
late, ‘‘ shall not come into judgment.’’ ‘The context shows that the be- 
stowment of eternal life through the resurrecting power given to the Son, 
was the immediate subject discussed, and this most emphatic reference to 
believers then is, that they are not to come into judgment in order to de- 
cide whether they are worthy or not of eternal life. That is already de- 
cided when they hear and believe, for every believer is at present ‘‘ justified’? 
(e.g. Rom. 5:1, 25; Acts 13:39; Gal. 2 : 16, etc.), which term is indica- 
tive of judicial action. This, of course, requires a continuing life of faith, 
evidenced by its fruits (Rom. 2: 7, and 6 : 22; Rev. 2: 7, etc.), for perse- 
verance evidences the sincerity of faith and the justification experienced. 
The resurrection of the sheep belonging to Jesus’ fold unto eternal life is 
secured (for e.g. John 10 : 26-29), for they follow Him, He knows them, 
gives to them eternal life, and they shall never perish, for no one is able fo 
pluck them out of His hand. The power of bestowing eternal life is 
lodged in Him (John 17:2, 3), ‘‘ and this is life eternal, that they might 
know Thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom Thou hast sent.” 
Being justified by faith we are assured of eternal life; the fruits of the 
Spirit, the work of the spirit, the abiding of the spirit (Rom. 8:11), isa 
testimony of its bestowal, for in Christ Jesus there is (Rom 8 : 1) no con- 
demnation. He has said, John 6 : 37-40, ‘‘ All that the Father giveth me 
shall come to me; and him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out. 


For I came down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of Him | 


who sent me, And this is the Father’s will which hath sent me, that of all 
which He hath given me J should lose nothing, but should raise it up again 
at the last day. And this is the will of Him that sent me, that every one 


that seeth the Son, and believeth on Him, may have everlasting life; and — 
L will raise Him up at the last day.’’ The multitude of assurances respect- — 


ing the safety and salvation of the believer, the deep self-consciousness of 
personal religious experience confirmatory of this, and especially the dying 


grace and hope inspired in the believer at the most solemn and trying crisis — 
of his career—all testify to his justification and his right, through Christ, — 


to eternal life. 


Indeed, if it were otherwise Christianity would be weak and unequal to the task im- — 


posed upon it. It could not then impart solid comfort and hope. But, thank God, it is 


vital, life-giving in its power, By faith such a union exists between Christ and the be- — 
liever, evidenced by a proper fruitage, that the believer is conscious of sins forgiven 
(a judicial work) through the atoning sacrifice, of a marvellous peace bestowed, of an 


extraordinary change of heart experienced, of a supreme love inspired, so that he has the 
assurance that having the Son he hath also life. 


Obs. 4. In reference to the ultimate salvation of the true believer there 
can be no doubt, for has it not been said, Rom. 8 : 31-34, ‘‘ Jf God be for 


us, who can be against us? He that spared not His own Son, but delivered 


Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? 


Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? tis God that justi- 


; 
: 
| 


Prop. 135. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 387 


fieth. Who is he that condemneth ?’ And this culminates in the positive 
declarations that nothing can separate us from the love of Christ ; that we 
are ‘‘ more than conquerors’ through Him. Now assuredly this constant 
abiding in the love of God, in union with His Son, is indicative of a justi- 
fied state, and becomes thus the most reasonable evidence that such are not 
to be brought into judgment ¢o ascertain whether they have accepted the 
terms (e.g. John 3 : 16, 18, 36) which entitle them to everlasting life. 
For, Acts 13 : 89, ‘* By Him, all that believe are justified from all things.”’ 
The ‘‘ Book of Remembrance’ (Mal. 3 : 16, 17) has recorded their names, 
and God ‘‘ will spare them, as a man spareth his own son that serveth him,’’ 
because they are His ‘‘ jewels’’ or ‘‘ special treasure.’’ Such are written 
or enrolled in heaven (Heb. 12 : 23), in ‘‘the Lamb’s Book of Life’’ 
(Phil, 4 :3; Rev. 13 :8), and in the consciousness of their ‘‘ names’’ 
being thus inscribed (Luke 10 : 20), they are to ‘‘ rejoice.’’ All this, of 
course, is based on an antecedent judgment. 


The converse of this is true: the wicked man, the unbeliever, is not justified, but is 
(e.g. John 3 : 18) ‘* condemned already.’’ ‘‘ The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God 
is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord,” Rom. 6 : 23, and this gift becomes ours 
owing to the forgiveness of sin by faith in Him. Here let it be remarked that this for- 
giveness of sin, this cleansing of sin by the appropriated blood of Jesus, demands—rea- 
sonably and scripturally—that such sins forgiven and cleansed should no longer be called 
up in judicial action for the purpose of condemning the believer as unworthy of eternal 
life. This is impossible, being a believer ; and every believer is assured of ultimate salva- 
tion. Yet, as we shall explain, sins—even every idle word—are recalled, not to condemn the 
believer as unworthy of salvation, but to indicate his worthiness for position, honor, rank in 
that salvation. 


Obs. 5. On the other hand, believers are also represented as judged in 
the future, not as to their worthiness to receive ‘‘ eternal life,”’ not as to 
their forming a co-heirship with Jesus (for all this, owing to their union 
with Christ and subsequent justification, has already been decided), but 
to ascertain the exact position of rulership, Kingship, and priesthood, to 
which they are justly entitled. No intelligent writer on Eschatology exists 
that does not fully admit that numerous passages (such e.g. as Luke 
P07, 19; Matt. 25 : 21, 23; 1 Cor. 15: 41, etc.) ‘distinctively teach a 
gradation of rank, power, authority, etc., even among the saints in the 
world to come. Aside from the reasonableness and justice of the same, 
the Theocratic ordering necessarily entails such differences among the re- 
deemed. Now such distinctions are no¢ based upon faith in, and union 
with, Christ (for all believers possess these, which entitle them to the 
blessed eternal life), du¢ wpon the works, actions, conduct, life brought 
forth by this faith and union, ‘‘ knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive 
the reward of the inheritance,’ Col. 83:24. Let the following points be 
observed : (1) ‘‘ Every one of us shall give account of himself to God,’’ 
Rom. 14:10, 12, ‘‘ for we shall all stand before the judgment-seat (or 
throne) of Christ.’’ This includes, of course, all believers. (2) This 
scrutiny extends to ‘‘ every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give 
account thereof in the Day of Judgment,’’ Matt. 12 : 36, and ‘‘ the secrets 
of men,” Rom. 2:16, shall be judged, etc. This evidences the real state 
of heart, for ‘‘the judgment of God is according to truth,’’ Rom. 2: 2. 
_ (8) The reward shall be proportionate (which is not eternal life, for all at- 
_ tain unto it) to the works. Thuse.g. ‘‘ God, without respect of persons, 
judgeth according to every man’s work,’’ 1 Pet. 1:17; ‘‘ God will render 


388 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prorp. 135. 


to every man according to his works,” Rom. 2: 6; ‘‘ Behold I come 

uickly, and my reward is with me, fo give every man according as his — 
works shall be,’’ Rev. 22:12 (with which compare Rev. 2:23; Eph. 6:8; 
Gal. 6: 7; 2 Cor. 5:10; Matt. 16: 27, etc.). Surely on the common 
principle of justice, apostles, martyrs, reformers, men eminent for labors 
and sufferings for Christ, men abounding in good works, should possess @ 
distinction above those who were less fruitful, less devoted, less engaged in 
service. 

But we must not lose sight of a principle here which is of vast encouragement to the 
weak and less gifted, showing how in the bestowment of rewards they may stand as high 
in God’s favor as the most talented. The principle is this: A faithful use of the ability 
and power committed unto us. This is forcibly illustrated by the two Parables of the 
Talents and of the Pounds. In the Parable of the Talents (Matt. 25 : 14-30), the one 
that received five talents gained other five, and the one that obtained two gained other 
two ; the talents were bestowed “ to every man according to his several ability,’’ and we 
learn that the one with two accomplished just as much as the one with five, i.e. he doubled 
what he had, and consequently we find the terms of divine approval are identical in expres- 
sion to both: they receive the same reward. But in the Parable of the Pounds (luke 
19 : 11-27), each one receives a pound, and to make the divine approval to apply equally 
to all (as evidenced in the other Parable), every one should show forth the same gain. 
But what are the facts illustrated by the Saviour? They all started with the same 
resources, but the gain being diverse one from the other, the rewards are also different. 
The one gaining ten pounds receives ‘‘ authority over ten cities 7’ the one gaining five 
pounds obtains rule ‘‘ over five cities.’* The lesson that this affords is the following : No — 
one with limited capacities, education, etc. need to be afraid that, owing to his lack of 
gifts, he must necessarily occupy a very subordinate position in the Coming Kingdom. 
If he diligently uses what God has given to him, his increase will be just as proportionate as 
that of men of greater gifts and ability. Indeed, it may be safely asserted that in the 
final award, when this principle will be carried out, it will be found that many a layman 
comparatively unknown will stand as high, if not higher, as ministers of extended reputa- 
tion and eloquence, simply because to the latter much was committed and much 
required, while of the former less was given and hence less demanded. 


Obs. 6. The judgment then of saints in the future is not one unto eter- 
nal life, but one pertaining to the position to be occupied in the Theocratic 
Kingdom, a distinction which is often implied, as e.g. in Matt. 19 : 28-30, © 
where we have judgment, already passed concerning the apostles that follow 
Jesus, when it is said, ‘‘ ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel ;’’? and then, in reference to others, it is asserted that 
whatever sacrifices are made in behalf of Jesus such shall doth “* receive a 
hundredfold and shall inherit eternal life.’”’ So in the next chapter 
(20 : 21-28) the general principle is laid down that future greatness in the 
Kingdom will le proportionate to present labor and suffering for the truth. 
(Comp. Luke 22 : 24-30.) Even ‘‘acup of cold water’’ (Matt. 10 : 4237 
Mark 9 : 41) shall be rewarded. And this view is fully corroborated by the 
fact that the Sec. Advent, which introduces this judging or assigning of 
positions in accordance with works, is spoken of as ‘‘ the blessed hope,” 
something in which we should rejoice, comfort ourselves (e.g. 1 Pet. 1 : 7, 
13; Tit. 2:13; 1 Pet. 4 : 13, ete.), which we could not do if a judicial 
trial, upon which our entire destiny depended, were before us. It is not 
for those who are accounted ‘‘ heirs according to the hope of eternal life,” 
Tit. 3:17, “heirs of salvation,’’ Heb. 1:17, to be thus judged, except- 
ing as it affects the position of the ‘‘ heirs’’ in the inheritance. } 

In reference to Matt. 19 : 30, the principle is merely adverted to, for, taking Luke 


18 : 30 and Mark 10 : 30, the parallel passages, it is asserted that for sacrifices thus madi 
there is a proportionate recompense already bestowed ‘‘ now in this time,” or ‘ in thi 


PRopP. 1385. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 389 


present time’’ (with accompanying persecutions) by the higher consolations of Christian 
union, sympathy, and blessing. For it is noticeable that the highest spiritual attainments 
and enjoyments are those resultant from devotedness in the service of the Master. It is 
well to notice the Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard connected in the following 
chapter (Matt. 20), because some interpreters consider it to teach the exact reverse, viz., 
that the heavenly inheritance is bestowed upon all, without reference to their labor or 
amount of toil, asa free gift and not as a reward of merit, and that consequently the 
glory of all will be identical, just as every laborer, those who worked long and those who 
labored late, received his penny. But the preceding context, giving a specific reward to 
_ the apostles, and the declaration, ‘‘ But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be 
first,” indicative of degrees, as well as other Scriptures, forbid such a conclusion. The 
equality is, when explained, referred to all laborers without distinction in the vineyard 
inheriting eternal life, and this is a free gift coming from grace through Christ. So also the 
rewards of station, etc., are represented as of divine favor, but distributed through grace 
to those proportionately whose works express the highest obedience to God and the most 
devoted service to’ the Master. The passage must, therefore, be explained so as not to 
conflict with other divine teaching. ‘The explanation is found in the simple ‘‘ whatsoever 
is right, I wil give you,” ‘whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive.” The householder 
reserving the right of giving proportionately whatever he deems proper, as a reward for the 
labor performed. But when the time of payment arrives he gives the last as much as he 
gave to the first, being satisfied with the labor performed, thus teaching that it is not 
merely the length of time employed (for e.g. believers have died young who in a few 
years have done far more for Christ than many who have lived long, etc.) that secures 
the highest reward. And this is corroborated by the last assertion : ‘‘ So the last shall be 
first, and the first last ; for many be culled, but few chosen.” Whatever truths may be deduced 
from the Parable, it must not, and does not, conflict with the clearly taught degrees of 
reward. Hence nearly every expositor fully admits our position. Thus e.g. Barnes says 
on the last verse: ‘‘ This is the moral or scope of the parable. To teach this it was 
spoken. Many that in the order of time shall be brought last into the Kingdom, shall be 
urst in the rewards. Higher proportionate rewards shall be given to them than to others. 
To all justice shall be done. ‘To all to whom the rewards of heaven were promised, they 
shall be given. Nothing shall be withheld that was promised. If among this number 
who are called into the Kingdom, I choose to raise some to stations of distinguished use- 
fulness, and to confer on them peculiar talents and higher rewards, I injure no one. 
They shall enter heaven as was promised. If amidst the multitude of Christians I choose 
to signalize such men as Paul, and Martyn, and Brainerd, and Spener, and Summer- 
field ; to appoint some of them to short labor, but to wide usefulness, and raise them to 
signal rewards, I injure not the great multitude of others who live long lives less useful 
-and less rewarded. All shall reach heaven, and all shall receive what I promise to the 
faithful.” ‘‘ It (the parable) is simply designed to teach that in the Church, among the 
multitudes that shall be saved, Christ makes a difference. He makes some more useful 
than others, without regard to the time which they serve; and He will reward them 
accordingly. The parable teaches one truth, and but one,” ete. But the student must 
keep in view, as many writers have correctly insisted, that it is not merely the amount of 
labor that is performed in connection with time, that made e.g. the last receive twelve 
times as much as the first, but disposition, zeal, humility, etc., rendering the persons 
worthy or unworthy, must also be regarded. 


Obs. 7. A passage most decisive and worthy of serious consideration is 
the one found in 1 Cor. 3 :10-15,. Here we have the following evidence 
corroborative of the correctness of our view. (1) This is a judgment ez- 
clusively of believers, who build upon the foundation laid, Jesus. (2) All 
who have this foundation and build upon it are saved. (3) But some, in 
securing this salvation, ‘‘ suffer loss,’’ while others ‘‘ shall receive a reward.” 
(4) The reception of reward is conditioned on the fact that they build pre- 
cious, enduring material on this foundation. (5) The endurance of Joss 
is caused by the worthless material placed on the foundation. (6) 
‘Every man’s work shall de made manifest,’’ for it will be tested “ of 
what sort it is.’’ This is only illustrating the principle previously (v. 8) 
announced, ‘‘ every man shall receive his own reward according to his own 


390 HE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 135. 


labor.’’? Now, to receive a reward for building ‘‘ gold, silver, and precious 
stones’’ on this foundation is not to attain simply eternal life, for those 
who also build ‘‘ wood, hay, and stubble’’ on it secure the same, but, fol- 
lowing the Scripture analogy of faith, it must relate to position in ruler- 
ship and to a corresponding doss in rank. The only rational, consistent 
interpretation is that which here finds that one, owing to faithfulness, etc., 
obtains a more elevated rank, a higher reward than another. All obtain a 
glorious prize (1 Cor. 9 : 24), but not all the highest prize (Phil. 3 : 14); 
all obtain an entrance into the Kingdom, but one a more *‘ abundant 
entrance’ (1 Pet. 1 : 11) than others. 


A few practical lessons may be derived from this subject. (1) The tremendous 
rebuke that this gives to that narrow spirit of exclusiveism—so apparent in some quarters 
—which considers its own body as alone building ‘‘ gold, silver, and precious stones” on 
the foundation, and that others build upon it ‘‘ wood, hay, and stubble” (although all 
such exclusive claims so ill harmonize with humility, etc. that they are open to grave 
suspicion) and will inevitably be damned while they alone are saved. (2) How guarded 
we should be in building, choosing the proper material, lest we suffer loss. (3) How we 
should strive, like Paul, to receive a high reward tendered to us by the grace of God. 
(4) That such advancement is open to all, and the reward proportionate to the use of 
talents committed to us. (5) That this building on the foundation, as the analogy of 
faith shows; includes doctrine and life, faith and obedience, love and its fruit —in brief, 
all that pertains to a Christian and is specially applicable to teachers. (6) The sweet 
assurance that this gives to the weakest, the most humble and diffident, that accepting of 
Christ and building—poorly it may be thought—upon it, they shall be saved, and that 
God’s goodness will bear in remembrance every act, even the slightest, of piety and 
love. (7) That the best of us may have cause to regret that with precious things we 
have mingled inferior things. (8) That if such is the criterion respecting the believer, 
surely then the unbeliever who rejects the foundation itself can have no hope. (9) This 
gain or this loss is eternal; although all are happy in salvation, yet the superiority 
gained or lost will evermore remain. (10) No one can avoid this scrutiny, for it is essen- 
tial to his future appointment. (11) That when this appointment is made we will be sur- 
prised to see (owing to the secrets, the motives, etc. of men being revealed) some suffer 
loss, be barely saved, whom we esteemed eminent in piety, and others receive with salva- 
tion a rich reward whom we regarded as low in the scale. (12) That we should strive to 
secure more than mere salvation, especially since the reckoning will be made according 
to the ability, means, etc. possessed. (13) Prayer and watchfulness are requisite. 


Obs. 8. It is in virtue of this future judgment according to works, 
that believers are so urgently pressed to good works. God sees how largely 
their future glory and honor depend upon the character now formed, 
that repeatedly and perseveringly, yea constantly, this is brought to their 
attention. Take e.g. Col. 3:4, 5, 8, 9, 24; 1 Thess. 3 12; 13)qamm 
§:4-8; Tit.2:12,13;1 Pet. 1: 7-15; 2 Pet.3: 11,12, and many others, 
and they show God’s deep interest in our future welfare, that as ‘‘ little 
children, we may abide in Christ, that when He shall appear, we may have 
confidence, and not be ashamed at His Coming’’ (1 John 2:8); that ‘‘ owr 
love may be made perfect, so that we may have boldness in the Day of Judg- 
ment’? (1 John 4:17). Good works now glorify God (Matt. 5 : 16), qual-— 
ify for usefulness and happiness (2 Tim. 2: 21; Tit. 3 : 8), etc., and they 
do not lose these essentials in the world to come; for, sanctifying unto — 
honor and making us the more meet for the Master’s use, they contribute 
to glorify the Father, Son, and Spirit. And no one can plead inability to — 
perform them, since ‘* God is able to make all grace abound toward you, — 
that ye always, having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every 
good work’ 2 Cor. 9:8 (comp. Phil. 2:12; 2 Thess. 2:17; 2 ae 
3:16,17%7; Heb. 13:20, 21; Eph. 2:10, etc.). -We may rest assuregm 


PROP. 135. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 391 


that ** God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love’? 
(Heb. 6:10), but will abundantly, through His wonderful grace, verify 
His promises, ‘‘ glory, honor, and peace to every man that worketh good”? 
(Rom. 2:10). Therefore, Gal. 6:9, ‘* Let us not be weary in well- 
doing, for in due season we shall reap tf we faint not; 2 John 8, 
‘* Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought 
(gained), but that we receive a full reward.”’ 


This distinction in judgment gives us a clue to salvation by faith and salvation by 
works. oth aretruths. ‘The Protestant and the Roman Catholic sides have their foun- 
dation in Scripture. But the one is, as we have shown, a salvation unto eternal life (a 
judgment consummated in the justification and continued—until death—justified state, 
of the believer) ; and the other is a salvation unto special glory, honor, inheritance 
(a judgment to be decided in the Coming day of the Lord Jesus). ‘Ihe one precedes the 
other ; the one is fundamental to the other ; the one is ultimately united and blended with 
the other. ‘The essential point is to be ‘‘ saved by faith’”—but it is also of the highest 
moment to be ‘‘ saved by works’’—for while the one secures admittance into the King- 
dom, the other determines the lot, the reward in that Kingdom. To secure the highest 
salvation, both must be kept in view, and both must be in unison. The one being a result- 
ant of the other—naturally flowing from it—they cannot exist independent, the one from 
the other. A living faith will inevitably produce works, and proportionate to that faith 
will be the product. The reality, strength, and perseverance of saving faith will be evi- 
denced in its fruitfulness, in works of love. And the fruitage—such is grace—becomes 
the measure of reward, being indicative of loyal obedience and attachment. A man of 
strong faith will sow bountifully, and he shallalso reap bountifully (2 Cor. 9 : 6) ; he will lay 
up treasure in heaven (Matt. 6 : 20), abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that our 
labor is not in vain in the Lord (1 Cor. 15 : 38). 

_Whether the secret acts, etc. will be publicly revealed (as some hold, like the failings 
of Abraham, Moses, David, and Peter) or be privately taken cognizance of by the Lord (as 
others think), one thing is self-evident, that the lot or position assigned to the believer 
evidences to all others his past faithfulness in God’s service. The gradation or rank will 
ever tell the story of devoted love, holy conversation, and godliness. Whether any of the 
saints will be rebuked and be made ashamed, on account of negligence, etc. (as some 
believe, basing it on 1 John 2 : 28; Col. 1 : 22, etc.), one thing is certain, that the con- 
sciousness of a time departed, in which the greatest honor was within their reach but 
unattained, will be vividly impressed. But such is the glory still attained by the lowest ; 
such the impression that it results from marvellous grace and far beyond desert ; such 
the supreme love to the Divine Master and the glowing affection for the fellow-saints 
who acted more prudently and wisely ; such their appreciation of ‘‘ the workmanship of 
God, created in Christ Jesus unto good works ;’ such their hearty acknowledgment of the 
justice of reaping in mercy the righteousness sowed ; such the fulness, joy, and blessed- 
ness of a soul in perfected redemption, that neither jealousy, nor envy, nor unhappiness 
can flow from such differences of degree in glory. . While ‘‘ There is one glory of the sun, 
and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars ; for one star differeth from 
another star in glory ; so also is the resurrection of the dead’’—yet all this divergence of 
glory helps to swell the glory of God Himself. Supreme love to God is the controlling, 
all-absorbing passion of every saved and honored ‘‘ vessel of mercy,’’ and hence nothing 
* —eyven that relating to his own inferiority in the corporate body of Christ, can dampen 
the unutterable bliss of being, after all, thus incorporated and glorified. The “‘ least’ and 
the ‘‘ greatest” will have ‘“‘fulness of joy and pleasures forever more.” All that we can 
justly say on this subject is the following : The judgment, in whatever form it is made, 
will manifest God’s justice in assigning the reward ; and the self-consciousness of the 
individual (which, owing to the past forgiveness of sin, the efficacy of Christ’s blood and 
power of His intercession, alone is requisite) will fully acquiesce in the same, and although 
of different degrees and ranks, every one justified through Christ and being fully redeemed 
is presented ‘‘ faultless before the presence of the Father with exceeding joy.” 


Obs. 9. A prominent doctrine of Pre-Millenarianism is the reign of 
the saints with Jesus when the Millennial Kingdom is set up (Prop. 154). . 
The saints judge with Christ, inherit together with Him, etc., and for this 
purpose are raised up and translated ; then (as will be shown hereafter) the 


392 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 186. 


Kingship and priesthood is assigned to them, and afterward they come 
with Jesus in the open Parousia. They are themselves ‘‘ Judges’’ in the 
great ‘‘ Day of Judgment” (e.g. 1 Cor. 6:2, 3), and this necessitates a 
previous, antecedent judgment of themselves. Hence, as already noticed, 
certain passages of Scripture exclusively refer to the righteous—to a judg- 
ment specially relating to the saints. This is not a judgment unto con- 
demnation, but one relating to position, and will be a fulfilment of e.g. 2 
Cor. 5 :10. And yet, considering such passages as Matt. 22 : 11-14; 
Luke 13 : 23-30; Matt. 7 : 21-23, 1t may be true (what many affirm) that 
also mere professors will at the same time be rejected. But whether this 
includes professors of former ages or those then living is another question. 
As the dead in Christ are only raised at the Coming of Jesus (the rest of 
the dead not until the close of the thousand years), and then also only 
those accounted worthy, are translated, it is, perhaps, the most prudent 
and consistent to confine this rejection to living professors, as is fully il- 
lustrated e.g. in the warnings given by Jesus respecting the condition of 
parties at the Second Advent, as realized in the position of the Ten Vir- 
gins. We are told that there will be a judgment ‘‘ of quick and dead,” 
Acts 10 : 42, of ‘‘ the quick and the dead at His appearing and His King- 
dom,’’ 2 Tim. 4:1; 1 Pet. 4:5. The ‘‘ dead,’’ as we have seen, follow 
an order: all the dead are ultimately judged, some preceding the Millen- 
nial age, the rest after that age. So with the living or ‘‘ quick,’’ some are 
judged at His appearing, others in His Kingdom ; for we have the judg- 
ment of ‘‘ the quick’’ who are translated, of ‘‘ the quick’’ under Antichrist, 
of ‘* the quick”’ pertaining to the Jewish nation, and of ‘‘ the quick’’ em- 
bracing the Gentile nations. The general affirmation of a judgment in- 
cluding ‘‘ the quick and the dead ’”’ is thus carried out, and we must not 
forget that it also comprises the judgment of ‘‘ the quick’’ existing in the 
Church at the time of the Advent. In the judgment of *‘ the dead’’ there 
is a discrimination apparent in the order of resurrection, and in the judg- 
ment of ‘‘ the quick’’ the same discrimination is manifested in the transla- 
tion of some, in the delivery of the Church and the Jewish nation from the 
power of Antichrist, in the overthrow of all enemies, in the exaltation of 
the Jewish nation, etc., running in and through the Millennial age. 


In so wonderful and comprehensive a subject as that of the judgment, we can only 
present the outlines which give a grander estimate of the vast scale upon which it is 
grounded than the common, narrow Popish limits usually urged in books and pulpits. It 
also prevents us from falling into an error on the other hand of extending the judgment 
of believers only to their death, and declaring that after death there is no more judgment 
concerning them, appealing e.g. to Paul’s crown being determined, etc. Now this takes 
in only the one side of judgment, which is true so far as the justification of the believer 
is concerned, but totally overlooks another side, which declares of believers that they 
shall be judged according to their works and be correspondingly rewarded at the Sec. 
Advent. The judgment unto life is one thing ; the judgment unto reward is another 
thing ; the former is decided at death, the other at the Coming of the Lord. To unite 
those two into one is to do violence to the Scriptures, which discriminate ; for if you 
locate the fulfilment at death it ignores the passages relating to believers at the Sec. Ad- 
vent, and if you confine judgment exclusively to the Second Coming, then it passes by 
the justification, etc. of believers in this life and their surety of eternal life. The only 
true and consistent method, therefore, is to accept of both truths, the one declaring a 
freedom from judgraent unto condemnation, and the other declaring a subjection to a 
judgment relating to position in the Kingdom. Some writers who advance good ideas 
on the judgment mar the whole by failing to notice this discrimination, and apply (as e.g. 
Barbour, Three Worlds, pp. 62-66) passages describing a future reward of works at 
Christ’s Coming, as not descriptive of the resurrected and translated saints, but of those 


PROP. 1385. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 393 


living in ‘‘ the restitution age,’’ when the whole tenor and spirit of the New Test. is to 
make them applicable to all believers, from the First Advent down to the Second. <A 
theory that can misapply such passages is necessarily defective. 

Various writers take substantially the same view expressed by us concerning the judg- 
ment of believers, as e.g. Dr. Cooper in his Essay on Judgment before the Proph. Confer- 
ence ; Dr. Newton in the Proph. Times, vol. 1 ; Dr. Brookes in Maranatha , Dr. Seiss in Last 
Times, etc. We append a specimen or two of utterances : “ Greybeard ” (Graff ), in his 
Lay Sermons (No. 40), after saying that the river Jordan is a type of judgment, the word 
meaning ‘‘ River of Judgment,” remarks : “ The more common assumption that the river 
Jordan is a symbol of the Christian’s dissolution is erroneous. ‘The Jordan is not a 
boundary-line at all, and the figure is as wrong in geography as it is untrue in theology. 
The feet of God’s chosen people did not touch the waters of the river, and the secret of 
their protection was the Ark—the typical Christ. Neither will any of God’s children 
ever come into or be touched by the waters of judgment. As it is written: ‘ He that 
heareth My Word, and believeth on Him that sent Me, hath everlasting life, and shall not 
come into judgment, but is passed from death unto life.’ They will pass through the judg- 
ment, but it will be in Christ, their Ark of safety, and they will be shielded from its bil- 
lows.” Brookes (Bible Reading on Sec. Adv.) says : ‘‘ Of course by the judgment of the 
saints it is not meant that their persons will be judged, as if it were still uncertain 
whether they personally had been purchased by the blood of Christ ; nor is it meant that 
their sins will be judged, as if the question of their salvation were still unsettled ; but 
only that their works will be judged, and their stgtion-in the Kingdom be thus deter- 
mined. As to their persons, our Lord expressly declares there is no judgment (see John 
3:18, and 5 : 24, where the words condemned and condemnation should be translated judged 
and judgment) ; and as to their sins, the Holy Ghost often declares that they are cast be- 
hind God’s back, cast into the depths of the sea, all forgiven, and never to be remem- 
Perea. (Isa..38 :17; Mic.8 :19; Col. 2:13; Heb. 10 : 17). Many such confirmatory 
statements could be presented. 


394 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop, 1386. 


Proposition 136. Zhe doctrine of the Kingdom in agreement 
with the doctrine of the intermediate state. 


The intermediate state between death and the Second Advent is 
such as to confirm our doctrinal position, because the Scripture 
statements clearly and unmistakably teach a detention of the saints 
from the promised inheritance and reward. 

Our argument is not concerned in the location or description of this intermediate 
state. Whether it bein the third heaven, or in some place specially set apart for the 
purpose, or in the grave, etc. ; whether it be a conscious state of high enjoyment, or a 
pleasurable dream state, or one of unconsciousness, etc.—these things, however inter- 
esting, do not fall within our line of reasoning. Whatever view may be held respecting 
the place or the actual state does not affect our doctrinal position, provided such a view 
places the period of recompensing, rewarding at the fulure resurrection of the just. Works 
specially devoted to this subject are accessible, in which these points are discussed by 
their respective advocates. Our concern is only with one aspect of the subject. For we 
hold that the principle announced by Calvin (/nsti., b. 3, ch. 25, s. 6), of incompleteness 
of redemption, must be maintained : ‘‘ Since Scripture uniformly enjoins us to look with 
expectation to the Advent of Christ, and delays the crown of glory till that period, let us be 
contented with the limits divinely prescribed to us, viz., that the souls of the righteous, 
after their warfare is ended, obtain blessed rest, where in joy they wait for the fruition of 
promised glory, and that thus the final result is suspended till Christ the Redeemer appear.” 
So again he says: “ Christ is our Head, whose Kingdom and glory have not yet 
appeared. If the members were to go before their Head, the order of things would be in- 
verted and preposterous ; but we shall follow our Prince then, when He shall come in 
the glory of His Father, and sit upon the throne of His majesty.’’ (Comp. Tyndale’s 
remarks, p. 324; Works by Fox, and his Reply to Moore, and the references by Brooks 
in his El. of Proph. Interp., and in Abdiel’s Essays.) 


Obs. 1. The Propositions that have preceded show that any view which 
unduly exalts the intermediate state or condition after death must corre- 
spondingly depreciate the Second Advent as ‘‘ The Blessed Hope,’’ the res- 
urrectiop as completed Redemption, the covenant as still to be verified, 
and the prophecies as realized on earth. The prominence heaped upon 
the condition of saints after death (so different from the Scriptural posi- 
tion, which says so little respecting it), and the extravagant eulogies at- 
tached to it, are practically leading multitudes to make little or nothing 
of the Advent, the resurrection, the covenant, and the prophecies. If we 
are to credit the many statements made, then the latter can make no im- 
provement in the condition of believers, for after death such (we are in- 
formed) are crowned, rewarded, inherit, ete. Our doctrinal position 
enters a protest against this perversion, and to sustain such an averment 
confidently appeals to the Scriptural teaching and that of the Early — 
Church. The postponement of the Kingdom ¢o the Sec. Coming, the in- | 
heriting only at its manifestation, the design of the present dispensation, — 
the Pre-Mill. resurrection and its recompense, the rewards connected with 
a restored glorious Theocratic Kingdom here on the earth, the time for the 
ample fulfilment of the Abrahamic and Davidic covenants, and other re- 


PRor. 136. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 39D 


lated points, only find a unity in supporting the same, if the condition of 
saints during this intermediate period is one in which they are represented 
as not crowned, as not rewarded, and as no¢ inheriting, but that (whatever 
their actual state as to conscious happiness) they are still imperfect as to 
realized Redemption, and waiting for the Advent and resurrection for a 
completed restoration to forfeited blessings and exaltation to Kingship 
and priesthood. ‘The reader can readily see that this is an important feat- 
ure in the argument, and that if the Scriptures sustain us in the affirma- 
tion that they are imperfect and waiting, we add another link to our 
chain of evidence. 


How perverted this doctrine in the hands of multitudes has become, so that death 
itself is transmuted into ‘‘ the Prince of Peace,” and the resurrection is associated with 
death itself (entire bodies of professing Christians holding to the same) ; how profuse the 
eulogies heaped upon the-saints fallen asleep in Jesus, so that their blessedness is com- 
pleted, not requiring a Coming of Jesus unto salvation—all this has been pointed out (see 
e.g. Prop. 121, Obs. 7, and 124, Obs. 2, and 125, Obs. 2 and 5, etc.). Our obituary notices 
in religious papers are fuli of untruthful sentences, and many works (like ‘‘ Heaven our 
Home,”’ etc.) are replete with unscriptural statements concerning the reward of the right- 
eous. Things which exclusively belong to the period of the Second Advent—and so 
expressly stated by the Spirit—are misquoted and applied to the deceased in order to 
comfort the bereaved. Popery and Protestantism, professed Orthodoxy and Heterodoxy, 
are alike prodigal of ewalting the present state of the dead. Very recently a prominent 
minister eulogized the death of a brother minister, and made, without reflection, the con- 
dition of the latter immensely superior to Paul’s, for he had him ‘“* crowned,”’ etc., when 
Paul still awaits his crown (2 Tim.4:8). Rev. Dr. —— likewise had occasion to describe 
the blessedness of a brother divine deceased, as follows : ‘‘ Yes! our brother is saved and 
crowned forever.” ‘‘ And to the bereaved family, the words of the pitying Saviour to 
weeping Mary are addressed in all their tenderness and sympathy : ‘ Why weep ye? He 
is not here, but risen.’ He has already entered the everlasting rest.” Thousands of asser- 
tions similar to Thomas Gibbon’s (Ser. noticed in Crit. Review, vol. 1, p. 566) might be pro- 
duced as illustrations : ‘‘ The moment a saint dies, or rather the moment that his veil of 
flesh drops off, that moment begins his blissful era of perfect life and glory.” Victor 
Hugo’s picture of the reception of Louis XVII. into heaven (poem on—Van Laun’s His. 
Fr. Liter., vol. 3, p. 326), is matched (Luth. Obs., March 1st, 1878) by Beecher’s saying 
in a sermon that Pius IX. was carried by angels direct to heaven into Christ’s presence, 
etc. (which Romanists must doubt, seeing that in many churches prayers and masses 
were said in his behalf). Our hymnology is overflowing with this perversion of promise, 
and the pulpits aid it on by quoting promise after promise without the least regard to its 
order of realization. 'The strong faith and hope, the anticipated triumph over death, the 
blessed and glorious consciousness of forgiveness, acceptance, and peace, the precious 
removal of the sting of death, the foretaste and earnest of joy, graciously given by God 
to many saints in the dying hour, is at once elevated to the standard by which to meas- 
ure the intermediate state, and deductions are drawn of so extravagant a nature that it is 
amazing that any believer in the Word—which alone is capable of throwing light on the 
future—can accept of them. 


Obs. 2. The Scriptures bearing on this subject are decided. ‘Thus e.g. 
the glory with Christ is thus expressed: Col. 3: 4, ‘* When Christ, who is 
our life, shall appear, then shall ye appear with Him in glory.’’ (So 
‘“ praise, honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ,’’ 1 Pet. 1:7; 
‘‘ grace that shall be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ,’’ 1 
Pet. 1 : 13; ‘‘ glad also with exceeding joy,’’ ‘‘ when His glory shall be 
revealed,’ 1 Pet. 4:18, etc.) The being fashioned like unto Christ is 
thus declared : ‘‘ Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it doeth not 
yet appear what we shall be: but we know that when He shall appear we 
shall be like Him ; for we shall see Him as He is,’’ 1 John 3:2 (comp. 
Phil. 3: 21; Rom. 8 : 17-23, etc.). The time of inheriting is thus speci- 


396 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 136. 


fied: Matt. 25 : 31-34; Col. 3:4, 24; 1 Pet. 1 : 3-7, 13, when the Son 
of man is revealed in His glory. The res¢ is thus given: 2 Thess. 1: 7, 
‘God will give you rest, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from 
heaven’? (comp. Prop. 143). The mansions are given, John 14 : 2, 3, 
when ‘‘ J will come again and receive you unto myself, that where I am, 
there ye may be also’’ (comp. Prop. 170). The ‘‘ new heavens and new 
earth’’ are still future, and linked with the Sec. Advent, e.g. 2 Pet. 
3:13; Rev. 21 :1 (comp. Props. 148-151). While perseverance unto 


death secures a crown (Rev. 2:10), yet the time when the crown itself is 


given is thus stated: 1 Pet. 5 : 4, ‘‘ When the Chief Shepherd shall appear, 
ye shall receive a crown of glory that fadeth not away’? (comp. when 
Paul, and all others, receive their crown, 2 Tim. 4:8). The period of 
rewarding is thus explicitly described : Matt. 16 : 27, ‘‘ For the Son of Man 
shall come in the glory of His Father with His angels ; and ¢hen He shall 
reward every man according to his works’? (comp. Rom. 2:6, 16; Rev. 
22:12, and 11:18; Luke 14:14, etc.). Thus the entire tenor of the 
Scripture is, as our position demands, an overleaping of the intermediate — 
state, as if it were not worthy to be compared with the glory that is to be 
revealed at the Coming again of Jesus ; and a positive asserting of reward- 
ing, crowning, inheriting, etc., at that time. We dare not reverse the 
order thus laid down, and any theory which requires such a transposition 
is most certainly defective. 


Hence so very little is said concerning the intermediate state, because it is an imper- 
fect state, i.e. with incompleted redemption. Dr. Poor in Lange’s Com., 1 Cor., p 349, 
refers to Paul’s passing by the intermediate state and linking the hope (as e.g. in 1 Cor. 
15) of salvation with the resurrection of the saint. He correctly argues that ‘* the world 
to come” is not the state after death, but a definite fixed age or period in the future 
associated with the Sec. Advent and resurrection. Therefore there would be an impro- 
priety to say that at death a soul entered into ‘‘ the world to come,’ for, he adds : ‘*‘ That 
future world or age has not yet come in, and no one can be said to enter it until Christ 
appears to set up His Kingdom. It is then only that the earth will be in readiness for 
the reception of the risen saints. And inasmuch as the glory which they are waiting for 
is to be found here, it will be seen why a resurrection is necessary—why they want a 
body at all, and a glorified body, since it is in this as their organ that they will be fitted 
to dwell in a glorified earth and enjoy the felicity of that age. According to Paul’s 
theory, man is not to be separated from this lower creation, of which he forms a part, and 
of which he is the lord,”’ etc. 


Obs. 3. Other Scriptures confirm the imperfect and waiting condition of 
the saints. Thuse.g. in Heb. 11 : 39, 40—after the apostle had enumer- 
ated a long list of ancient worthies, some deceased for many centuries and 
others more recent, but all in this intermediate state—he says of them : 
‘** And these ad/, having obtained a good report through faith, received not 
the promise ; God having provided some better thing for us, that they with- 
out us should not be made perfect.’? Here it is positively asserted : (1) 
that not having received the promise (which refers to the promised in- 
heritance, as shown e.g. v. 13, comp. with Gal. 3 : 18, etc.—comp. Prop. 
49), it is still future to them ; (2) that in their present condition they are 
not ‘‘ perfect,’’ i.e. enjoy the blessings of a full Redemption as promised ; 
(3) that this perfectness or completeness of realization of faith in God’s 
promises is to be attained in connection with believers in Christ (who also 
receive the promise by faith, but under increased light, divine teaching, 
etc.) ; (4) that all believers, ancient and modern, Pre- and Post-Christian, 
are to be made perfect or complete at the same time, i.e. experience the 


Prop. 136. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 097 


completeness of salvation. (Some, as Barnes, apply this ‘‘ perfect’’ to the 
completion of Revelation as a system, but this is not the subject discussed ; 
the reference to the non-reception of the promise demands an interpreta- 
tion of the “ perfect’’ in a realization of the promise by themselves person- 
ally.) The saints after death are represented as hoping and waiting for 
greater blessings (Rev. 6:9, 10, 11, comp. with 20 : 4-6), and it isin 
view of this that the apostles, when comforting the bereaved, do not dwell 
on the intermediate state, but refer such for consolation to the period 
when Redemption is completed, as e.g. 1 Thess. 4 :13-18. And it is 
because of this still imperfect and waiting nature of the period between 
death and the Advent, that the apostles, in the midst of trials and suffer- 
ings, overleap the intermediate, and exhort to patience wnto the Coming of 
the Lord, e.g. James 5: 7. 


Nast (Com. Matt. 22 : 31, 32) justly observes: “ That the Scriptures attach more im- 
portance to the resurrection of the body than to the mere self-conscious existence of the 
soul in its disembodied state, arises from the fact that the disembodied state of the soul 
is considered in the Scriptures as something imperfect, abnormal, so much so that even 
the souls of the just look forward with intense desire to their reunion (Rom. 8 : 11, 23) 
with their bodies.” We have only to contrast the Scripture statements respecting death 
and its results with those of the resurrection and its results, to see that Nast, and many 
others who make similar declarations, are correct in affirming such an ‘‘ imperfect, abnor- 
mal’’ condition. 


_ Obs. 4. In the very nature of the case there must be an incompleted sal- 
vation during this period, because both soul and body constitute the per- 
son redeemed, and so long as “‘ the redeinption of the body,’’ Rom. 8 : 23, is 
not experienced, an imperfect state must exist. Besides this, the forfeited 
blessings, such as the restored earthly Paradise, the dominion over the 
earth, the absolute victory over death, are not realized init. And in the 
promised blessings of glorification, rulership on the earth, association with 
Jesus in His inheritance and glory, none of these are experienced, being, 
as we have seen, always combined, as a resultant, with the Sec. Advent. 


Dr. Nevin (Mystical Presence, p. 171) says: ‘‘ The whole argument in the 15th ch. of 
1st Cor., as well as the representation in 1 Thess. 4 : 13-18, proceeds on the assumption 
that the life of the body, as well as that of the soul, is indispensable fo the perfect state of 
our nature as human. The soul, then, during the intermediate state, cannot possibly 
constitute, in the biblical view, a complete man; and the case requires, besides, that we 
should conceive of its relation to the body as still in force ; not absolutely destroyed, but 
only suspended. ‘The whole condition is interimistic, and by no possibility of concep- 
tion capable of being thought of as complete and final.’’ Dr. Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., p. 
24) concedes that death, or the condition after death, is not to be put in the place of 
Christ’s Sec. Advent, and that the state of ‘‘the just is not only incomplete, but, in some 
sense, private and fragmentary, if I may so express myself. But at the Redeemer’s appear- 
ing all His redeemed will be collected together, and perfectly and publicly glorified.” 
(Comp. Prop. 121, Obs. 7 (4), and note, and Prop. 120, Obs. 4.) 


Obs. 5. Another distinctive and remarkable feature corroborates our 
position. Every writer on the subject of the intermediate state confesses 
that no attempt is made in any place whatever to describe it. The various 
theories and descriptions respecting it are drawn from inferences, and the 
admission is fully made by writers of all classes (who hold to a future per- 
‘sonal Sec. Advent), that the eye of faith and the heart of hope is fixed, not 
so much on the condition after death as to the condition after the Advent. 
Now why such a procedure? The key lies in this simple fact, viz., that 


398 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 136. 


the intermediate state (whatever it may be) has no relationship whatever to 
the fulfilment of covenant and prophecy pertaining to Redemption, and 
consequently is not portrayed. 


Thus to illustrate the utterances of many theologians, take e.g. Knapp (Ch. Theology, 
p. 518), who says : ‘‘ Before this time (i.e. the resurrection of the body) shall arrive, the 
disembodied spirit will be in a certain intermediate state. The exact nature of this state 
is not, indeed, particularly described to us, and we are unable even to conceive of it dis- 
tinctly ; but so much the Bible plainly teaches, that immediately after death the soul 
passes into that state for which, from the nature of its previous life, it is prepared.”’ In 
what the rewards and punishments of this intermediate state will consist cannot be deler- 
mined, nor whether, in addition to those which are natural—the necessary consequences 
of action and feeling—there will also be, even then, those which are positive and result 
from the free appointment of God.”’ 


Obs. 6. The Early Church doctrine, established under the direct auspices 
of the apostles, and the elders appointed by them, was, over against Gnos- 
ticism and other errors, wniversally held as follows: that the hope of the 
believer was in the Sec. Advent (expected speedy), at which period ¢he in- 
heriting of the Kingdom, the crowning and rewarding was located. In 
the intermediate state it was held that there was a non-fulfilment of cove- 
nant promises, the realization of which was allied with the Sec. Coming of 
Jesus. Much was made of the Sec. Advent, the resurrection of the saints, 
and the resultant glory, so that in Eschatology these things were pre- 
eminently prominent—a prominence unfortunately undermined by the 
Alexandrian school and overthrown by the Papacy. Now how can we possi- 
bly account for the Early Church view, given under divine auspices, on so 
important a matter, unless it be the correct one, sustained as it 1s by a con- 
sistent appeal to Scripture ? 


Comp. Brooks’ Essays (Abdiel’s), and El. Proph. Interpretation, Bish. Taylor’s Liberty 
of Prophesying, 8. 8. We quote Taylor, charging the Romish Church with contradicting 
early Church doctrine, as follows : “ That is a plain secession from antiquity, which was 
determined by the Council of Florence, ‘ that the souls of the pious, being purified, are 
immediately at death received into heaven, and behold clearly.the triune God, just as He is ; 
—for those who please to try may see it dogmatically resolved to the contrary by Justin 
Martyr, Ireneus, Origen, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Arethas Ceesariensis, Enthymius, who 
may answer for the Greek Church, And it is plain that it was the opinion of the Greek 
Church, by that great difficulty the Romans had of bringing the Greeks to subseribe to 
the Florentine Council, where the Latins acted as their masterpiece of wit and strategem, 
the greatest that hath been till the famous and super-politic Council of Trent. And for 
the Latin Church, Tertullian, Ambrose, Austin, Hilary, Prudentius, Lactantius, Victori- 
nus, and Bernard, are known to be of opinion that the souls of the saints are in abditis 
receptaculis et exterioribus atriis (in private receptacles and in more outward courts), where 
they expect the resurrection of their bodies and the glorification of their souls; and 
though they all believe them to be happy, yet that they enjoy not the beatific vision 
before the resurrection.” Some writers feel the incubus of the early Church view upon 
their modern conceptions, and try to make the impression that the fathers entertained 
the modern engrafted notions. Thus e.g. Pressense (Harly Years of Christianity ; The 
Martyrs, etc., p. 250) attributes to Justin at his martyrdom the expressed belief of an im- 
mediate ascension to heaven when his head was cut off, saying, ‘‘ I know it, yes, beyond 
all power to doubt, I know it.’’ Now, when we ask for the authority of a belief which 
flatly contradicts Justin’s own published faith, we are referred to Rinault’s Acta Mar- 
tyrum Sincera, a work, like similar ones, which largely draws on the imagination for pro- 
fessed details. When Pressense declares, “ The details of the narrative correspond with 
all that is known of Justin,’’ we beg to differ, and assert --from Justin’s own writings— _ 
the contrary. In reference to this substitution of death for ‘‘ the blessed hope,” ete., the — 
reader will find some excellent remarks by Gordon in his Essay on the First Resurrection. 


PRop. 136.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 399 


Obs. 7. ‘The Jewish view must be considered by the student. This, as 
stated by numerous authorities, was decided, viz., that the Patriarchs and 
their deceased descendants, that all who had died true Israelites, were only 
to be raised to glory and covenanted promises at the Coming of the Messiah. 
Whatever differences of opinion existed as the actual condition of dead 
ones, all were united in the common view that a¢ the Advent of the prom- 
ised David’s Son, then, and then only, would the promises of God respect- 
ing a glorious Salvation be completed. The abundance of quotations 
already given under previous Propositions fully show this faith. But now 
observe that this ¢dentical Jewish faith is incorporated in the New Test. 
and in the Karly Church, with this difference, that what the Jews attrib- 
uted to the First Advent of the Messiah, the New Test. and Early Church 
applied to the Second Advent of Jesus the Messiah. 


Take e.g. such a writer as Knapp, who endeavors to make as much as possible out of 
death, yet (Ch. Theol., Lects. 149 and 150) he very fairly gives the Jewish view as mate- 
rially different from the modern one of immediate entrance into heaven, and admits that 
an intermediate state was held “‘ by many of the Church Fathers—e.g. Justin the Martyr, 
Trenzus, and Tertullian. The student need only refer to our Biblical Cyclops. and Dicts., 
in Arts. on “ Sheol” and ‘‘ Hades,” as well as those on Jewish belief, and he will find 
abundant material in behalf of our position. Those who press the Parable of the Rich 
Man and Lazarus to a delineation of the bliss and suffering of the righteous and wicked 
after death, gain nothing after all but an intermediate state separate and distinct from the 
third heaven or from the rewards, etc., at the Sec. Advent. Whatever view we take of 
its teaching, this isthe result. Thuse.g. Hudson (Debt and Grace, p. 257) remarks : ‘‘ The 
Parable of the Rich Man and Lazarus, also, will not sustain the modern expectation of 
entering heaven at death. Borrowed from the Jews themselves, it simply illustrates their 
dramatic conceptions of the under world.” So Van Oosterzee (Lange’s Com. Luke, p. 256) 
on the same, says: ‘‘ Paradise, which is here spoken of as the destined place of the 
blessed, must be carefully distinguished from the third heaven, 2 Cor. 12 : 4, the dwelling- 
place of the perfected righteous. The Paradise is, on the other hand, in the intermediate 
state a place of incipient, although refreshing, rest, in which the Jews conceived all the 
saints of the Old Test. as united in joy.” Some Jews, however, as Hudson (above), notices, 
** did not consider the Patriarchs as living until the resurrection.” But all united in the 
idea of a detention, an intermediate state. 


Obs. 8. While it is true that our argument is not affected one way or the 
other, no matter what theory of the intermediate state is held (provided 
only that the non-fulfilment of the covenant promises, the inheriting, 
crowning, and rewarding, is conceded)—the third heaven theory of the 
multitude, the spheres of Origen, the intermediate state of Stilling, Hahn, 
etc., the underground world of Storrs, etc.—yet it may be proper, in this 
connection, to point out that if this intermediate state is one of detention, 
if it is intermistic and incomplete, a certain incongruity exists in locating 
it an the third heaven. Rejecting Romish Purgatory and Cameron’s (future 
State) prayer for the dead as unscriptural ; without attempting to explain 
the actual place and condition of the saints which the Bible leaves indefi- 
nite and unexplained (saving in general terms expressive of security of 
Redemption and blessedness), it may be sufficient to direct attention to the 
Primitive Church view as presented by Justin Martyr (Dial. Tryp. c. 80) : 
‘Tf you meet with some who are called Christians’’ (i.e. Gnostics) ‘* who 

dare calumniate the God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, and who 
say that there is no resurrection of the dead, but that at death their souls 
are received up into heaven, do not regard them as Christians.’’ This, as 
Hudson (Debi and Grace, p. 254) has well observed, is ‘‘ the more remark- 
able because he had been a Platonist.’’? Ireneus (Contra Heres, l. 5, ¢. 


400 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 1386. 


51, § 2), thus opposes the Gnostics : ‘‘ How shall not they be confounded 
who say that the Underworld (¢7feros) is this world of ours, and their inner 
man, on Jeaving the body here, ascends the supercelestial place?’ ‘* The 
souls of His (Christ’s) disciples also, for whom the Lord did these things, 
go away into an unseen place appointed them by God, and there abide 
until the resurrection which they await. Then receiving bodies and rising 
entire, that is, bodily, as the Lord also arose, they come thus to the vision 
of God.’’ Others, as Polycarp (pis. Phil.), speak of ‘‘ the place due and 
promised,’’ and Tertullian (On the Soul, On Paradise, and On the Res.) 
asserts that the souls are ‘‘ detained in safe keeping in Hades until the 
day of the Lord,” ‘‘that all souls are compelled into the Under- 
world’’ (although the love of martyrdom and its eulogy made an ex- 
ception as stated by Tertullian : ‘‘ No one, on leaving the body, dwells 
immediately with the Lord, except he who, by the prerogative of martyr- 
dom, shall go to Paradise instead of the Underworld.’ 'The only key to 
Paradise is your blood’’). Such a doctrine of detention and of non-in- 
troduction to heaven itself, in view of the prevailing philosophy and the ~ 
earnest desire of believers to secure Redemption, could not have arisen 
and become so extended unless it were derived from apostolic teaching. 
It is, therefore, the most prudent to avoid a dogmatic expression as to 
place, seeing how largely the Karly Church, which one should suppose, 
owing to nearness to the apostles, ought to know the truth, if revealed, 
differs from modern conceptions. 


Origen (comp. Prop. 169, Obs. 1) could not spiritualize this intermediate state away, 
and although somewhat contradictory (showing the change of view progressing) he posi- 
tively (De Principiis, b. 2, ch. 11) places the saints after death ‘‘ in some place situated 
on the earth, which Holy Scripture calls Paradise, as in some place of instruction,’’ ete., 
but afterward, with his peculiar doctrine of progression added, has them when qualified 
to ‘* ascend to a place in the air and reach the Kingdom of heaven, through those man- 
sions, so to speak, in the various places which the Greeks have termed spheres, i.e. 
globes, but which Holy Scripture has called heaven,’’ etc. The intermediate state was 
one always allied, more or less, with Millenarianism, and so e.g. Neander ((enl. Ch. His., 
vol. 2, sec. on Mill.) notices how it was specially connected with our doctrine. Prof. 
Bush (Anastasis) quotes Justin, and remarks that the notion opposed by Justin is regarded 


by him as ‘‘a heresy,” viz., ‘‘ that immediately on death the soul is received upto 


heaven,” but Bush (who denies a bodily resurrection, having a resurrection to accom- 
pany, or immediately follow, death, and making such an ascension to heaven a contin- 
gent proof of it) explains Justin’s view to be owing to ‘‘ the prevalence of the Millenarian 
doctrine,” and then adds: “ That doctrine (Millenarian) has been from that day to this 
tae grand support of the crass conceptions which have been entertained on the subject 
of the resurrection.’’ ‘This we accept as the highest possible praise (comp. Props. 125-28), 
seeing that our doctrine thus opposes the Gnostic corruptions introduced which make 
Redemption incomplete, and Christ’s bodily resurrection unnecessary (if not a farce), 
especially when Prof. Bush has to turn away from the early Fathers and seek consolation 
in Cicero, praising the ‘‘evangelical tone of Cicero,’’ because the latter says in his Tusculan 
Questions : “‘ that souls may, when they have forsaken their bodies, come into heaven as into 
their own domicile.’’ Gnosticism, as a reference to Church history (Neander, Kurtz, Mos- 
heim, etc.) clearly shows, had a wonderful moulding influence on the doctrine of the 
intermediate state. The Papacy incorporated Origen’s view, attaching to it the doctrine 
of purgatory, making the detention, the process of release, and final ascension to heaven 
a source of power and profit to the church. In the case of eminent or distinguished per- 
sons an immediate ascension to the third heaven was predicted (as e.g. when Louis XVI. 
was beheaded, his confessor exclaimed, ‘‘ Son of Louis, ascend to heaven’’), but of lesser 
ones a purgatorial requisition was in place. This exaltation of the saints to the third 
heaven is really the foundation of the invocation and intercession of saints, who (accord- 
ing to the creed of Pope Pius IV.) are now “ reigning together with Christ,” having 
either been delivered from purgatory or directly ascended to heaven. 'Thisis seen e.g. in | 
the difficulty of Pope John XXII. (Draper's Intel. His. of Europe, p. 394), who raised the 


Prop. 136. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 401 


question of ‘‘ the beatific vision,” declaring that none of the dead saints would enjoy it 
until after the Judgment Day. He was accused of heresy, and of taking a course opposed 
to the interests of the church ; for the question was at once raised : ‘‘ If the saints stand 
notin the presence of God, of what use is their intercession? What is the use of address- 
ing prayers tothem?” It may be that owing to this usage of the Papacy (as well as to its 
former reception in the Church, and Scriptural support), it (Thompson's V’heol. of Christ, 
ch. 13) “ obtains especially in the Lutheran communion, but has able advocates as well 
in other communions.” It is held by many, as can be seen in articles on ‘‘ Intermediate 
State” in Herzog, and other Cyclopedias, in ‘‘ Eschatology,’’ in various Systems of The- 
ology, etc. Thus e.g. comp. art. on in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., which rejects the 
idea of the saints immediately after death entering heaven, and declares that the long 


interval between the decease of Christians and the resurrection “‘ is sufficient to prove 


that they do not instantly pass from the Church Militant to the New Jerusalem above.” 
Rejecting the state of unconsciousness and of purgatory, the idea of locality, and passage 
of time, it maintains strictly “ an intermediate state.” It cites various authorities and 
quarterlies containing articles. Hudson’s ‘‘ Debt and Grace” has some valuable consid- 
erations, referring to the Fathers, Tyndale, Luther, etc., and explaining the passages 
(2 Cor. 5:8; Phil. 1 : 21-23) supposed to teach the contrary—holding that ‘‘ those 
addressed in the Epis. to the Hebrews did not consider ‘ the general assembly of the 
Church of the first-born’ as being already in heaven ; their names only were written 
there” (to which we add that the distinctive mention of “ first-born” is indicative of a 
still future resurrection—with which it is allied—not yet experienced). G. 8S. Faber in 
The Many Mansions has the spirits of men, good and bad, in Hades, where they are 
detained, neither entering heaven nor hell, until the resurrection. ‘‘ Greybeard,” in his 
Lay Sermons, No. 104, makes ‘‘ the being with Christ,” Phil. 1 : 23, 24, “ present with 
the Lord,’’ 2 Cor. 5 : 8, etc., a state of blessed repose with Christ in sleep, as though a 
night, preparatory to an awakening at the resurrection (Hudson, above, explains such 
passages as an overleaping the intermediate state by anticipation, and seizing the ultimate 
result at the resurrection). Dr. Smeltzer advocates “ The Intermediate State” in The 
Quarterly Review, April, 1873, and so many who have no sympathy whatever with Mille- 
narianism hold to the same. Kven Macnight on Heb. 11: 40-43 (Com.) is forced to lay 
down the doctrine that the righteous are only rewarded at the Sec. Advent, giving as proof 


_ dohn 14 : 3, Matt. 13 : 40, 48, 1 Pet. 4:13 and5:4,1 John 3; 2. Van Oosterzee (Dog., 


vol. 2, sec. 142) makes the departed saint ‘‘ only blessed in hope,’ awaiting the Sec. Ad- 
vent (with which comp. Martensen’s —Ch. Dog., s. 276—advocacy of an intermediate 
state, and see Hagenbach’s His. of Doc., vol. 1, s. 77). Works having a discussion of the 
subject or references to the same are numerous, including such as Bickersteth’s Hades 
and Heaven, Huidekoper’s Belief of the First Three Centuries Concerning Christ’s Mission 
to the Underworld, Sear’s Foregleams of Immortality, Whately’s Future State, Copland’s 
Mortal Life, Alger’s Cit. His. Doc. Future Life, Fiddes’ Doc. Fut. State, Humphrey’s Transl. ° 
of Athanagoras on State of the Dead, Blackburne’s His. View of the Controversy from Refor- 
mation to 1772,” ete. 

It is only necessary to say to the critical student that whatever differences may exist 
respecting the meaning of ‘‘ Sheol’’ and ‘‘ Hades” (see Bib. Lexicons, etc.), whether it 
be taken in a most comprehensive or in a limited sense, one thing is self-evident, that 
neither Sheol nor Hades ever stands for the third heaven, and yet all the departed, both good 
and bad, enter there ; and the simple fact that both classes enter the same designated 
place ought of itself to be amply sufficient to cause the current third heaven application to 
be seriously questioned. Every definition of these terms (e.g. by Stuart, Campbell, etc.) 
including under-world, the region of the dead, state of the dead, grave, etc., forbids its 
being connected with heaven, and it was evidently this usage that influenced Luther 
(Table Talk, ‘‘ On God’s Word,”’ ch. 29) to say, as both the rich man and Lazarus entered 
Hades, the same place: ‘‘ Abraham’s bosom is the promise and assurance of salvation, 
and the expectation of Jesus Christ ; not heaven itself, but the expectation of heaven.” (So 
Trench on the Parables: ‘‘‘Abraham’s bosom’ is not heaven, though it will issue in 
heaven ; so neither is ‘ Hades’ hell, though it will issue in it, when death and Hades 
shall be cast into the lake of fire, which is the proper hell ;’ comp. Knapp, Ch. Theol., 
p. 526, saying of the early Fathers who held to ‘‘ a state which is neither heaven nor hell :” 
‘‘ This intermediate state they call, taking the appellation from Luke 16, Sinwm Abra- 
ham.”) A simple comparison of these terms and usage will alone decide the cautious stu- 
dent to avoid the popular application, especially when the few texts supposed to conflict 
must be controlled in interpretation by the general analogy on the subject. Nothing can 
be made out decisive by the usage of the word ‘“‘ Paradise,’’ for the student well knows 


_ that it was employed to designate both a heavenly and an earthly Paradise —that it means 


402 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 136. 


a pleasure or delightful garden, a blissful abode either in heaven or on earth, and that, 
therefore, the early and later Fathers used it simply to designate a place where the saints 
were happy. Another subject often blended with this one, viz., the natural or acquired 
immortality, or the intermediate nature of man, does not require any notice from us, for 
the reason that whatever view is held (and all these are most ably represented in works 
specially devoted to them) none of them demands, as a necessary sequence, the rewarding 
of the saints after death and before the Advent, or the rejection of a detention, imperfect 
state, or the elevation of the saints to the third heaven, Writers who hold to these sey- 
eral theories unite with us in asserting the incompleteness of Redemption in this inter- 
mediate state, the non-exaltation of the saints to heaven, and the necessity of the Sec. 
Advent to complete salvation, From those who advocate the highest blissful, active 
consciousness in a Paradise located in Hades, down through those who have gradations 
of bliss to a pleasant sleep, down to utter unconsciousness—all, whatever they may make 
out of this intermediate state, insist upon an imperfect state, outside of heaven, which 
imperfection is removed at the Second Coming of Jesus. 

To illustrate how men hastily infer a doctrine and dogmatically assert it respecting the 
intermediate state, we refer to Dr. Clark’s Man all Immortal. He correctly encounters 
various errors on the subject, as e.g. ‘‘ that the saints of God enter upon the full realiza- 
tion of their everlasting felicity immediately at, death, and independently of their resur- 
rection bodies ;’ and he shows this to be unscriptural because “ everywhere do the Scrip- 
tures teach us that it is in connection with his body man is to attain his highest destiny.’’ 
But instead of leaving ‘‘ Sheol” and ‘‘ Hades’ represent an intermediate place aside 
from the third heaven, he insists upon it that the intermediate place embraces for the 
saints the third heaven. The proof given for this positive declaration is the following : 
Jesus Christ is in the third heaven, and as dead saints are represented to be with Christ 
or Christ with them, they must also be in the third heaven. Unfortunately this is pure 
inference formed by combining two classes of passages, which combination is not given by 
the Spirit, for no passage exists which describes the intermediate state as located in the 
third heaven. We admit that Christ is there, but while there He is also here in the be- 
liever, in the sacraments, in the closet of prayer, in the Church, etc. God is everywhere 
(Ps. 139 : 7-12) present, and the presence, care, protection, etc., of Jesus over the de- 
parted in this intermediate state is affirmed. Dr. Clarke’s argument proceeds on the 
assumption that if Jesus is in the third heaven He cannot specially be in the intermediate 
state if one of consciousness and blessedness, and if a place separate and distinct from 
the former. If Jesus specially appeared to Paul, etc., He can specially manifest Himself 
to others, wherever they may be located. Harbaugh in “ Heaven,’’ etc., takes the same view 
that Clark does, based on the same assumption, ignoring totally the meaning attached to 
the Scriptures respecting ‘‘ Sheol and Hades,” into which all enter, and into which Jesus 
Himself entered during the short period of His detention, and in which David (Acts 
2 : 34) is still detained. We conclude by saying: our view of the intermediate state as an 
imperfect one, the saint still unclothed and waiting, answers the question so often put to 
us, viz., how we can reasonably expect ihe saints who have been ages in heaven, enjoying 
its bliss, clothed upon with a spiritual or semi-spiritual body, glorified or semi-glorified, to 
come here to this earth to reign, etc., after such a blessed experience? Our answer is 
plain : No two stages of glorification, embodiment, completed Redemption after death are 
described in the Scriptures, The glorification, the Christ-like embodiment, the perfected 
Redemption, are all attached to the Second Advent and the resurrection of the just. 


Obs. 9. We insist upon it that the intermediate state, expressed by the 
terms Hades and Sheol, continues down not only to the Second Advent, but 
to the end of the Mill. age. For it is only (Rev. 20:13, 14) after the 
close of the thousand years and little season that the realm of the dead, 
through the power of Jesus, is utterly removed. (Comp. Revision, Vario- 
rum, etc.) While some are removed from it, and reign with Christ, ete., 
others are kept in it until this final period. Hence, we cannot, without 
violence, allow a change to have been introduced at the First Advent, viz., 
that saints s¢nce then are directly taken to heaven, and therefore do not now 
enter Ilades. Such a view is opposed to the general analogy of the Script- 
ures, which makes every believer to follow the humiliation of the Master, 
and like Him enter Hades ; it multiplies the prayer of faith given to every 


Prop. 136. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 403 


believer (e.g. in Ps.) for deliverance from Hades ; it makes the distinguish- 
ing characteristic of Jesus at His Coming, as having ‘‘ the keys of Hades,’’ 
of no personal interest to the believer. One passage alone is decisive of 
two truths, viz., that the saints in Hades are not in heaven, and that be- 
levers at the future res. of the saints are st7// in Hades, and that is, 1 Cor. 
15 : 54, 55, ‘I will redeem them from the hand of Hades, I will ransom 
them from death. O death, I will be thy plagues ; O Hades, I will be thy 
destruction.’’ 


Let the student keep in view the following points, viz., (1) Hades (so Sheol) is ‘‘ in 
opposition to heaven” (so Lange, Matt. ch. 11 : 23, and see the references to Owen, Alex- 
ander, etc., who concede it) ; (2) the Scriptural representations that all believers, like 
their Head, enter Hades ; (3) that Jesus, at His Coming, having the keys of Hades, de- 
livers His people ; (4) that others remain in Hades until the thousand years are ended ; 
(5) that in Hades there is incompleteness of redemption ; (6) that those in Hades are rep- 
resented as waiting for the glorious redemption. The reception of these points—all 
clearly taught—preserves Scriptural unity. We direct attention to Dr. Craven’s Excursus 
on Hades in Lange’s Com. on Rev., pp. 364-378, which will repay perusal. Much that he 
says is confirmatory of our view, and can be cordially received. He makes Hades an in- 
termediate place in the Unseen World, distinct from heaven and hell, having before the 
resurrection of Jesus two compartments, one of comfort and the other of misery, one for 
the pious and the other for the wicked ; but after the resurrection of Jesus, the righteous 
being delivered from Hades and having ascended to heaven with Him, only the wicked are 
taken to Hades (reserved in misery against the day of general judgment), while the right- 
eous are taken to heaven. While serious objections can be urged against several of the 
points taken by him, we are only concerned in this alleged change which takes it as a fact 
that one compartment of Hades, employed for the retention of the righteous, has been 
vacated and unused since the ascension of Jesus. However ably urged, we cannot receive 
this view, because the deliverance of the saints from Hades (e.g. Hos. 13 : 14, comp. with 
1 Cor. 15) is directly associated with the Pre-Mill. Advent of Jesus and the resurrection 
distinctive of believers. His proof (as e.g. John 14 : 2, 3, see Prop. 170) is considered and 
explained under various propositions, and requires no special repetition. We object not 
to a partial removal at the resurrection and ascension of Jesus of captives delivered from 
Hades if that be insisted upon, but we insist on its continuance as the state or abode of 
all men until the Coming of Jesus, who says: ‘‘ I have the keys of death and of Hades.”’ 
(Comp. e.g. Dr. Seiss in The Apocalypse, p. 99.) When He comes then, according to 
Paul’s testimony, death and Hades will be conquered by Him, and give up to the Con- 
queror those accounted worthy of the better, pre-eminent resurrection. 


404 “THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 187. 


Proposirion 1387.—This doctrine of the Kingdom sustained by 
the phrase “the world to come.” 


If we find this phrase employed by the Jews to designate a 
particular period of time, and if it is adopted by the apostles, 
without the slightest hint as to a change in its meaning, it is fair 
and just to conclude that in the Apostles’ estimation 7 continued 
to retain the meaning ascribed to it by the Jews. 


Obs. 1. Let us briefly consider in what sense the phrase, ‘‘ the world to 
come’? was used by the Jews. Prof. Bush (Anas. p. 136) says: ‘‘ ‘ The 
judgment of the great day,’ the period of ‘ the world to come,’ is that period 
which in the Jewish Christology was identical with the reigning and judg- 
ing supremacy of the Messiah.’’ He quotes Lightfoot in confirmation, and 
adds from the Sohar, fol. 81, ‘* Zn the world to come the holy blessed God 
will vivify the dead and raise them from their dust,’’ etc., and then refers 
to Pococke (Porta Mosis, Not. Miscel. p. 166) who says, that R. Saadias 
maintains that ‘‘ the resurrection is to take place during the Messiah’s 
reign on the earth, and so that the promise of the dead Israelites being 
brought out of their sepulchres is to be accomplished in this world or age, 
and that we are not to suppose that it pertains to another ; consequently 
the prediction of Daniel respecting the many that sleep in the dust, with 
various other Scriptures, is to be fulfilled in ¢he time of salvation, a phrase 
entirely equivalent to the days of the Messiah.’’ ‘‘ So it is said in Toreth 
Adam, fol. 105, that the day of judgment will commence, sub initiwm 
dierum resurrectionis, at the beginning of the days of the resurrection.” 
(Comp. Prop. 133.) According to Buxtorf, as quoted by Barnes on Heb, 
2:5, it was employed by the Jews to denote ‘‘ the world which is to exist 
after this world is destroyed, and after the resurrection of the dead, when 
souls shall be again united to their bodies,’’ or ‘‘ the days of the Messiah, 
when He shall reign on the earth.’’ The Targum of Palestine (Dr. Ether- 
idge’s ‘T'ransls.) on Balaam’s prophecy has: ‘‘ If the house of Israel kill me 
with the sword, then, it is made known to me, I shall have no portion in 
the world to come ; nevertheless, if I may but die the death of the true ! 
O that my last end may Be as the least among them.’’ The student will 
find additional references to the opinion that ‘‘ the world to come’’ referred 
to the reign of Messiah after the resurrection in Lightfoot’s works, Wet- 
stein, Schoettgen (Bloomfield, Heb. 2:5), Clarke’s, Lange’s, and other 
Commentaries. See Props. 138 and 139. 

The Talmud frequently speaks of Israelites receiving ‘‘a portion of the world to 
come,”’ “ a part in the world to come,” and asserts : “ He who denies that the Scriptures 
are from heaven has no part in the world to come,” ‘‘ the generation of the deluge have 
no part in the world to come,” ‘‘ the generation of the dispersion (at the building of the 
tower of Babel) have no part‘in the world to come,”’ ‘‘ the people of Sodom have no part 
in the world to come,”’ etc., speaking also of “ this world and that to come,”’ etc, Hence — 


Prop. 137. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 405 


Barnes, Com. Heb. 6 : 5 on the phrase “ the world to come,’’ says : ‘‘ Or, of ‘ the Coming 
age. ‘The age to come’ was a phrase in common use among the Hebrews, to denote the 
future dispensation, the times of the Messiah,” ete. Littell’s Liv. Age, July 26th, 1879, 
in an art. on the “Talmud,” quotes as follows : R. Simeon on Prov. 6 : 22 says : ‘‘ When 
thou goest, it (the law) shall lead thee, that is, in this world. When thou sleepest, it shall 
keep thee, in the grave, and when thou awakest, it shall talk to thee in the world to come.” 
Another utterance on Ps. 23:5 is thus given: ‘‘ In this world ye (Israel) offer me (God) 
the shew-bread and oblations. In the world to come, I will spread for you a great table, 
and. the nations of the world shall behold and be confounded ; for it is said, ‘ Thou wilt 
prepare a table before me in the presence of mine enemies.’ ” 


Obs. 2. The effort made by Barnes, Bloomfield, etc., to make this 
expression used by the Jews, and adopted without dissent or change, in the 
New Test. to mean the present dispensation, age, or world under the Messiah 
fails, because it does not meet the conditions attached to it in that day, 
viz., it included the reign of the Messiah after the resurrection of the dead. 
This will appear evident if notice is taken of the distinctive wsage accorded 
to the phraseology in Matt. 12 : 32, ‘‘ neither in this world (age) nor in the 
world to come.’’ Critics, Lightfoot, Wetstein, etc., refer the latter to 
Christ’s Kingdom, and according to Wetstein (Lange, Joc?) it was a pro- 
verbial expression referring to the Advent of the Messiah. Jesus adopts it, 
and links it therefore, as we maintain, with His future personal Advent. 
And this is conceded (unwillingly) by our opponents, in the simple state- 
ment that the sin or guilt alluded to remains unpardoned after the Sec. 
Advent of Christ, and therefore this world or age to come is included in 
the period after the Advent. The language being addressed to Jews, with- 
out any of those modern explanations attached, is a virtual indorsement of 
the phrase as understood by them. So Paul, Heb. 2:5, ‘‘ for unto the 
angels hath He not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak,’’ 
argues that this subjection is not witnessed, as many passages prove, down 
to the Sec. Advent of the Messiah, and hence necessarily locates it in the 
future after that Advent. Therefore his use of the word corresponding 
with that of the Jews he intimates no change in its usage, as fairness would 
have required if it referred toanother period. It isnever employed to desig- 
nate heaven or the state after death (as our opponents, Barnes, etc., loct, 
frankly admit,’ but to point out this very earth, regarded as ‘* inhabited” 
or “‘ inhabitable.’’ The choice of the phrase directly refers us to the 
covenant and its promises, which, if fulfilled, require under the Messiah 
such a world. The only period when all things, as this predicted world 
demands, are brought into subjection, is after Christ’s Sec. Coming, for 
down to this Pre-Mill. Advent Gentile domination is existing, and even 
preceding it confederations of wickedness are witnessed. This world to 
come is given to Jesus as man, thus corresponding with His future coming 
as the Son of man, etc. But this expression receives its fair and honest 
interpretation only by regarding the general analogy of the Word ; and for 
a proper and full understanding must be viewed in the light thrown upon 
it by “‘ the day of Jesus Christ,’’ ‘‘ the end of the age,”’ and ‘‘ the coming 
age,’’? as given in Propositions following. Therefore the reader, before 
deciding, will await the additional evidence to be placed before him. In 
regard to the phrase in Heb. 6:5, however much some may make the 
tasting of ‘‘ the powers of the world to come’’ the enjoyment of religion, etc., 
in this present dispensation, or the gospel period (thus making the world 
to come equivalent to ‘‘ the gospel dispensation’’), yet numerous commen- 


406 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 1387. 


tators and others, who have no sympathy with our views, tell us that there 
is a reference to the future, making it to refer to the future heavenly state, 
so e.g. Bloomfield, Scott, etc. That it has reference to the future, and to 
the future as understood at that period by the Hebrews addressed, must be 
apparent to the scholar from the occurrence of no proposed change by the 
apostle to its usual significance.’ 


1 We have found one exception, which charity will attribute to ignorance and not to 
design, as follows: Winthrop (JLec., p. 197) justly says, after many able critics and 
writers, that, as Barnes etc., loci, the word translated ‘‘ world’’ should have been ren- 
dered ‘‘ the habitable earth,’ because the word oikumenen is a participle meaning inhab- 
ited or habitable, the word earth being understood. A reviewer of Winthrop in The King- 
dom of Grace, produces the following remarkable and critical rejoinder : (1) That we are 
not at liberty to “supply Greek terms when they seem wanting,’’ and (2) that ‘‘ all plain 
readers of the Bible suppose this expression to refer only to the future state of men after 
death.’’ The readers must then be very ‘‘ plain’’ and addicted to mere “‘ suppositions,”’ 
and all versionists are guilty of undue liberty in supplying the terms that the Greek idiom 
requires. We can respect infidel attacks by ascribing some honesty to them, but such 
criticisms are simply contemptible, made to subserve an unscholarly purpose. Such a 
writer evidently hus never seen the statements given in our elementary books, as e.g. 
Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 18, etc. He also fails to notice that this phrase is identified 
with the Second Adamic dominion restored in the person of Jesus, and which restoration 
is invariably linked with the Sec. Advent (comp. Prop. 82). H. Dana Ward (Proph. 
Times, vol. 12, p. 33, etc.) gives an interesting statement of the usage of the three words 
(aidn, kosmos, oikoumene) translated “‘ world” in our version, and he makes “ aidn” 


equivalent to “a period of time,” or ‘‘ the age ;’ ‘‘ kosmos” to order, arrangement, the ~ 


present order of things, the universe ; and ‘‘ oikoumene” to “ the inhabited earth,”’ it 
meaning ‘‘ inhabited’ and as ‘‘a passive participle agrees with g@, i.e. earth, under- 
stood.” So used Matt. 24:14; Luke 2:1;4:5;21:26; Acts 11:28; 17:6, 31g 


19): 273 24:5 Rom. 10:18; Heb.12°6 3.11/75. ;, Rev. 3°210.;12 295706 tala 


9 


night (Com. loci) ‘‘ the inhabitable world to come,’’ which is correct. The Comp. Com- 
mentary makes it “ the state of the Gospel Church,’’ for which there is no proof. Many 
make it ‘‘ the coming world,’’ i.e. the Messianic, which we can receive. ‘The Revision 
has as marg. reading, ‘‘ the inhabited earth.’’ 

* To make the phrase ‘‘ world to come” equivalent to the present dispensation, ‘‘ the 
Christian dispensation’’ (so Stuart, etc.), ‘“‘the times of the New Test. (so Bloomfield, 
etc.), involves its advocates in self-contradiction. 'Thus e.g. such a dispensation has 
been running for some time, about thirty years, and yet if it is thus referred to ; it is 
spoken of as not present but still future—as something to come. If they endeavor (as 
Scott, Doddridge, etc.) to unite with the idea of a present dispensation that of heavenly 
blessedness, thus including the future, they only increase the difficulty : (1) for then the 
writer still ignores the present by leading us to contemplate that which is to come, and 
(2) he chooses a phrase which all anciently applied to this earth, this inhabited earth in the 
future under the Messiah, to describe heaven ; but how it can consistently describe the 
latter these writers fail to inform us. Philo-Basilicus (Judge Jones, Essays, p. 42) says : 
** Dr. Owen observes ‘ that it denotes a certain state or condition of things in this world,’ 
that is on this globe, ‘ for the apostle does not treat directly of heaven,’ and to call 
heaven ‘ the world to come’ because we are to go into it, is, says Beza, ‘ rather harsh.’ ”’ 
We only add, that it is a period of time following the resurrection, which Polyearp (Apis. 
Phil., ch. 5) notices : ‘‘ If we please (the Lord) in this present world, we shall also be made 
partakers of that which is to come, according as He hath promised us, that He will raise us 
from the dead ; and that if we walk worthy of Him, we shall also reign together with Him.” 
This is only repeating what Barnabas previously stated, viz., that when the Lord comes 
to renew this world, making “ all things new, then shall be the beginning of another world.” 
This has been reiterated by a multitude, who link it with the time of restitution, as e.g. 
Dr. Goodwin (Hxtr. Proph., p. 181), advocating the renovation, remarks : ‘‘ As God takes 
the same substance of man’s nature and engrafteth the new creature upon it, the same 
man still ; so He takes the same world and makes it a new world to come for the Second 
Adam. For the substance of the same world shall be restored to a glory which Adam 
could never have raised it unto. And this God will do before He hath done with it, and 
this restitution is ‘the world to come,’ Heb. 2:5.” So also the reader’s attention may be 


called to Luke 20:35. Although in the Greek another word is used (meaning age or dis- 


C 


mE ROP. 137. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 407 


pensation), yet the translators evidently employed it as synonymous (which it is to some 
extent) with the other. It reads: ‘‘ But they which are accounted worthy to obtain that 
world (or age) and the resurrection from the dead,”’ etc., thus showing how the obtaining 
of the future age or world is inked—not with Hades, or Sheol, or Heaven, or this dis- 
pensation, or the Gospel, but with the resurrection of the dead—just as the Jews believed, 
as the covenants demand, as the promises of God require. Hence Van Oosterzee 
(Lange’s Com. Luke, p. 305, on ch. 25 : 35) says: ‘* Zo obtain that world. The Messianic 
aion (age) is conceived as coinciding with the resurrection of the righteous, ch. 14 : 14, 
which is here exclusively spoken of. It is a privilege which is not communicated to all, 
but only to the eklektois (the called or elect), while those who at the moment of the 
Parousia have not died but are found yet living are here not further spoken of.’’ In his 
comment to ch. 14 : 14, to which he refers, he remarks : ‘‘ He (Christ), like Paul (1 Thess. 
4:16; 1 Cor. 15 : 23) and John (Rev. 20 : 5, 6), between a first and setond resurrection, 
comp. also Luke 20 : 34-36,’’ etc. (Comp. Dr. Poor's note to Lange's Com. 1 Cor., p. 349.) 


Obs. 3. The Bible clearly teaches a dispensation to succeed our present 
one. This is done in a variety of ways, and is confirmatory of our posi- 
tion. Leaving the intimations of a new ordering or arrangement given by 
“ vestitution,’’ ‘‘ regeneration,’’ ‘‘ new heavens and new earth,’’ etc., this 
is virtually admitted by Fairbairn, Brown, and others, in that they inform 
us that the Mill. age can only be introduced and realized as predicted by 
the bestowal of new and extraordinary measures, agencies, etc., thus show- 
ing marked and distinguishing changes in the order then established. The 
‘‘harvest’’ at the end of this age bounds the closing of this and the com- 
mencement of the new dispensation. This ‘‘ harvest’’ is predicted, as we 
have shown, Rev. 14 : 14-20; Joel 3 : 13, cte., to be Pre-Millennial. The 
Millennium itself, including the resurrection and events which require the 
exertion of supernatural power, etc., is indicative of a new era orage. ‘The 
dispensation that follows is one of Redemption, perfected Salvation, and 
it is a low estimate to confine the redemptive period to this age or dispen- 
sation, in which it remains 7ncompleted down to the Sec. Advent. ‘This is the 
preparative stage of Redemption ; that which follows is Redemption fully 
realized. Consequently such declarations as Eph. 1 : 10, ‘‘ that in the dis- 
mensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things,”’ 
ete., must be understood of that dispensation still future which shall be 
ushered in when the times preceding it have been completed. The proof 
that Eph. 1 : 10 thus refers to such a dispensation is found in the context, 
for (1) as numerous passages plainly state, this gathering of all things into 
one is only witnessed when this dispensation or age closes; (2) in this 
gathering ‘‘ ail things,’’ in the Greek the neuter form, evidently also 
embraces the creation then redeemed from the curse, which only is done in 
the re-creation after this dispensation has ended ; (3) all things are under 
Christ in this dispensation mentioned, which is not realized wntil after the 
Sec. Advent ; (4) the connection of the ‘‘ inheritance,’’ ‘‘ the redemption 
of the purchased possession’’ with this dispensation indicates the same ; 
(5) the adopting the exact phraseology of the Jews respecting an incoming 
age, with the sole change of applying it to Jesus Christ, David’s Son and 
Lord.! It seems to us strange that some theologians, seeing the gathering 
and oneness ascribed to the Millennial period, seeing that the churches 
under the direct teaching of the apostles all believed in a future and incom- 
ing dispensation—Millennial—should so persistently, to defend a theory, 
apply this to the present dispensation, and yet acknowledge, as many of 
them do, that its realization will only be witnessed fully when Christ 
comes. Such arguments as are derived from the Pre-Mill. Advent, resur- 


408 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 187. _ 


rection, judgment, etc., form the introduction of the incoming Kingdom 
by the power of Christ—indeed all the varied propositions derived directly 
or indirectly from the Covenant, the foundation of all that is future, con- 
verge in a dispensation succeeding this one.’ 


1 On this important passage may be added : (1) A gathering is predicated at Sec. Advent, 
which occurs at the close of this age, as e.g. 2 Thess. 2:1; 1 Thess.4:17, etc. (2) This 
gathering is at the end of the age, includes the harvest, as in parable of tares and wheat, 
Rev. 14:19, etc. (3) This gathering includes that from the heavens, as e.g. angels, 
saints, New Jerusalem, and even dominions, etc. (4) This gathering embraces all on 
earth, as e.g. saints, the Jewish nation, Gentile nations, restoration of forfeited bless- 
ings, removal of curse. In brief, as Olshausen, etc., it includes “ the restoration of all 
things.’ Comp. Lange’s Com. on Matt. 13:41. Barnes Com. on Eph. 3 : 11 explains “‘ the 
eternal purpose” to be literally rendered “‘ the purpose of the ages,” i.e. the plan or arrange-— 
ment of the incoming ages, thus indicating that others follow. Barnes with his theory 
of a final age or dispensation insists that this ‘* the purpose of ages’ means ‘‘ the purpose 
formed in past ages.” Admutting that this purpose or plan originated in past ages, yet 
the line of argument connects the samme with the completion of the arrangement in actual 
redlizution, and, therefore, relates to the present and future. Locke, Chandler, Whitby, 
and others render this : ‘‘ according to that disposition or arrangement of the ages which 
He made in Jesus Christ, or through Him.’’ ‘Two things are self-evident, (1) that this 
Plan or Purpose has reference to Jesus Christ, and (2) that it includes all pertaining to 
Jesus, and hence of necessity what pertains to Jesus after His Sec. Advent. It includes, 
consequently, the time following His Coming, or what, Eph. 2 : 7, is specifically denomi- 
nated as still future ‘‘ the ages to come.”’ This is one of the revealed ‘‘ mysteries,’ in 
which we should be personally concerned, and so clearly stated that the assertions (e.g. 
(of Dr. Rice, in Signs of the Times) of those who declare that this dispensation is the last 
or final one, remains without the slightest Scriptural foundation. If this is ‘‘ a Gospel 
dispensation,” the one Coming is only a far greater one, seeing that the goodness of the 
Kingdom and of salvation is realized in all its preciousness to a far greater extent in the 
Coming one. ‘Take the characteristics ot the Millennial age, and while they indicate great 
changes (showing a new ordering or arrangement), yet they all are embraced in the Gos- 
pel of the Kingdom ; all are a fulfilment of Gospel promise. 

» Having sufficiently shown that the Millennial period isan era, a definite age, or dispen- 
sation, introduced by Jesus Christ at His Coming, we cannot receive the claims and pre- 
tensions of many, who in the past and present, pretend that they or the founders of their 
sect, introduce a new dispensation (as e.g. in Swedenborgianism, Shakerism, Mormonism, 
Curryism, Spiritualism, ‘‘ The Eclectic Church,’’ etc.). This coming dispensation is not 
dependent on human instrumentality ; it is directly inaugurated by Jesus Himself, and in so 
marked a manner—by the works performed, the results attained, etec.—that no one can 
fail to see it. We only now notice that as there have been past ages or eras (some divide 
them into Adamic, Patriarchal, Jewish, and Christian ; others into Adamic, Noahic, Abra- 
hamic, Mosaic, and Christian ; others again into Adamic, Antediluvian, Noahic, Abra- 
hamic, Mosaic, and Christian ; and still others, making the Mosaic Theocratic, introduce 
another era from the captivity to Christ as Mosaic in part lacking the civil element), so- 
there will be others, as the Millennial and the Eternal ages following. Hence it is, as 
Barnes, Com., Heb. 1 : 2, has observed, that if the word “‘ age’’ is used to designate this 
world or that to come, it does so because ‘ made up of ages.’’ This age or dispensation 
to follow pertains to the glory of Christ, and is new, i.e. a new ordering, because it em- — 
braces a restored Theocracy, a renewal of the earth, resurrected and glorified saints, ete. 
It introduces the Theocratic reign of Jesus and His associated rulers bringing in the resti- — 
tution of all things ; it enforces and exhibits in living realization Redemption through 
Christ ; it practically illustrates and enlarges Christ’s Redemptive work until it envelops 
the world in its inestimable blessings. Great and important changes are indeed intro- 
duced, but all in the purposed line of Redemption through Christ, which only serve to exalt 
Him as the Saviour and King; to magnify His sacrifice, love, mercy, and power ; to 
honor Him as the combined Prophet, Priest, and King ; and to elevate Him in the hearts 
of the glorified and of the nations of the earth. Hence Bh. South's rendering of Isa. 
65 : 18 (with whom agrees Dr. Clarke, ete.), ‘‘ Hult in the age to come which I create,’’ and 
there is force in his rendering Isa. 9 : 6, ‘‘ The Father of the age to come’’ (with which — 


“ 


comp. Bh. Chandler’s ‘‘ Defense of Christianity” and Lange’s Com., etc.): 


* 


Prop. 138.]- THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ACG 


Proposition 188. This doctrine of the Kingdom fully cor- 
roborated by “the day of the Lord Jesus Christ.” 


This Kingdom is after the Sec. Advent, and in a period, dis- 
pensation, age, day, or time, which, owing to the public, personal 
manifestation of Jesus Christ, is by way of pre-eminence entitled 
** His day,” etc. Now, if it can be shown that the Jews believed 
that the day or age of the Messiah was thus identified with the 
period of the reign of the Messiah on David’s throne, and that 
the Apostles, without any change or transformation, apply this 
phraseology to Jesus after His Sec. Advent, it at once powerfully 
confirms our doctrine of the Kingdom. For, if our interpretation 
of the Covenant and promises is correct, then such a day or time of 
Christ must be still future. 


Obs. 1. The Jewish view is given by many writers. Thus e.g. Mede 
‘ quotes R. Saadias Gaon, who indorses the ancient opinion on Dan. 7 : 18 
by saying : ‘‘ Because Israel have rebelled against the Lord, their Kingdom 
shall be taken from them, and shall be given to those owr monarchies 
which shall possess the Kingdom in this age, and shall lead captive and 
subdue Israel to themselves in this age wntil the age to come, until the Mes- 
siah shall reign.’’ The ancient opinion of the Jews previous to and at 
the First Advent are given in Commentaries, Sys. Theologies, etc., viz., 
that the times or reign of the Messiah was frequently denominated ‘‘ the 
day or the days of the Messiah,”’ originating from the prophetic announce- 
ments of ‘‘ the day of the Lord,’’ etc. Knapp, Barnes, Bloomfield, and 
many others, show how the Jews regarded ‘‘ the day of the Lord”’ as 
equivalent to ‘the times of the Messiah.’’ Indeed, as stated in previous 
Propositions, it was fully identified with both the resurrection and the 
judgment which it was believed the Messiah would bring to pass. How 
later Jews continued to hold this notion of the day,thus linked with these 
adjuncts is evidenced by the following extract from R. Menassah Ben Israel 
(in Res. of the Dead, p. 254), who, commenting on Isa. 2 : 12-17, ‘' For 
the day of the Lord of hosts,’’ etc., remarks: ‘‘ It is not to be doubted, as 
we shall demonstrate in the sequel, that by ‘ the day of the Lord’ the 
prophet intends ‘ the day of judgment,’ which is otherwise called ‘ the day of 
the resurrection of the dead.’’’ Again (B. 3, c. 2), he says, on Mal. 4: 5, 
‘‘That great and terrible day of the Lord is the day of judgment, which 
shall be conjoined with the resurrection.’? The day of Messiah, the day 
of judgment, the day of resurrection, the day of the Lord, etc., were al/ 


associated in the Jewish mind with the predicted coming and reign of the 
Messiah. 


Gill, Com. on 2 Pet. 3 : 8, gives several Rabbinical citations in which is specified that 
“‘ the day of the holy blessed God is a thousand years.” Lange, Com. Matt. 22 : 2, notices 


410 ' THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 188. 


how the Jews thought the feast, the marriage festival, would be held at the end of the 
age. Many such references are found in the various commentaries, and the critical stu- 
dent will not fail to observe how these views, after the commencement of this dispensa- 
tion or age, are repeated in the Apocalypse, but always as related to the future, the Sec. 
Advent of Jesus, and the resurrection of the saints. The reign of the Messiah on David's 
restored throne was ‘‘ the day of Kedemption,’’ ‘‘ the day of salvation,’ etc., and was 
even claimed by impostors, as e.g. Milman (His. of the Jews, vol. 2, p. 435) informs us 
that R. Akiba addressed the Jews in behalf of the impostor Bar-cochab, ‘* Behold the 
Star that is come out of.Jacob ; the days of the Redemption are at hand.’’ 


Obs. 2. Next, it is important to notice, (1) how the inspired apostles 
adopted this phraseology, applying it to Jesus, and (2) locating this ‘‘ day,” 
that the Jews expected, 7m the future. (1) A period of time, separate and 
distinct from previous ones, is called ‘‘ the day of the Lord Jesus,’’ 2:Cor. 
1:14; “ the day of Christ,’’ 2 Thess. 2 : 2; ‘‘ the day of the Lord,” 1 Thess. 
5: 2, etc. ‘This is so apparent that it needs no additional mention. 
(2) That this day of Christ is not in the present dispensation (comp. e.g. 
John Wesley’s remarks, Prop. 135, Obs. 5), but in the future one, is evident 
by reference to the general tenor of Scripture concerning it, and by then 
giving the opinion of our opponents as indicative of its relation to the 
future. Thuse.g. 1 Cor. 5:5, “ that the Spirit may be saved in the day 
of the Lord Jesus ;’? Barnes, Com. loci, ‘‘ the day of judgment when the 
Lord Jesus shall come,’’ etc. 1 Cor. 1 : 8, ‘* blameless in the day of the Lord 
Jesus Christ ;’’? Barnes, loci, ‘‘in the day when the Lord Jesus shall come 
to judge the world ; and which will be called His day, because it will be 
the day in which He will be the great and conspicuous object, and which is 
especially appointed to glorify Him.’’ 2 Cor. 1 : 14, ‘‘ ye also are ours in 
the day of the Lord Jesus ;’’ Barnes, loci, ‘‘in the day when the Lord 
Jesus shall come to gather Wis people to Himself.’’ 2 Thess. 2 : 2, ‘‘ that 
the day of Christ is at hand ;’’ Barnes, loci, ‘‘the time when He should 
appear, called ‘ the day of Christ,’ because it would be appointed especially 
for the manifestation of His glory.’? 1 Thess. 5 : 2, ‘‘ the day of the Lord 
so cometh as a thief in the night ;”’ Barnes, loci, ‘‘ Of the Lord Jesus,’’ 
etc., “‘‘ the day of the Lord’ means that day in which He will be mani- 
Fested,’’ etc. So also 2 Pet. 3:10; Phil. 2:16, etc., and Barnes, loci, 
gives the same. Barnes even indorses the Jewish view on John 8 : 56, 
when he says, ‘‘ the day of judgment is also called the day of the Son of 
man because tt will be aremarkable time of His manifestation.’’? (Compare 
also Knapp, Ch. Theol., s. 155 (4).) Jesus Himself employs the phrase, as 
e.g. Luke 17 : 24, 30:' ‘* So also shall the Son of man bein His day ;” 
“even thus shall it be in the day when the Son of man is revealed,’’ with 
which compare Matt. 24 : 30, 31, 37, ete., and then notice the concessions 
of Barnes, etc., that its ultimate reference must be to the time when He 
personally comes to judgment, etc. We have thus a distinctive ‘‘ day of 
Christ’ ushered in at the Sec. Advent ; and with the predictions relating 
to “‘ that day’ by the prophets; with the Scriptural usage of the word 
‘* day ;”’ with the events connected with it and the guards thrown around 
it to prevent, if possible, misconception of its duration, etc., it is simply 
to be faithless not to identify this ‘‘ Lord’s day,’’ this ‘‘ day of the Mes- 
siah,’’ with the promised exalted Millennial times of the Word with which 
itis blended. That this ‘‘ day of Christ’? embraces a long period of time 
1s apparent from the examples already given, but the Spirit multiplies 
evidence ; for believers, being ‘‘ the children of the day,’’ see on every side 


Prop. 138. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 411 


*‘ the day’’ linked with the Advent, with Mill. blessedness, with entering 
into (comp. Matt. 7 : 21, 22), and realizing the Kingdom, and with Bar- 
nabas they look for a * holy age’’ to come, believing Him to be ‘‘ King of 
the ages” (1. Tim. 1:17; Heb. 1 : 2, Vulgate), who will manifest Himself 
in the day that significantly and appropriately is called after Himself. And 
when the Spirit, to whom a thousand years are as a day, pronounces it 
‘a great day,’’ we are very slow in limiting it.? 


1 It may be proper to notice the attempt Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 443) makes to refer 
this to the day of Pentecost. But this fails (1) because there was no Coming of the Son 
of Man (humanity) at that time ; (2) it violates the context which contrasts this Coming 
with that of other false Christs ; (3) if fulfilled on the day of Pentecost, then the disciples 
would see one of the days of the Son of Man which Jesus positively declares, v. 22, they 
shall not see, owing to His departure ; (4) it is opposed to the Jewish view entertained, 
whose exact phraseology Jesus adopts without any intimation of change ; (5) it is con- 
demned by the usage we refer to in the text. 

* Hence we cannot accept of Martensen’s (Ch. Dog., s. 287) language : ‘‘ The final Ad- 


- vent of Christ is to be the end, not only of this present time and this one term of history, 


but of all time and of all history.” Against this, the covenants and prophecy all unite in 
proclaiming the opposite, viz., that then a glorious period'of time is ushered in when the 
history foreshown and outlined in covenant and prophecy shall be realized. This ex- 
treme must, therefore, be rejected as untenable. The other extreme, adopted by a few, 
that this present existing age shall be eternally perpetuated, is likewise, as we abun- 
dantly show, unscriptural. One of Dr, Arnold’s admirers ( Westm. Review, Jan., 1852, p. 
120) says that Arnold’s Theology is based on the assumed perpetuity of the age, and that 
he admits (although claiming it as correct) that ‘‘ it is the least apostolic in appearance.’’ 
This admission is amply sufficient, and we rest content in those ‘‘ times’’ (1 Tim. 6 : 15, and 
which Paul in 2 Tim. calls ‘‘ that day’’—comp. Crit. Eng. Test. loci) still future and con- 
nected with ‘‘ the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ.”’ 


Obs. 3. To satisfy some objections, it is necessary to allude to Waggoner 
(Ref. of Age to Come), who refuses to acknowledge an “‘ age to come’’ to 
follow this age, on the ground that that which succeeds this is called “ az 
everlasting age’’ or ‘‘ the eternal age.’’ But this is a mere play on words so 
far as the phrase is concerned, for (1) he thus professes his behef in an age 
to come, although ‘‘ everlasting ;’’ (2) he divides this ‘‘ everlasting age’’ 
arbitrarily into two periods, the first part of one thousand years in the third 
heaven, the second part, or remainder, after the thousand years here on the 
earth. While we do not even thus limit it by the thousand years (which years 
do not limit the reign, but the binding of Satan and non-resurrection of 
the wicked), extending it through and beyond them into the future (Prop. 
159). When the characteristic duration, etc., of the age are to be deter- 
mined, we find it extending to, merging into, and embracing perpetuity. * 
To build up his theory, Waggoner contends that ‘‘ the end,’’ ‘‘ Christ’s 
Coming,’ and ‘‘ the termination of Salvation,’’ are synonymous terms, and 
taking this for granted (without the least proof), he proceeds to erect his 
argument upon it. This is a sad mixture, seeing that Christ’s Coming is 
not to ‘* terminate Salvation,” or to make an ‘‘ end”? of all things, but 1s 
for purposes of salvation and to gather all things into oneness, etc. Again, 
a favorite phrase is quoted, and paraded even as a title of sermons and 
books, as if it were a Scriptural one, viz., ‘‘ The Hnd of Time,’’ as if it were 
an equivalent for ‘‘ the time of the End.’’ In tracing the matter some- 
what, it seems to be founded on Rev. 10:6 in our Eng. Version, which 
unguardedly reads ‘‘ that there should be time no longer.’’ That this is a 
misapprehension of the passage is evident, for (1) critics and commentators 
pronounce it incorrect. (See Barnes, Stuart, Elliott, Lord, ete., loci.) (2) It 


412 THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 138. 


is inconsistent with fact : (a) as to the text, seeing that instead of a closing 
of time, time is represented as continuing on, and events occurring during 
its progress ; (6) as to the creation, for while time may be regarded as 
unmeasured, eternal, yet no creature or event can be duly considered apart 
of time. ‘Time cannot end; a day, year, age, cycle may close, but not 
dime ; eternity itself embraces endless time. ‘The arguments erected upon 
this phrase, therefore, can well be dismissed without more attention, seeing 
that ‘‘ times’’ are connected with, 1 Tim. 6:15, ‘‘ the appearing of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.’” 


1 Time, even eternity, is marked necessarily by cycles, ages, etc., and we cannot con- 
ceive of it without some measure. The Spirit accommodates Himself to this to give us a 
proper conception, and hence speaks of ‘* the ages to come,’’ ** the age of ages,’’ ‘* the eternal 
ages,” or ‘‘ ages of ages,” and refers to Christ as ‘‘ King of the ages,”’ indicating such grand 
divisions—while on the other hand expressions are found which, without distinguishing 
between those ages speak by reduplication of the entire future as one everlasting age. 
Our idea simply is that this Mill. age merges into the others unchanged as to blessedness, 
glory, etc., and is thus continued on, although the doom of Satan and the wicked, etc., 
properly marks an epoch in it. 

» The reader is referred back to Prop. 133, Obs. 5, and requested to notice how John 
Wesley speaks of this day of Christ ; also how the Thessalonians regarded this day ‘“ as 
present’ (so Alford, Olshausen, Lange, etc.) and the apostle, in order to reassure them, 
locates it in the future. Maultitudes affirm that this dispensation is ‘‘ the day of Christ,” 
but they do this in opposition to the passages quoted, to the analogy adduced, and to the 
direct affirmation of Jesus, Luke 17 : 22, that during His absence ‘‘ the days will come, 
when ye shall desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and ye shall not seeit.’’ The 
student will notice, what our argument has persistently urged, that ‘‘ the day of the Lord 
Christ’’ is, to be such, identified with a personal presence ; it is this presence that con- 
stitutes it “His day.” Turning to 1 Cor. 4 : 3, 4, 5, and instead of ‘‘ man’s judgment” the 
Greek is, as stated in the marginal reading, ‘‘man’s day” (so numerous critics and ver- 
sions ; comp. e.g. Luther’s).* This accords with the analogy on the subject. The time 
when this was written, and the time from thence down to the Coming of the Lord, is 
** man’s day,’’ and not the Lord’s day. The direct contrast in the passage is amply suffi- 
cient, and what was true in Paul’s time, that the world was controlled by ‘‘ man’s day” 
(i.e. was largely under the power of his opinions, wisdom, self-will, sway, ete.), is true 
to-day, being—as history testifies—a fact constantly witnessed from that time down to 
the present, and—as prophecy attests —will continue a sad fact down to the Sec. Advent, 
culminating in its exhibition of wilful power and sway just before the open Parousia, 
This, then, is ‘‘ man’s day’’—a day in which the absence of the Lord is self-evident, and 
in which man’s attachment to the world and disregard of God and His dear Son makes it 
a time peculiar in accord with his views, feelings, passions, ete. And yet this distinctive 
‘“man’s day,” in which the Church is struggling and fighting, is enlogized by hosts of 
writers as ‘‘ the Lord’s day,” although the bridegroom is absent and the marriage post- 
poned to His Coming. ‘To indicate how perversely men will employ this phraseology, a 
few more illustrations are presented. Scott (Com. Zech. 14) makes ‘‘ the day of the Lord ”’ 
to be *‘ the time when the Romans marched their armies, composed of many nations, to 
besiege Jerusalem, was ‘ the day of the Lord Jesus,’ on which He came to ‘ destroy those 
that would not that He should reign over them.’” Alas! Rey. Robison, in a sermon at 
Springfield, O., Nov., 1878, made ‘‘ the day of Christ” in 1 Cor. 1:9 and Phil. 1 : 6, 10, 
to refer to the death of the saint! Egbert (The Chron. of Henry of Huntingdon) is said to 
have seen ‘‘ the day of the Lord” in the conversion of the monks of Hii or Iona, which 
has been repeated again and again at accessions to the Church. It is wonderful how 
flexible and full of numerous meanings the phrase becomes in the hands of spiritualizers, 
denoting almost everything but that really intended. In connection it may be said that 
we earnestly protest against the theories of those who would locate ‘‘ the day of the 
Lord” as already present in any form, as the things connected with such a day have 


* The Amer. Bible Union has the following comment : ‘‘Man’s day: namely, the pres- 
ent, in contrast with the coming of the day of the Lord.’’ So e.g. Fausset (Com. loci), 
“literally, man’s day, contrasted with the day (ch. 3 : 13) of the Lord (v. 5), 1 Thess. 5 : 4. 
All days previous to the day of the Lord are man’s days.’’ 


PRop. 138. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. _ 413 


never yet been realized. Hence we reject as utterly untenable the theory of Barbour and 
others (as seen e.g. in Herald of the Morning, Aug. 1st, 1877), who, basing their view on 
some unproven chronological positions, declare that “ ‘the day of the Lord ’ commenced 
in the autumn of 1874.” Aside from the reasons presented in this work against it, it is 
sufficient to say that the misleading view of ‘‘ the harvest” incorporated with it (which 
harvest is to last three and a half years) alone shows the incorrectness of the chronologi- 
cal position so positively asserted. When the tares are gathered, and Christ and His 
angels begin the work of the harvest, we will see—as a comparison of the prophecies 
relating to the harvest conclusively shows—a very different kind of work than the one de- 
scribed by them, One especial lack in this view of Barbour’s is, that in his harvest 
interpretation he utterly fails to discriminate between ‘‘ the first-fruits” previously gath- 
ered, and the harvest which follows, but adopts an opinion which he thinks is favorable 
to his groundwork, viz., chronological position. 


414 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 189, 


Proposition 189. Zhe Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, as cove- 
nanted, is sustained by what is to take place in “ the morning” of 
“the day of Christ.” 


We now come to one of those beautiful, most forcible evidences 
of the truthfulness of our position, which no other theory can 
present. For, the Divine Spirit, taking part of the phrase “‘ the 
day of the Lord,’’ etc., viz., the morning or introductory of that 
day, allies with it such events, identified fully with the Millennial 
era, that the student can be at no loss to distinguish and locate the 
period of time intended. ‘‘ The morning’’ is so widely different in 
blessing, judgment, etc., from the beginning of this present dis- 
pensation, that no comparison can be instituted between them. 
The fact, too, that this figure of ‘‘ the morning’ is employed by 
writers separated by ages ; that they coincide in attributing to it 
the same results; that they preserve a wonderful unity in the use 
of it, establishes us the more jirmly in a doctrine universally 
received by the Early Church. 


Obs. 1. The Millennial day being represented as preceded by a ‘‘ morn- 
ing,’’ the period of time just previous to the breaking of this morning is 
appropriately, to complete the figure, called ‘‘ the night.’’ This is done by 
the Spirit in Ps. 30:5; Rom. 13:12’; Isa. 21:11. The timé ot trae 
fighting, struggling, pilgrimage, absence from the bridegroom, mixture of 
tares and wheat, tribulation, sorrow, death, etc., is forcibly designated as 
‘* the night.”’ ‘ 


Dean Alford (Com. Rom. 13 : 12) says, ‘‘ The ‘ night’ is the lifetime of the world, the 
power of darkness. The ‘Day’ is the Day of resurrection.’? Comp. the excellent note 
by Riddle (Lange’s Com. loci), When adverting to Stuart, Hodge, and Wilkinson as oppos- 
ing this view, he’ remarks : ‘‘ On the other hand, most modern German commentators 
defend this reference,’’ i.e. to the Second Coming, and instances Olshausen, De Wette, 
Philippi, Meyer, Lange, and adds: ‘‘ This opinion gains ground among Anglo-Saxon 
exegetes, giving Alford’s remark. Prof. Lewis (Six, Days of Creation, p. 273) says of the 
Scriptural usage of ‘‘ morning :” ‘* Whatever dispensation causes to appear a new state 
of being supernaturally rising out of the old, thus revealing the ever-ascending glory of 
God, is a new morning, the literal perfection of a new day in the outgoings of that King- 
dom which is called (Ps. 145 : 13) the Kingdom of all worlds or ages.”’ 


Obs. 2. The Millennial day is introduced by the personal coming of 
Jesus. To perfect this figure of ‘‘ the morning,’’ if it alludes to the begin- 
ning of the same period of time, it would be highly appropriate, if thus 
dependent on Christ’s Coming, to designate Him either as the Morning 
Star or as the Sun ushering in this day. This also is done to prove to us, 
if we will but accept of it, that this coming is the real, veritable coming oy 
the person called ‘‘ the Star’’ and ** the Sun,’’ who shines forth, not throug 


Prop, 1389, | TILE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 415 


others, but, in His own proper effulgence. It is therefore with pleasure 
that we read in ‘‘ the last words of David,’’ that (2 Sam. 23 : 1-4) ‘“ there 
shall be a Just One ruling over men, ruling in the fear of God ; as the light 
of the morning shall He arise, the Sun of an unclouded morning, shining 
after rain upon the tender grass of the earth.’’ Night disappears when 
the sun comes, so this ‘‘ night’? shall fade away when “the Sun of an 
unclouded morning’ arises, ushering in a glorious day. Hence Jesus is 
styled also ‘* the bright and morning star,’’ ‘‘ the Day Star,’’ because His 
coming shall be the sure sign of the dawning of the foretold morning. He 
is not merely called such owing to the glory of His person or the splendor 
of His appearing, but because He reveals Himself in the early morning. 
For, Hos. 6 : 3, ‘‘ His going forth is prepared as the morning.”’ 


That we are not attempting to force a meaning, the student is referred to the com- 
mentaries of our opponents. Thus e.g. on 2 Pet. 1 : 19, ‘‘ until the day dawn and the day 
star arise,” etc. Barnes, loci, says: ‘‘ Until the brighter light which shall be shed on all 
things by the glory of the Second Advent of the Saviour,’’ etc. And on the Day Star he 
says: ‘‘ The morning star—the bright star, that at certain periods of the year leads on 
the day, and which is a pledge that the morning is about to dawn. Comp. Rev. 2 : 28; 
Rev. 22:16." Justin Martyr (Dial. with Trypho), long ago, said, ‘“‘ With thee shall be in 
that day, the chief of thy power, in the beauties of thy saints, begotten from the womb 
before the morning star,’’ an evident rendering of Ps.110:3. The Dean of Westminster 
in Good Words renders 2 Sam. 23 : 1-4: “ He that ruleth over men justly—ruling in the 
fear of God—so is it, as the ight of the morning, at the rising of the sun—a morning 
and no clouds—after a clear shining, after rain, tender grass springs from the earth.”’ 
Dr. Erdman (Com. loci Lange’s) says, that this is a *‘ picture of the blessings that follow 
the appearance of the future ruler, under the figure of the wholesome effects of the light 
of the rising sun on a bright morning.’’ Its Messianic reference (as a multitude of ex- 
positors hold) is given under Prop. 49. The figure of a preceding night dissipated by the 
radiance of a splendid morning light at sunrise, is exceedingly impressive, combined as 
it is with the results of a refreshing rain. Dr. Schmoller (Lange’s Com. Hos. 6 : 3) has 
‘* His Coming forth is sure as the dawn, etc. Jehovah will appear bringing salvation. 
This is set forth under the figures of the daybreak and a fertilizing rain. The appearing 
of Jehovah is denoted as arising by the dawn. The transition from night to day is set 
forth.’” Some endeavor to give another meaning to 2 Pet. 1 : 19, making the day and 
day star a shining forth of the light of God’s grace and truth in the heart, but this is 
opposed to the usage of those terms. For whatever Christian experience we have here, 
it is an experience, an earnest given in the night. Hence we adopt in preferences 
Barnes’s statement, with which compare e.g. Calvin’s and Dietlien (quoted Lange, Com. 
loci), who make the present dispensation still night (owing to trials, death, etc.) and the 
incoming one at Christ’s Coming (so Dietlien) or at entrance into heaven (so Calvin) a 
glorious day. 


Obs. 3. The events associated with this morning are of such a nature 
that they can only be realized after the Second Advent ; and they thus 
confirm the Pre-Mill. Advent, the reign of the Just One in the day follow- 
ing this morning, etc. 

1. The resurrection and the dominion of the saints is connected with this 
morning. Thus in Ps. 49 : 14, 15, the Psalmist contrasts the condition 
of the wicked and righteous : ‘‘ Like sheep they (the wicked) are laid in the 
grave ; death shall feed on them ; and the upright shall have dominion over 
them IN THE MORNING ; and their beauty shall consume in the grave from 
their dwelling. But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave ; 
for He shall receive me.’’ Here the prophet distinguishes between those 
who rise in the morning (1st res.) and have dominion, and the rest of the 
dead who lived not again until the one thousand years were finished. In 
Ps. 88 : 10-15, after alluding to death and the grave whither he was tend- 


416 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 139, 


ing, the Psalmist asks, ‘‘ Wilt Thow show wonders to the dead? Shall the 
dead arise and praise Thee?’ etc., and then expresses his hope of a resur- 
rection : ‘‘ But unto Thee have I cried, O Lord; and IN THE MORNING 
shall my prayer prevent Thee.’’ The same is found in Ps. 143 : 8, where 
death is described as smiting the righteous one and making him to dwell in 
darkness, and the prayer, inspired by the Spirit, comes forth impressively : 
** Cause me to hear Thy lovingkindness IN THE MORNING, for in Thee do I 
trust,’ etc. The expression found in several Ps., ‘‘ J will awake early,’’ 
can only be satisfactorily explained of his awaking (res.) in this morning. 
In Ps. 99, after alluding to the universality of death, etc., the petition is 
offered : ‘‘ Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent Thee concerning 
Thy servants’’ (that is, do not let them thus be subject to the power of 
death) ; ‘‘ O satisfy us early (lit. as some critics : 1m the morning), with Thy 
mercy, that we may be glad and rejoice all our days.’’? If we are to take 
the rendering given by the Vulgate, Syriac, Chaldee, and by some critics, 
of the phrase, Eng. Version of Isa. 26:19: ‘‘ for Thy dew 1s as the dew of 
herbs,’’ which is presented as “‘ the dew of the dawn,’’ then in immediate 
connection with the resurrection there is reference to the morning. 
Delitzsch, sustained by Alexander on Isa. and others, translates Isa. 8 : 19, 
20, *‘ they are a people for whom NO MORNING DAWNS,”’ which the marg, 
reading, ‘‘ Heb. 20 morning,’’ also affirms; thus corroborating that the 
‘wicked, living or dead, have no part or lot in this morning.’ 

2. The utter destruction and removal of the wicked is identified with this 
incoming morning. ‘This we haye seen is predicated also of the introduc- 
tion of the Mill. age. Thus Isa. 17 : 14, speaking of the nations who set 
themselves against God (as in the last confederation, Rev. 19, etc.), adds : 
“¢ Behold AT EVENING TIDE trouble ; and BEFORE THE MORNING he is not. 
This is the portion of those that spoil us (compare Zech. 14), and the lot of 
them that rob us.’’? In Mal. 4 the wicked are consumed and utterly rooted 
out at the time ‘‘ the Sun of Righteousness’’ arises. In Ps. 59 : 16, after 
describing the confederation and overthrow of the wicked by the power of 
God, foreseeing the time of its accomplishment, the prophet bursts forth 

-exultingly : “ But [will sing of Thy power, yea, I will sing aloud of Thy 
mercy IN THE MORNING,”’ etc. If we take even Origen’s (Ag. Celsus) ren-_ 
dering of the word ‘‘ early’? in Ps. 101 : 8 which he makes ‘‘ morning,’’ we 
have affirmed the destruction of the wicked of the land that they may be 
cut off from the city of the Lord.? 

3. It is, as the Mill. descriptions predict, a time of deliverance and sal- 
vation. Thus in Ps. 46:5, after portraying the mighty confederation 
under the figure of the roaring waters and the swelling sea, and then con- 
tinuing the figure drawn from the waters and representing the incoming 
river or Kingdom so gladsome, the Psalmist assigns both the reason and 
the time when this confederation shall be overthrown and His Kingdom 
shall be established to the joy of His people : “ God is in the midst of her ; 
she shall not be moved ; God shall help her, and that RIGHT EARLY,”’ or as 
marg. reading, Heb. ‘‘ WHEN THE MORNING APPEARETH.”’ If it is allow- 
able to receive the translation of Zeph. 3:5 given by Gildas (A.p. 546), 
there would be a distinct reference to this morning, as follows: ‘‘ Our 
Lord is upright in the midst of His people, and in the morning He will 
not do injustice, in the morning He will give His judgment.’’ Job even 
(7 : 21) expresses the idea that deliverance shall be granted by God ‘‘ in 
the morning’’ to those whom He, ‘‘ the preserver of men,’’ has pardoned.’ 


Prop. 139. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 417 


4, ‘This morning is identified with the rule of Christ, and the glorification 
of the saints. This we have already seen, but the Spirit gives us additional 
evidence. ‘Thus in Ps. 110: 2, 3, at the very time that ‘‘ the Lord shall 
send the rod of His strength out of Zion and shall rule in the midst of His 
enemies,’’ then, ‘* Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the 
beauty of holiness from the womb of THE MORNING’? (alluding to ‘‘ the 
birth,’’ etc.) ; ‘* Thow hast the dew of thy youth’’ (referring to the renewal). 
If considered in the light of the general tenor of the Word, this passage is 
exceedingly expressive and beautiful.* 

5. Having shown and advocated as a necessary condition the restoration 
of the Jewish nation, a confirmation is found in the specification that this 
also (as we contended) takes place in this morning. Turning to Hos. 5 : 
14, 15, and 6 : 3, when the Jewish restoration is spoken of in verse 15 (see 
McNeile, Lec. 4, Prospects of the Jews), it issaid : ‘‘ in their affliction they 
will seek me IN THE MORNING ;”’ and in the next chapter, verse 3, the 
Lord’s return or coming is likened to ‘‘ the morning.’’ 


1 The Millenarian reader will notice two points here in the context. (1) That evidently 
Spiritualism is described and condemned, and (2) that it is represented as existing just 
previous to this morning. Patrick (Com. Ps. 49), Graves (On the Pentet., Pt. 3, sec. 4), 
Horne (Com. Ps. 49), Wines (Com. on Laws, p. 295), and a host of writers refer ‘* the 
morning’’ to the time of the resurrection, and speak, therefore, of “ the glorious morning 
of the resurrection.’’ Isaki, Kimchi, Geier, Mendelssohn, and many of the older exposi- 
tors, express the same. The reader is referred to Tayler Lewis’s Intro. to Gen., Lange’s 
Com., on the usage of ‘‘ morning.’’ On p. 142 he remarks: ‘‘ The morning, Ps. 49 : 15, 
when the righteous shall reign,’’ is the great dies retributionis, so prominent in Scripture, 
and acknowledged too (like the conception of great times) in the earliest language and 
thinking of the race.’’ He refers in a footnote how ancient Arabian poets used it, as e.g. 
“God isone. He began (life) ; He causes it to come back (from death) ; to Him is the 
returning in the morning.’’ The Koran employs it, and asthe Com. of Al-zamakhshari de- 
clares ‘‘ the day of the resurrection ”’ is ‘‘ called the morning, to impress us with a sense 
of its nearness.’’ Lewis deems the figure very ancient, “ and to have gone back to the 
days of Job.”’ Even such writers as Ewald and others, who refuse a direct application, 
still think it gives ‘‘ a glimpse of the Messianic hope ;’’ we say that it imparts far more, | 
as a comparison of Scripture teaches us. 

2 We only now allude to the order of events as given in the Word of God, as e.g. in 
Mal. 3 and 4, etc. ; (1) the gathering of the special treasure or jewels ; (2) the fearful 
destruction, of the wicked ; (3) the glorious Sun of righteousness shining forth with heal- 
ing ; (4) the wicked remain fallen. This very order is preserved and enforced by the 
general analogy, indicative of the introductory (morning) and fulness (day) of the Mill. 
era. 

3 Other allusions may be found, as e.g in Delitzsch’s rendering of Isa. 62:1, ‘‘ the 
morning brightness,’’ Ps. 59:16; Ps. 130 :6; Isa. 58:8, etc. Whatever view we may 
take of some of these expressions, as e.g. Zeph. 3: 5, one thing is self-evident, that God 
is stated to manifest Himself specially in the morning, which is particularly true of the 
morning of the day of the Lord Jesus, the Christ. 

4 Prof. Lewis (Sia Days of Creation, p. 326) makes the expression ‘‘ from the womb of 
the morning, thou hast the dew of youth,” expressive of generation or birth before the 
morning (even as early dew, of the same), but refers it to Christ ; we, however, in view 
of the antecedent “ people,” prefer to apply it to His brethren raised from the dead. Dr. 
Conant (New Ver, Psalms) renders : “ The rod of thy strength will Jehovah stretch forth 
from Zion ; rule thou in the midst of thy enemies. Thy people are free-will offerings in 
the day of thy warfare, in beauties of holiness ; from the womb of the morning thou hast 
thy dew of youth.” He says: ‘‘ In beauties of holiness. Sanctified for the holy warfare. 
There may be a typical reference to the ceremonial purity of the person and garments.” 
*** Dew of youth’ suggests the freshness and beauty of young life. ‘ Womb of themorning’ 
suggests the prolific source of the countless dew-drops. Accordingly, ‘from the womb 
of the morning thou hast thy dew of youth,’ suggests the countless numbers and fresh 
vigor of the youthful warriors, as the dew-drops poured forth from the womb of the 
morning.’’ The res. of the saints, springing forth in this morning, is represented, Isa, 


418 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 139. 


26 : 19, as the coming forth of the bright, sparkling dew. Dr.-Nigelsbach in his com- 
ment (Lange’s Com. Jsa,) on the passage refers it to that period as follows : ‘‘ On the morn- 
ing ot the res. a wonderful dew will cover the earth. It is no more the earthly dew, it isa 
heavenly, a divine dew. If even now the earthly dew, when the rays of the sun mirror 
themselves in it, sparkles Jike pearls, how resplendent will be the drops of that heavenly 
dew, every one of which will be a glorified luminous body, a body of the resurrection !” 
After advocating the phrase “ dew of lights” in preference to ‘‘ dew of herbs,” as referring 
to the bodies of the glorified, fashioned after Christ, he adds ‘*‘ But whence come these 
forms of light, which as heavenly dew-drops, will on the morning of the res. shine on the 
surface of the earth? They have arisen, i.e. they come out of the earth in which they 
hitherto as gloomy shades have dwelt. At the Almighty word of the Lord, the earth was 
forced to give up (cast out, v. 19) these that had been hitherto regarded asa spoil that 
could not be snatched from it.’’’ ‘‘ Dew’’ is also used as indicative of blessing (e.g. Mic. 
5:7, etc.), and these glorified ones will (as will be shown under Props. 154 and 156) 
prove an inestimable blessing to the world. 


Obs. 4. The identification of this morning with the beginning of the Mill. 
day not only confirms the doctrine of the Kingdom, but teaches us how to 
estimate the spiritualistic conception of ‘‘ the Morning Land,’’ etc., to be 
immediately realized after death.* It puts aside as irrelevant a mass of 
matter put into print concerning ‘‘ the morning’”’ as connected with the 
present state of the Church, with death, or with the third heaven. It 
enables us also to correct such unintentional mistakes into which Lange 
falls, when he says (Com., p. 355), ‘‘ the festive evening (hour of final reward) 
of the Church will take place at the Sec. appearing of Christ, which must 
not be confounded with the final judgment.’’ The substitution of ‘* morn- 
ing’’ for ‘‘ evening’’ makes the sentence sore Scriptural. 


Obs. 5. This subject gives pertinency and preciousness to the promise : 
‘© 7 will give unto Him the morning star.’’ This Star is Jesus Himself, 
Rey. 22:16, etc. There is even here an allusion to the time of a special 
bestowal, viz., at the period when Jesus is manifested as ‘‘ the morning 
star,’’ i.e., even before the dawn of the day itself. Jesus will come, and 
the saints, to whom the ruling is promised in the context, shall be asso- 
ciated with Him in judgment, etc. We have in *‘ the Morning Star’’ an 
implied reference to the first stage (Prop. 130) of the Advent, the thief-like 
coming for the saints, and to obtain it indicates that we are worthy of the 
better res. or (if living) of the translation. The mention of this in such 
a connection is also exceedingly significant of the exaltation of the saints 
to coheirship with the Christ when the morning breaks. It embraces more 
than the comparison of Dan. 12 : 3, viz., distinguishing honor and intimate 
relationship with Jesus at a specified period. Blessed they, who shall 
experience this bestowal of love. 


It may be deemed desirable, in connection with this day and morning, to say some- 
thing respecting that very difficult passage found in Zech. 14:6, 7. A concise render- 
ing, consistent with other Scripture, is stilla desideratum. The translations of the Eng. 
Version, Henderson, Moore, German Bible, etc., are unsatisfactory, because contradic- 
tory to other statements given by the same Spirit. Thus e.g. the renderings which say 
that in that (Mill.) day ‘‘ the light shall not be clear nor dark,” ‘‘ there shall not be bright . 


* It is saddening to find that the professed orthodox take up and copy those Spiritual- 
istic phrases, as Davis’s Summer Land, Mrs. King’s Spirit Land, etc. Recently in an 
obituary, a divine placed his deceased brother safely in ‘‘ the Summer Land,’’ where 
(anticipating Paul’s crowning at the Sec. Advent, 2 Tim. 4 : 8) “ the angels crowned him” 
—thus perverting and abusing Scripture promises. 


PRop. 139. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 419 


light and darkness,” “‘ there shall not be brightening light and condensing darkness,”’’ 
‘*‘there will be no light, but only cold and frost,” “it will not be light, the glorious will 
withdraw themselves,” “ there will not be light, and cold, and ice,” ‘‘ it shall not be 
light, precious things are obscured,” ‘‘ there shall not be the light of the precious orbs, 
but condensed darkness,”’ etc., are flatly contradicted by the Mill. predictions, e.g. Isa. 
30 :26 ; Isa. 60 : 19, 20, ete. Some (Fausset, Com. loci, and a writer, J. G. W., in Proph. 
Times, 1874, p. 175) limit this to a *‘ twilight-like time of calamity,” or of trial, preced- 
ing the Mill. age, but this is forbidden by the context which associates with ‘‘ that day’ 
Mill. blessedness and glory. Several renderings are presented, each one of which cor- 
responds with other statements, preserving the proper unity. ‘‘ And it shall come to 
pass in that day’’ (introduced by the Coming of the Lord and His saints), ‘‘ the light 
shall not be (marg. reading) precious’’ (i.e. rare but bountiful), ‘‘ nor (marg. read.) thick- 
ness”’ (i.e. darkened or obscured). ‘* But the day shall be one’ (i.e. unbroken) ‘‘ which 
is known to the Lord, not day nor night’’ (i.e. not changeable, but one entire day) ; ‘‘ but 
it shall come to pass, at evening time it shall be light’’ (i.e. either, when evening comes, 
the light shall continue, there being no darkness such as we now experience ; or, at 
evening, viz., the close of the Mill. day or period, the light remains undiminished). A 
friend handed me the following, derived from marginal readings in his possession : 
** And it shall come to pass in that day, that it shall not be clear in some places and dark 
in other places of the world. But the day shall be one which shall be known to the 
Lord, not day, nor night ; but it shall come to pass, that at evening time it shall he 
light.’’ That is, the increased light of the sun and moon as predicted, with the special 
revelation of light and glory at Jerusalem, forbids in that day our present ordinary day 
and night ; hence there will be no change from light to darkness, and at evening it will 
still be hght-—that is, there will be one continuous day. Archb. Newcome’s translation 
is a good one, as follows : ‘‘ And it shall come to pass in that day, there shall not be a 
bright ight and darkness ; but there shall be one day. This shall be known unto 
Jehovah. There shall not be day, and there shall not be night, but it shall come to pass 
that, at eventide, there shall be light.’ Fry (Sec. Advent, p. 122, vol. 2, Sirr’s First Res., 
p. 141) follows Newcome, and explains its meaning to be that ‘‘there shall no longer be 
the ordinary vicissitudes of day and night,’’ ‘‘ all shall be one entire day, not day and 
night as now,’’ etc. Comp. Isa. 60; Rev. 21 and 22 ; Isa. 30 : 26, ete. 


420 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 140, 


Proposition 140. This doctrine of the Kingdom confirmed by 
the phraseology of the New Test. respecting “ the end of the age.” 


Having shown that the Jewish idea of a ‘‘ world to come,” a dis- 
pensation or age to come, a septenary or millenary still future, 
necessarily involves the ending of this age and the introduction of 
another (which the Jews also plainly stated, as e.g. Prop. 138, Obs. 
1 and 3), a link in the chain of evidence (seeing that the Messianic 
Kingdom is with them identified with the closing of this age and 
the coming in of a future one) is presented by considering iow the 
New Test. language corroborates the Jewish view when reverting 
to ‘‘ the end of the age.”’ 


Obs. 1. The student will notice how the Jewish idea is presented in Matt. 
24 : 3, where the disciples asked concerning ‘‘ the end of the world.’’ (1) 
Almost every commentator’ frankly admits that the word translated 
‘* world ’’ is in the original ‘‘ age’’ or ‘‘ dispensation.’’ ‘To the critic or 
the Biblical investigator, there is no question respecting its reference to 
‘* the ending of the age.’’ For, asis well known, the Jewsexpected under the 
Messiah (who should abide forever John 12 : 34) such great changes that 
they looked for a termination of the present, and the introduction of a new 
order or arrangement of things under Him. WHence the pertinency of the 
disciples’ question, being in accord with the current views on the subject. 
(2) This is made decisive by their uniting, just as the Jews did, with the 
ending of the age the coming of the Messiah. The coming and the ending 
of the age were inseparably connected in the Jewish mind. The reader will 
also notice that Jesus in His reply gives not the slightest hint of their being 
mistaken, but proceeds to answer the questions as legitimate. This Jewish 
usage 1s also seen in Heb. 9 : 26, where Christ is said to have come, to 
make a sacrifice for sin, at the conclusion, ending of the preceding dispen- 
sation or age, then called ‘‘ The end of the world,”’ or ages. (Comp. 1 
Cor. 10:11.) The same is found in the promise of Christ, Matt. 28 : 20, 
to be with His people ‘* wnto the end of the world’ or age—that is, down 
to the very close of this dispensation. Some have confined this to the 
Jewish age ending at the destruction of Jerusalem, but united as it is with 
the gospel preaching, etc., it seems rather to apply to the present dispen- 
sation. ‘The ending of the age, to usher in another and more glorious Mes- 
sianic one, is a Jewish conception which has Scriptural foundation and 
inspired warrant for its adoption.’ 

1 Some commentators, like Barnes, will give no explanation of the phrase in Matt. 24:3, 
and most uncandidly avoid Matt. 13 : 39, 40, 49, because it would be antagonistic to his 
own theory. We append, for the common reader, several explanations, illustrative of 
the general concurrence of critics. Olshausen (Com. Matt. 24 :3) says the word translated 


world ‘‘ indicates the time of the world which passes away, while the world itself 
remains.” So Lange, ‘‘ the present order of things ;’ Judge Jones, ‘‘ the end or con- 


Prop. 140. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 421 


summation of the age or dispensation, or the expiration of the age ;’ Bh. Newton, “‘ the 
consummation of the age ;’’ Nast, ‘‘ closing of the dispensation or age ;” so also Schaff, 
Bengel, Alford, Clark, Van Oosterzee, Gill, Steir, Greswell, Ryle, Buck, Carleton, Roos, 
Lillie, Ebrard, Auberlen, and numerous others make it equivalent to ‘“‘ the age.” 

* It is a harsh interpretation that Barnes and many others give to it to mean “ the last 
dispensation,’’ for Christ to come ‘‘ at the end of the age” is to come at the close and not 
at the beginning of one, even if it should prove to be the last one. Again, it is uncrit- 
1cal, for it does not take into account the Jewish usage of such phrases. Besides, it is 
not correct, since other ages are to follow this one. The same criticism applies to the 
phrase ‘‘ last days,” Heb. 1 : 2, etc., which Barnes, etc. interpret the same way, overlook- 
ing entirely how the Jewish mind entertained it. Indeed when not biassed by a theory, 
these same writers fully admit that the proper meaning of ‘‘ aidn’’ is (as Barnes, Heb. 
1: 2), “ age, duration,” ‘* an indefinitely long period of time, their perpetuity,’’ etc. This 
is abundantly sustained by Greek lexicons, as every reader can verify for himself. Now, 
the very selection of such a word in addressing Jews is in itself exceedingly significant, 
and must not fail to receive the attentive consideration of the critical student. Lederer 
(Nathaniel, Sept. 1868), gives quotations from Jewish prayer-books, etc., showing their 
belief in the Son of David restoring the Davidic throne and Kingdom, and among the 
prayers, used in thanksgiving after meal, is the following : “ May He who is most merci- 
ful grant us life and make us worthy to draw near and to behold the days of the Messiah, 
the building of the sanctuary, and the life in the age to come.’’ ‘‘ The Advance” (1878) 
objects to Dr. Seiss’s (Last Times) Exposition, on the following ground (quoted by the 
Luth. Observer, May 10, 1878): ‘* That the starting-point, Matt. 24 : 3, is erroneous, for 
that Jesus meant by the ending of the age the ending of the Jewish dispensation, and 
not that of the dispensation under which we live, and that this transition was meant 
when Jesus declared that the Kingdom of God wasat hand.” To this we reply : (1) That 
the concession that the phrase denotes the ending of the age confirms our position ; (2) 
for the events alleged by the Saviour to precede this end have not yet all taken place ; (3) 
no such fulfilment preceded the First Advent or the establishment of the Christian 
Church ; (4) that the reply of Jesus has reference to future time, as the events indicate, 
thus explaining time to the disciples ; (5) all those taught by these disciples, afterward 
(Props. 71-75) followed the view entertained by Dr. Seiss ; (6) the Kingdom and estab- 
lishment are misconceived (Props. 56, 58, 66, 67, etc.) ; (7) the ablest critics, including 
many hostile to Pre-Mill., coincide with our view. Dr. Schaff in Lange’s Com. Matt., p. 
505, on ch. 28 : 20, says: ‘* Lit : till the consumination of the ( present) won (as distinct from 
the future zon after the Advent, or the never-ending world to come).”’ This distinctive 
reference to this present age to be followed by an age, or ages to come, is constantly 
affirmed. 


Obs. 2. For it is employed by Jesus Himself in His address to the Jews, 
without any alleged change of meaning, and in accord with their views. 
Thus Matt. 13 : 39, 40, 49, ‘‘ the harvest is the end of the world,’’ ‘* so shall 
it be at the end of this world,’’ simply means that such things will be at 
‘“‘ the end of the age.’’ Every commentator, with sufficient candor, what- 
ever his views may be, will acknowledge that such is its definite meaning. 
Jesus, thus adopting the Jewish phraseology, points wnerringly to a future 
age to be introduced, after this one is closed, connecting with it the King- 
dom of the Son of man precisely as the Jews were accustomed to regard the 
matter. The disciples to whom the parable was eaplained understood the 
phraseology in its usual Jewish significancy, as is evident from their ques- 
tions, Matt. 24:3 and Acts1:6. If it be said, that after the day of 
Pentecost they changed their views, it is found amply rebutted by the con- 
tinued usage of the phraseology, as in Eph. 1: 21, ‘* not only in this world 
(ai6n, age) but also in that which is to come,’’ Eph. 2:7, ‘‘ in the ages to 
come ;”’ Eph. 8 : 21, ‘‘ throughout ail ages, world without end”? (or, through- 
out or unto all the generations of the age of ages), etc.’ Allusion has already 
been made to Luke 20 : 34, where the Saviour contrasts ‘‘ this world ’’ or 
age with ‘‘ that world”’ or age, linking the future one, just as the Jews 
did, with the resurrection. Addressed to Jews, it certainly must have 


422 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 140. 


strengthened them in their belief of the Messianic Kingdom and age being 
still future, because, first, it could only begin when at least the one in 
which they lived had run its allotted course, and second, it was identified, 
as they also held, with a resurrection from the dead.’ 


1 Barnes, giving the same in brackets, adds : ‘‘ Or unto all the generations of the eter- 
nity of eternities or the eternity of ages.”’ Bloomfield, ‘‘ through the succession of all 
generations, unto the latest period of eternity.’’ Barnes says that Bloomfield calls it 
one of ‘‘ the apostle’s self-invented phrases ;’—it would indeed be such if it denoted 
“ eternity of eternities,’’ or even ‘“‘unto the latest period of eternity.”” Viewed in the 
light thrown upon it by Jewish faith, the meaning is very apparent, viz., that Paul alludes 
to the age, above all others the object of desire which either follows the other preceding 
ages or will extend into succeeding ages. The singular number “‘ age’ has a detinite Jew- 
ish cast. The critical student is reminded that our line of argument is calculated to 
throw light on some very difficult passages of Scripture. Thus e.g. let us select the — 
phrase ‘‘ in those is continuance, and we shall be saved,’’ in Isa. 64 : 5, a passage of great 
difficulty to critics, giving rise to numerous conjectures and renderings. Notice, how- 
ever, that, as Bh. Lowth remarks (with whom nearly all agree), the word ‘* olam”’ trans- 
lated ‘* continuance’’ means ‘‘ a destined but hidden and unknown portion of time.” Then, 
in this hidden, unknown time or age, salvation is to be experienced. Now if we regard 
the context, we have (1) the Advent, (2) the glory that shall follow, (3) the encouragement 
to the righteous, that although God was angry, they shall be saved in the ‘‘ olam.’’ 
What can this ‘‘ olam” be, if we allow analogy to speak, but this age to come, the time of 
which is still unknown and hidden to men. We append a few remarks on passages 
cited. Dr. Brane (Lange’s Com. Eph. 1 : 21), ‘‘ The expression here is not purely—now 
and hereafter (Hodge), but designates present time as the first age, disappearing in the 
transition to the future glory, the future as the eternal beginning with the return of 
Christ.’’ Alford, Com. Eph. 3:21, says: ‘* The age of ages (eternity) is conceived as con- 
taining ages, just as our ‘ age’ contains years ; and then those ages are thought of as 
made up, like ours, of generations (unto all the generations of the age of ages). Itis 
used, by a transfer of what we know in time, to express imperfectly and indeed improp- 
erly, the idea of eternity.’’ Such references could be multiplied. Comp. e.g. arts. in 
Proph. Times, 1866, No. 8, and 1867, No. 5, and articles on ‘‘ World,” ‘‘ Aion,” etc., in 
Bib. Cyclops. 

* Such express references to the closing of one age and the ushering in of others fully 
exposes the fallacy of Waggoner’s supposed Refutation of an Age to Come, because it is in 
direct violation of the Jewish views held, and their complete indorsement by Jesus and 
the apostles. If he and others were correct in their one-sided references and conclu- 
sions, then the positive language of Scripture has no force of meaning. Waggoner’s proof 
is inferential, and the most plausible is the following: He lays great stress on the an- 
nounced fact that there is ‘‘no temple’ in the New Jerusalem, and hence no provision 
(his own inference) for the future salvation of men. But he forgets that the inhabitants 
of the New Jerusalem are already saved, and hence need no provision for salvation, while, 
on the other hand, it is different with the restored earthly Jerusalem at its side, which 
has a temple worship and to which the nations come (comp. e.g. Zech. 14, and observe 
the connection). But evenif his position were granted, it does not by any means follow, 
that ages—so positively announced—are conditioned by the salvability of men, seeing 
that the saints are represented as not merely enjoying ‘‘ the age to come’’ but the suc- 
cessive ages of eternity. Such expressions e.g. as Eph. 2:7, “in the ages to come” 
(indicative of a series of ages, successive periods of time), as well as the often repeated 
“‘ ages of ages,’’ are directly opposed to his theory. (Comp. our remarks, Props. 137 and 
138, and in reference to the future age, such Props. as 152, 148, 151, etc.) One passage 
alone fully substantiates our position, e.g. Luke 20 : 34-36: “The children of this age 
marry and are given in marriage ; but they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain 
that age, and the res. that out of dead ones,’’ etc. Comp. the arts. of J. B. in Proph. 
Times, Aug. 1865, and Aug. 1872, who insists upon time being expressed, and that the 
definite meaning of aion is “age,’’ and hence ‘‘ the ages are God’s grand divisions of 
eternity.” It will ever be true (Prof. Lewis, Six Days’ Creation, rendering of Ps. 90), 
‘* from age to age, Thou art God.” 


Obs. 3. This expectation of the Jews of a closing and then an incoming 
age throws light upon the language of Martha, John 11 : 24, when she 


Prop. 140. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 423 


says, “* that her brother shall rise again in the resurrection at the last day.”’ 
The ‘‘ last day’’ was synonymous with the ending of the age at which time 
the Jews believed the resurrection would take place. Jesus, by employing 
the same phrase, John 6 : 39, 40, 44, 54, directs attention, according to 
the prevailing belief, to another age, of which ‘‘ the last day’’ of a closing 
one isthe precursor. So delicately guarded too are the expressions concern- 
ing this “* last day,’’ that in no respect do they embrace the notion of our 
opponents. ‘The resurrection of believers (as we hold) is only associated 
with the phrase. The wicked, the rejecter of the truth, is indeed judged 
by the Word in “ the last day,’’ John 12:48, but he is judged by it 
unworthy of the first resurrection. So also the phrase ‘‘ last days,’’ derived 
from Gen. 49:1; Isa. 2:25; Micah 4:1, was apphed by the Jews to that 
closing period of time, when under the auspices of the Messiah a new era 
or age would be inaugurated, and thence were allied with the coming and 
reign of David’s Son.’ The apostles, as well they might, retain the ex- 
pression and locate them in the future—knowing that they were universally 
held to be followed by the era-of blessedness delineated by the prophets— 
ase.g. 2 ‘Tim. 3:1; James 5:3; 2 Pet. 3:3. The phrase as used in 
Heb. 1:2 may denote either the concluding portion of the Jewish or 
Mosaic dispensation, or it may, in view of the unknown duration of this 
dispensation, refer to the fact that these ‘‘ last days’’ are associated with 
this dispensation, and in the largeness of the Divine measure of time were 
regarded as near at hand, and even present. For we have another expres- 
sion which covers the same ground, viz., that of ‘‘ the last time’’ in 1 Pet. 
1:5, 20, where ‘‘ the last time’’ is future, and the plural form ‘‘ last 
times’’ 1s both present and future. In 1 John 2:18, *‘ the last time’’ 
includes this dispensation, which, according to the Jewish estimate, would 
then be preparative to the ushering in of the new and desired dispensation. 
This is clearly seen in John’s associating the Coming of the Messiah (v. 28 
etc.) with the close of this ‘‘ last time.’? Comp. Jude 18 with preceding 
context. Thus by a comparison of Scripture, and observing the current 
views on the subject, it is found that while there are strong intimations 
that this age is ‘‘ the last’’ one preceding the final and much-desired one 
of Messianic manifestation in glory, yet the most of the references direct 
our attention to the future, the closing period of the dispensation, for an 
astounding outbreak of wickedness and an open display of Divine power, to 
be followed by a glorious age. Not one of these utterances indorses the 
monkish notion—even now entertained by learned men-—that time will end, 
or that no other age shall succeed this one on the earth. The very phrase- 
ology, Jewish in origin, and the manner in which it is united with the 
Coming of Jesus, the resurrection, and the rejection and overthrow of the 
wicked, amply sustains our position.’ 


1 In reference to “ the latter days,” Kurtz (His. Old Cov., vol. 3, p. 440) remarks ; ‘‘ This 
expression always denotes the period of the ultimate completion of the Kingdom of God, 
in other words, the Messianic age.’’ (Comp. last Obs. of Prop. 130.) 

2 It is surprising that writers do not observe the force of their own concessions. Thus 
e.g. Barnes, Com. Acts 2:17, after stating that “the last days” denotes ‘‘ future times,”’ 
‘‘ after times” (and expressive of the glorious times of Messianic reign), adds: ‘* It does 
not appear from this, and it certainly is not implied in the expression, that they sup- 
posed the world would then come to an end. Their views were just the contrary. They 
anticipated a long and glorious time under the dominion of the Messiah, and to this 
expectation they were led by the promise that this Kingdom should be forever ; that of 
the increase of His government there should be no end, etc.” The question naturally 


424 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 140. 


arises, If this be so, why then not allow this view of the disciples to have equal weight 
when considering other phrases, as e.g. ‘* the end of the world or age,’’ etc? 


Obs. 4. The expressions ‘‘ end of the world,’’ ‘‘ last day,’’ etc., have in- 
fluenced many to reject the Jewish idea of a dispensation to follow this 
one ; and in their eagerness to make out such an age or era impracticable, 
they have even asserted the complete destruction of the world (some even 
have it annihilated, see following Prop.), and a previous withdrawal of the 
righteous to the third heaven, where they forever remain. In brief, the 
perpetuity of the earth is denied, or at least its being rendered unfit and 
uninhabitable for the redeemed, is declared. Now our entire argument 
assumes the exact reverse, and if such a Kingdom, age, day of Christ, etc., 
is to come at the end of this age, then the continued existence and per- 
petuity of the earth must, in the very nature of the case, be also a fact. 
How else can the Davidic throne and Kingdom be re-established, and all 
the covenant promises be realized? Instead of casting ourselves upon the 
Covenant, and the promises derived from the Covenant, which boldly take 
the matter for granted, assume it as self-evident and indispensable, we shall 
now proceed, in order to guard our argument on all sides, to produce direct 
reasons given by the Spirit to indicate this very perpetuity. 


‘““The end,” and ‘‘the end of the world,” was employed by the early Christians to 
denote the end of the age when Jesus appeared, so e.g. Ignatius, Hpis. 6; Lactantius, Div. 
Inst., B. 4, ch. 10, ete. Prof. Bush (and others of our opponents) makes it equivalent 
to “end of the age, dispensation, or order of things.’’ Lange (bremen Lec., No. 8) says, 
‘*The end of the world is the Kingdom of God in its consummation,” indicating an age 
to follow. We, however, prefer, “ The end of the age will witness the Kingdom of God in 
its manifestation,’’ for then the Theocratic ordering is restored with glorious additions. 
Even the expression “ End of Days’ comports with this general analogy, so that Kurtz 
remarks : ‘‘ This expression denotes, not only here (Balaam’s prophecy), but in every 
other place, the time when the promises and hopes of salvation indulged by any age 
should all be fulfilled ;’’ and Havernick : ‘‘ They always denote the horizon of a prophetic 
announcement.’ We regret the omissions of some writers, thus noticed in Old and New, 
Aug. 1871, when, after alluding to the fault of Barnes’s Com., in finding a double mean- 
ing or fulfilment of Christ’s Sec. Coming, as in Matt. chs. 24 and 25, it is said: ‘‘ Even 
in the parable of the tares, when ‘ the field is the world’ and ‘ the harvest is the end of 
the world,’ he (Barnes) does not allude to the fact, that two different Greek words are 
used in the original, and that ‘the world’ which is ended at the harvest is by no means 
the same as that which constitutes ‘ the field.’ The omission of the slightest hint to this 
difference in the original isa great blemish to the book. Every reader of the Greek 
Test. knows that the end of the earth is never used in the Gospels ; but a reader of 
Barnes’s Notes would suppose it to be used very often.’’ Such omissions are calculated 
to mislead and to prejudice the unlearned against us. Strange that men through inad- 
vertency blunder on this point, as e.g. Dr. Knapp (Ch. Theol., Sec. 154), who, under his 
preconceived notion of the judgment, asserts, that the disciples in asking what should 
be the sign of ‘‘the end of the world,” meant ‘‘ what are the signs of the end of time.”’ 
A mere tyro acquainted with the Jewish views, the disciples’ opinions, and the usage of 
the original, could scarcely have penned such an unwarranted statement, which he 
repeatedly contradicts (as seen in the quotations from him under various propositions) 
when declaring that the disciples believed in an incoming age under Messianic rule. The 
idea of ‘‘ the end of time” never entered into the views of the disciples, who, instead, 
looked for the restoration of the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom. So Dr. Alexander (Vom., 
Matt. 13 : 39, 40) is singularly inconsistent, because biassed by his judgment theory. 
He makes ‘‘ the end of the world’’ (while admitting that the word relates specially to 
time) to ‘‘ include the material universe with its inhabitants and time with its great 
divisions, whether natural or moral. Of these two worlds, or of the world in these 
senses, the completion, consummation, winding up, denouement, or catastrophe, will 
be coincident, if not identical.” ‘‘ It shall be in the end of the world, i.e. of the present 
creation and time.’? Comment is not needed. Dr. Brown (Com. Matt. 18) evades giving 
the force of the original aion, and purposely leaves his interpretation so indefinite as to 


4 
——— SS 


PROP, 140: | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 425 


cover the Popish view: “‘ The harvest is the end of the world—the period of Christ's 
Sec. Coming, and of the judicial separation of the righteous and the wicked.’’ There is 
no hope of enlightenment when the force of language is thus concealed. We only add: 
Our translators were too much under the Popish notion of the ending of the world, and 
therefore it is reasonable to find such renderings as they have given to accord with King 
James's instructions to retain the ecclesiastical terms in use. (It is strange, that in 
Heb. 9 : 26 (comp. also 1 Cor. 10 :‘11) they translate by the same word “ world,” the first 
word denoting the literal earth, and the second word meaning an age or dispensation. ) 
The key to such a rendering may, however, be found in this, that even the word 
*‘world” had, at one time, the idea of cycle or age attached to it, and was thus used, as 
shown e.g. by Prof. Lewis in Six Days of Creation, p. 377, ete. Thus, to illustrate, he 
quotes Humboldt in his Kosmos, vol. 1, p. 70, as approving the decision of James Grimm, 
** that the word Welt, and which was weald in the old German, worold in the old Saxon, 
and weruld in the Anglo-Saxon, was a period of time, an age (seculum), rather than a term 
used for the world in space.” In his ch. on ‘‘ Time-worlds” he shows in detail that aion 
is employed to designate time in relation to the world ; and also refers to Heb. 1 : 2, ‘* By 
whom He made the worlds (i.e. the ages);”” Heb. 11 : 3, ‘‘ By faith we understand that the 
ages (world-times) were framed by the word of God,’’ i.e. adapted, arranged, put in har- 
mony with each other, etc. 


Obs. 5. So powerful and convincing are the reasons for holding to the 
ending of the present age or dispensation and the ushering of another and 
more glorious (the Sabbatism), that a multitude of the most eminent and 
learned men firmly hold to it. Indeed it would be almost universal, if all 
could be persuaded that the predicted reign of the Messiah on earth 1s still 
future. Dr. Breckenridge (Anowledge of God Subjectively Considered, p. 
668-9) only expresses the opinion of these, when he speaks of the Mill. 
period, introduced by the Sec. Advent, as ‘‘a new dispensation,” ‘‘ as distinct 
and real as any preceding dispensation,’’ made requisite in order to fulfil 
the Scriptures. If we accept of the Pre-Mill. Advent, the Pre-Mill. resur- 
rection of the saints, the Scriptural idea of the day of judgment and the 
day of the Lord Jesus, the personal reign of Jesus and the saints, we are 
inevitably forced to this position, which the Scriptures so abundantly sus- 
tain, seeing that a new period, new ordering, new dispensational arrange- 
ments, are a necessary sequence. This is indorsed by the highest theo- 
logical authorities, as seen e.g. in Rothe, Delitzsch, Auberlen, and others. 
(Comp. e.g. our quotation from Van Oosterzee, Prop. 133, Obs. 4, note 1.) 


The claims of Swedenborgians, Mormons, Shakers, Spiritualism, etc., that ‘‘a new 
dispensation,’’ the one predicted in behalf of the redemption of man, is realized now in 
their several respective schemes of doctrine, etc., is set aside by the simple and unan- 
swerable fact, that the concomitants, the accessories of such a dispensation, are lacking 
among them. The deliverance, glory, etc., promised in connection with it are all want- 
ing, and they are just as much under the influence of a sin-cursed earth, having the 
same trials, temptations, sorrows, tears, etc., as those who set up no such claims. All 
such schemes are a perversion and belittling of the promises of God in Christ Jesus. 
Dr. Kling, in art. Eschatology, Herzog’s Encyclop., advocates a future incoming age or dis- 
pensation, and refers to Rothe (Ethics) and others, as presenting the same. Fausset in 
his Com. constantly keeps this in view as required by the general analogy. As an illus- 
tration of his comments we give the following: On Gal. 1:4, he remarks: “‘ Greek, 
‘age ;’ system or course of the world, regarded from a religious point of view. The 
present age opposes the ‘ glory’ (v. 5) of God, and is under the authority of the evil one. 
The ‘ ages of ages’ (Greek, v. 5) are opposed to ‘ the present evil age.’”” On Eph. 1:10 
he translates, ‘‘ Unto the dispensation of the fulness of the times.’’ While in “ the 
times’’ are included those of the Gentiles and Jews and Church, he specially refers ‘‘ the 
dispensation’’ to ‘‘ the timeg of restitution,” the Mill. Kingdom, the New Heavens and 
New Earth, because this period forms a dispensation of the Divine Purpose in Redemp- 
tion completed when ‘‘ the times’’ allotted it have arrived. The student, of course, will 
not overlook the fact, as noticed by various writers, that “‘ the limes of restitution” indi- 
eates not merely one time but a series of times, and this succession of times we find—as 


426 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 140. 


shown under different Propositions—fully portrayed in prophecy concerning the events 
introductory to, parallel with, and following after the one thousand years. Even such 
writers as Hutton (Essays, vol. 1, p. 122), Eaton (Perm. of Christ), and others, consider 
the language of the Bible expressive of future ‘‘ centuries on centuries’ indefinitely, 
Pre-Millenarian commentators and writers, of course, lay great stress on the still future 
age and ages following the Sec. Advent. Dr. Poor (Lange’s Com. 1 Cor., p. 349) expressly 
affirms that aidn (world) ‘‘ properly means an age, a distinct cycle of years,” and adds: 
‘The ‘ present age’ is that period which, dating from the Fall, is to last until the coming 
of Christ. At this point the ‘future age’ will begin to date, and this will be the age of 
redemption completed—the age of the Messiah’s Kingdom and Glory. And the expres- 
sion for ‘ eternity’ is generally in the plural—‘ ages,’ or ‘ ages upon ages,’ to signify the 
ceaseless progression of time, under which conception eternity was ordinarily repre- 
sented.’’ We, however, prefer to date the ‘ present age’ from the establishment of the 
Ch, Church, seeing, as the Scriptures teach, previous ages (as the Antediluvian, Mosaic, 
etc.) definitely existed and expired. Our view also corroborates Boothroyd’s Version 
of Isa. 9:6,‘‘ the Father of the future age.” Comp. the Sep. Version, Cod. Alexd. 
‘‘(Father of the coming age”), Lange’s Com. Heb. 2 : 5, and Coms. generally on Isa. 9 : 6. 
To the student this is an interesting point,confirmatory of the Messiah’s relation to the 
age and ages, 


Prop. 141. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 427 


‘Proposition 141, Zhis Kingdom necessarily united with the 
perpetuity of the earth. 


Necessarily, because this earth is the promised inheritance 
tendered to Abraham ; this earth is the theatre on which David's 
throne and Kingdom existed, and if re-established at the Sec. 
Advent demands its continuance; this earth is covenanted to 
- David’s Son and promised to the saints, and hence God’s oath and 
Jaithfulness are involved in its perpetuity (comp. Props. 137, 188, 
139, 140,.142, 144, 152, etc.). 

The keynote, so far as Scriptural interpretation is concerned, is given by Dr. Schaft 
(Lange’s Com. Matt., p. 422): ‘‘ It should be kept in mind, that when ‘ the end of the 


world’ isspoken of in the N. Test., the term aidn, the present dispensation or order of 
things, is used, and not kosmos, the planetary system, the created universe.” 


Obs. 1. The misleading phrase ‘‘ the end of the world ’’ has been con- 
sidered under the previous Prop. If employed simply to denote the end 
of an order or arrangement connected with the world, it would not be 
objectionable, but used as it is by learned divines without explanation in 
support of a preconceived theory, it leaves the impression that the world 
itself, the earth or globe, shall come to an end. ‘This indeed has been 
maintained by Popish and Protestant writers, has been so sedulously 
preached and printed, until the minds of multitudes, misguided by the 
phrase just alluded to and the refusal (designed ?) of popular commentators 
to explain it in the Gospels, hold to the earth’s utter destruction and an- 
mihilation. Dr. Hodge (Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 853) declares, on the authority 
of Schmid (Dog.), that the Lutheran doctrine is that the world shall be 
reduced to nothing. ‘This indeed may be the individual opinion of some 
Lutheran divines, just as it is that of some Calvinists, but it 1s no Lutheran 
doctrine, from the fact that both Luther and Melanchthon taught the con- 
trary, and that multitudes of Lutherans, not being bound by any confes- 
sion on the subject, teach the renewal and perpetuity of the earth. 

This statement of Dr. Hodge’s was referred to Rev. Drs. Sprecher and Stuckenburg, 
both theological professors in the Lutheran Church, and they emphatically disclaimed 
it as Lutheran doctrine. It was, indeed, held by a large number of Divines (see Bret- 
schneider’s Dog.), but never was made a distinctive Lutheran article of faith. The 
Romish view of the dissolution of the earth, its utter destruction, was enforced by 
various Protestant divines, and their combined influence prejudiced many against the 
truth. Thus e.g. Dr. Blair (Sermons, vol. 2, on 2 Pet. 3 : 10) affirms that “ the dissolu- 

tion of the material system is an article of our faith,” and then to indicate that faith 
gives usa specimen of word or fire-painting : ‘‘ The globe itself shall either return into its 
ancient chaos, ‘ without form and void,’ or like a star fallen from the heavens, shall be 
effaced from the Universe, and its place shall know it no more.” Alas! what knowledge 
of the covenants, of Christ’s and the saints’ inheritance, of the Kingdom and its locality, 
this evidences! It is a return to the favorite and unscriptural notions of “‘ the end of 
the world”’ entertained by monkish ignorance. But such nonsense survives. Thus e.g. 
discarding John and Charles Wesley's renewed earth, etc., Rev. T. M. Terry (Cin. 


428 JHE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 141.7 


Enquirer, March 6th, 1881) engaged in ‘‘ Pictorial Preaching” in New York (Attorney 
Street Meth. Epis. Church) and among other pictures on a screen, gave the following ; 
“The last picture was startling. It was a great sphere in space, and burning up, 
Under the picture were the words: ‘ The End of the World.’ Across the globe were 
streaks of cloud. Yellow puffs of flame seemed to be bursting from the globe at irregn- 
lar intervals, and beneath it burned a great fire as though beneath a gigantic kettle,’’ 
etc. This is imagined to be Biblical teaching ! 


Obs. 2. It is admitted that there is no direct passage within the lids of — 
the Bible which teaches the annihilation of the earth. It is remarked by 
Olshausen (Com. Matt. 24) and others, that we never find the expression — 
in the original which would indicate a proper ending of the world in the — 
sense held by many divines. It 1s simply inferred from an incorrect recep- — 
tion of certain phrases, and from the conflagration of 2 Pet. 3, and finds © 
acceptance because eminently fitted to carry out the spiritualistic and mys- 
tical conceptions of their preconceived Kingdom of God. What foundation j 
the inference has in the phrases ‘‘ last day,’’ etc., has been made apparent, 
and what basis it finds in Peter’s portrayal will appear (Prop. 150) as we 
proceed in the discussion. ‘Thus much may now be said of the latter, that 
neither the early Jewish nor Gentile churches taught the inferences so con- 
fidently advanced by moderns concerning the results of that fire. If it 
were so fatally Anti-Millenarian as alleged, it is singular, to say the least, 
that it had no effect onthe Karly Church belief, and not even on Peter him- 
self, who, as a host of able men (our opponents), tell us, was ‘‘ Jewish Mil- 
lenarian’’ in view, retaining to the last ‘‘ a materialistic husk.”’ 


ee Oe ee 


~ 


eS ee eee ee ee 


It is, therefore, a matter of surprise, considering the prevailing Jewish belief, the — 
universal early Church doctrine, and the lack of positive Scripture affirmation, that 
eminent divines, guided solely by inference, hastily conclude and dogmatically affirni the 
total destruction of the earth, as e.g. Quenstedt (quoted by Auberlen, Div. Rev., p. 214), 
who declares : “ Fulfilment does not consist in simple changes or renewal of qualities, 
but in total destruction and annihilation of the very substance of the world itself.” Multitudes 
of works are enamored with this total destruction and annihilation theory, which, if true, 
would destroy and annihilate the inheritance of David’s Son and of His brethren. Latterly, 
it seems as if many persons derive their eschatology from scientists, instead of drawing 
it from the Bible. The romance of destruction is vividly e. g. presented in Miller’s 
Romance of Astronomy and works of a similar nature, and many pulpits repeat the same 
as a veritable Christian eschatology. Some apology may be made for unbelief, when 
from alleged scientific data it predicts (as e.g. C. H. Hitchcock's The World before the 
Introduction of Life) that the earth will pass into “perhaps, sixth, a stage of frigidity, 
impoverishment, and extinction of life,’ but none can be made for professed belief, 
which ignores the Bible delineations of the future happy, rejoicing earth, and endeavors 
(as e.g. Sermons in the University Church at Cambridge, see Ser. 3) to give the scientific 
‘* Catastrophism’’ a religious turn (ascribing to God, what scientists attribute to nature) 
as follows: ‘* The trumpet shall sound—-the struggle shall come—this goodly frame of 
things shall be rent and crushed by the arm of its Omnipotent Maker. It shall expire in 
the throes and agonies of some fierce convulsion ; and the same hand which plucked the 
elements from the dark and troubled slumbers of chaos shall cast them into their tomb, 
pushing them aside that they may no longer stand between His face and the creatures 
whom He shall come to judge.” Such extravagances, bordering on the blasphemous — 
(and for which ignorance is the only apology), are worthy of association with those 
emanating from “ the dark ages.’’ Science may present its ideas of a ‘‘ Catastrophism” 
resulting from an environment of meteors, or the concussion of a comet, or the dire influ- 
ences of other planets, or the preponderating of some inflammable gas, or the increase of 
heat, or the gradual decrease of heat, or the sudden suspension of natural laws, resulting 
in an utter destruction and annihilation of life, but the believer in covenant and covenant 
promises given by the Almighty can smile at such absurdities. Such, however, give us not — 
merely the fire, but the freezing, theory. Thus e.g. Prof. Clifford (Pop. Science Monthly, — 
July, 1875), in The First and the Last Catastrophe, argues that the duration of the earth — 
depends on the sun, but that the sun is ‘‘ wearing out,” its ‘‘ energy’’ is gradually ‘‘ used 


— eee oe 


. ee ee SS. ee 


 <e as, Se 


a 


_ 


a a. _ 


Prop. 141. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 429 


up,”’ so that finally it will not afford sufficient heat, and the result is, ‘‘ we shall all be 
frozen out.’ He continues (giving us an alternative), that the earth is not ‘‘ an abso- 
lutely stable thing,’’ so that eventually the earth may fall into the sun. He then saga- 
ciously and sagely adds : ‘* If we fall into the sun we shall be fried ; if we go away from 
the sun, or the sun goes out, then we shall be frozen. So that, so far as the earth is 
concerned, we have no means cit determining what will be the character of the end, but 
we know that one of these two things must take place in time.’’ He adds: ‘* We may, 
therefore, I think, conclude about the end of things that, so far as the earth is concerned 
and end of life upon it, is as probable as science can make anything.’’ (One must won- 
der what becomes of the boasted immutable laws of Nature!) And this is the comfort 
that Prof. Clifford derives from his alleged scientific deductions of frying or freezing : 
**But to those who do see the cogency of the evidences of modern physiology and 
modern psychology in this direction, it is a very serious thing to consider that not only 
the earth itself and all that beautiful face of Nature we see, but also the living things 
upon it, and all the consciousness of men, and the ideas of society, which have grown 
“up upon the surface, must come to an end. We who hold that belief must just face the 
fact and make the best of it, and I think we are helped in this by the words of that Jew 
philosopher, who was himself a worthy crown to the splendid achievements of his race in 
the cause of progress during the Middle Ages, Benedict Spinoza. He said, ‘The freeman | 
thinks of nothing so little as of death, and his contemplation is not of death but of life.’ 
Our interest, it seems to me, lies with so much of the past as may serve to guide our 
actions in the present, and to intensify our pious allegiance to the fathers who have gone 
before us and the brethren who are with us ; and our interest lies with so much of the 
future as we may hope will be appreciably affected by our good actions now. Beyond 
that, as it seems to me, we do not know, and we ought not to care.” This is modern scieu- 
tific (?) heathenism! What a world this would be, if all men entertained such views! 
Proctor (Other Worlds and Other Universes, Eclec. Mag. Ap., 1877, Suns inflames, same, May, 
1877) very complacently speaks of the extinction of worlds composing the various sys- 
tems and of the entire Universe—of “ the death of the last surviving member of the sys- 
tem,” which “ must for countless ages remain as an extinct world.” Theologians and 
preachers, with whom the extinction of this earth forms a cardinal feature of their 
eschatology, eagerly seize such wholesale deductions, utterly unproven and unfounded, 
to sustain their own view of the earth’s destruction by fire. They parade before us this 
and that star which has disappeared from view, and claim that analogy proves their 
theory to be correct. But they rashly conclude an analogy to exist where there is none. 
Recent astronomers (comp. e.g. art. on Lost Stars in Eclectic Mag. March, 1877, taken 
from Chambers’ s Journal) do not regard such stars as lost or destroyed, for they show how 
*‘ fitful changes of color and specially red scintillations have been long remarked as 
highly characteristic of an extensive and well-known class of stars termed ‘ variable 
stars,’ or stars variable in their brightness and consequent visibility through periods of 
“time, extending in different cases from a few days to many years, and occasionally, it is 
believed, to several centuries.” The disappearance and reappearance of a number has been 
definitely ascertained, and are given by the writer, extending from a few days to several 
years. Analogy proves our position and not the reverse. That star, especially, which, 
above all others, has been selected as a representative of the world on fire and destroyed, 
seen in 1572-3-4, burning and blazing in the constellation of Cassiopeia, is now supposed 
by astronomers to be the same one seen (as history specifies) in 1264 and in 945, and is 
believed to reappear about 1890. God does not create worlds to make a huge bonfire out 
of them and thus destroy them, and He does not frame the laws of Nature so as to make 
them the sport of chance convulsions, etc. He reigns and orders the Universe, and 
having faith in our God, we put aside as folly all such sensational theories. We believe 
in an intelligent, all-wise, omnipotent Creator, and take comfort and hope to ourselves. 
Our unbelieving scientific friends take refuge in ‘‘ molecules,” in their eternity. Thus 
e.g. Prof. Tyndall, in his Inaug. Address before the Brit. Association, refers to Prof. Clerk 
Maxwell (who is a Theist, in allowing a Creator to start the origin of formations in the 
production of matter) : ‘‘ Natural causes, as we know, are at work, which tend to modify, 
if they do not at length destroy, all the arrangements and dimensions of the earth and 
the whole solar system. But though in the course of ages catastrophes have occurred 
and may yet occur in the heavens, though ancient systems may be dissolved and new 
systems evolved out of their ruins, the molecules out of which these systems are built, 
the foundation-stones of the material universe, remain unbroken and unworn.” Great, 
indeed, are ‘“‘ molecules.”” So also must we reject the unscriptural hypothesis of The 
Unseen Universe (attributed to Profs. Tait and Stewart). This work, specially designed 
to indicate a pure Theism, a future state, etc., corroborative of the Bible doctrines, 


430 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. . [Prop. 141. 


while denying the ultra physical view that the earth will end in mere dead matter ag 
monstrous and unscientific, themselves fall into another error when they make the visible 
or sense perceivable world, including the universe, by some transferable energy, prob- 
ably in matter, also to come to an end, i.e. it will become part of their mystical, trans- 
cendental ‘*‘ Unseen Universe.”’ Now, take the Bible statements of the wonderful trans- 
formation of this world under the mighty hand of the Theocratic King, and it is the 
farthest removed from such an idea, for covenant and covenant promise, completeness of 
redemption, all demand a continued and abiding visibility, etc., of the world. One is 
saddened by reading such works, evidently produced by earnest men. 


Obs. 3. In this discussion the reader will not fail to notice the important 
concessions made by many of our opponents. Literally a multitude of 
them might be adduced, in which the perpetuity of the earth, after some 
changes and a process of renewal, is asserted. Neander in several places 
emphatically declares that at the consummation, restitution, new creation 
of nature, Coming of Christ, (p. 524), ‘‘ this globe is destined to be the 
scene of the triumphant Kingdom of God,’’ and that such is the teaching 
of Paul, etc. Barnes, Com., advocates the renewal and perpetuity of this 
earth, but is somewhat at a loss what to do with it after its renewal ; hesi- 
tating between putting the saints in it, or in the third heaven. Dick, 
(Phil. of a Fut. State), speaking of the opinion held by some that “ the 
material universe be blotted out of existence,’’ etc., adds: ‘‘ 7¢ is astonish- 
ing that it should ever be entertained by any man calling himself a divine 


or Christian preacher,’’ and then advocates a renewal, etc. Calvin cor- — 


rectly says (Insti., ch. 25, 8. 9), *‘ Christ will come, not for the destruction 
of the world, but for purposes of salvation ;’?? and in sec. 11 advocates a 
complete restoration. Dr. Hodge, Sys. Div., after finding fault with Dr. 
Seiss for presenting precisely the view and almost the language of Calvin, 
finally admits the renewal and perpetuity of the earth. This slight notice 
of admissions, made by hundreds of writers’ of a similar tenor, is amply 
sufficient for our purpose, which is this—that such is the nature of prophecy 
relating to the earth, the removal of the curse, its renovation, etc., that 
able and learned men, largely addicted to spiritualizing, find it ¢mpossible, 
without direct antagonism, to indorse either the daring speculation of 
annihilation, or the equally bold conjecture that the new creation refers to 
the third heaven. This, as far as it goes, is so much added to our side of 
the argument. It is remarkable that while there is a general acceptance of 
Origen’s alleged views respecting the end of the world, he himself (De 
Prin., B. 1, ch. 6), expressly asserts that he did not wish to be understood 
as presenting them as “‘ a fixed and certain decision,’’ but rather “‘ in the 
manner of investigation and discussion.’? His aim, however, to present 
them ‘‘ in the style of a disputation rather than of strict definition,’ was 
defeated by their being accepted as weapons against Chiliasm. Origen, in 
the same book (De Prin., B. 6, ch. 6, 8s. 4), rejects the idea of annihila- 
tion or utter destruction, fully indorsing a renewal. Thus the very man, 
to whom we are the most indebted for influencing, by his system of inter- 
pretation, the obscuring of the truth on this and other points, frankly 
admits in one aspect the Jewish and Early Church view of renewal and per- 
petuity.? 


1 Such as Chrysostom, Augustine, Koppe, Chalmers, Wesley, Origen, Jerome, Gregory 
the Great, Baxter, Charnock, Milton, Watts, Pope, Calmet, N. Brown, Fairbairn, Keith, 
Campbell, Knapp, Carlyle, Sir Th. Browne, Spener, Reinhard (Dog.) Nissen, Heber, 
Dorner, and, literally, a host of others, including, of course, all Pre-Mill. writers and 


Prop. 141.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 431 


commentators. So general an opinion, entertained by—as the above illustrates-—men of 
varied and antagonistic (on other points) views, is worthy of notice and consideration. 

? The reader will observe how science comes and corroborates the duration of the earth, 
advocating great changes in the past, subjecting it to changes in the future, but still 
insisting upon the continuance of the same earth. The Bible predicts this very scientific 
standpoint in 2 Pet. 3:4, but clearly intimates in connection, that, discarding the 
Lawgiver and His Plan in relation to the earth, it confines itself simply to the operation 
of the laws instituted, and denies that future changes will be introduced through the 
direct agency of the Creator. In fact, under the influence of a bias to natural law, they 
reject the return of Him who has promised to renew the earth, and being “ scotfers,” 
scoffingly say, ‘‘ Where is the promise of His Coming ?’’ for ‘‘ all things continue as they were 
from the beginning of creation.”” 'That which the Bible assumes as a necessary result in 
order to fulfil covenant and promise, they assume as opposed to fulfilment, viz., the 
perpetuity of the earth. But why this last assumption? Simply because “ they willingly 
are ignorant” of the Divine Purpose relating to the earth—a Purpose which makes per- 
petuity an indispensable requisite. Natural law can be no Saviour, as the past ages have 
demonstrated ; the Lawgiver alone can be our Redeemer, and this He becomes without 
destroying the perpetuity of the earth. Indeed, if He were to annihilate the earth, He 
would forfeit the perfection of Redeemer. Hence, we may sadly but calmly regard that 
arrogation of superior wisdom which claims (Contemp. Review, Aug., 1872, p. 431) that 
those who do not thus scoff with them and make the continuance of the earth an objec- 
tion to Christ’s coming, are ‘‘ enthusiasts, dreamers, knaves, and fools.’’ To indicate 
the perverseness and desire to find fault, it is only necessary to refer to the Essays and 
Reviews, p. 208, which presents such passages as Ps. 93:1; Ps. 104 : 5, etc., as teaching 
that the earth does not turn on its axis but possesses ‘immobility,’ when the simple 
idea conveyed is that of perpetuity and stability. Some scientists (Scribner’s Monthly, 
May, 1873) reject, from the same premises, the Utopian views of many of the evolution- 
ists, and, from the final exhaustion of coal, iron, etc., the encroachments of the sea, etc., 
predict first gradual distinction of race and ultimate destruction. Thus extremes meet. 


Obs. 4. The Word expressly declares the continuance and perpetuity of 
the earth, and no one should venture a counter statement without the same 
is presented in similar positive terms. Thus e.g. Ps. 104 : 5, ‘* God laid the 
foundations of the earth that it should not be removed forever.’? Compare 
Pe 148575, 5,6; Eccl. 1:4; Ps. 89°: 36; Jer. 31 : 35, etc. But to place 
it apparently beyond all contradiction, the perpetuity of God’s promises 
and faithfulness is contrasted with the perpetwity of the earth, as e.g. Jer. 
33 : 25, 26, and, especially when the covenant itself is specified, in Ps. 89 : 
34-37. Other passages will be presented in the following Propositions in 
order to save repetition. 


Hence, it follows that such passages as 1 Cor. 7 : 31 and 1 John 2 : 17, which declare 
that “the fashion of the world passeth away,’’ ‘‘ the world passeth away,’’ must be inter- 
preted in accordance. And this can the more readily be done, because the word trans- 
lated ‘‘ world’’ is “kosmos,’’ which, as lexicographers affirm, has special reference to the 
order or arrangement of the world, and this very order, as Millennial prophecies abun- 
dantly show, shall be changed. Even such commentators as Barnes (1 John 2 : 17) say: 
** The reference here does not seem to be so much to the material world, as to the scenes 
of show and vanity which make up the world. These things are passing away like the 
shifting scenes of the stage. See Notes on 1 Cor. 7: 31.” Nearly all commentators 
admit that we are directed to the palingenesis of the world (Props. 144 and 145), or the 
deliverance of creation (Props. 146, 148, and 151), connected with the future advent of the 
Messiah. For, as Dr. Moll (Lange’s Vom. Heb. p. 41) justly observes : ‘‘Its (i.e. world’s) 
transformation into a new and nobler form of existence is effected by means of the same 
Lord through whom it was created,” etc. Comp. Meyer and Luthardt, as quoted by Dr. 
Hodge in Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 839. Even such a writer as Anselm (Bh. of Havilburg, 
Treat. on Rev.) declares his faith in this perpetuity, when he says: ‘‘ The whole earth, 
which carried in its lap the body of the Lord, will be a Paradise.” 


Obs. 5. Aside from various considerations presented in previous Proposi- 
tions which direct the eye of faith to the perpetuity of the earth, a few 


422 . THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 141. 


additional may be adduced, as follows. (1) The Early Church, having the 
advantage of apostolic teaching on a subject which excited special attention, 
held, as far as known, to the same. (2) Taking the Millennial descriptions 
as a whole, without forcibly separating them, they clearly teach a purifica- 
tion, renewal, and perpetuity. (3) The promise individually to Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob, to inherit the land, and the same promise to the saints, 
imply it. (4) The praying of God’s will to be done on earth as in heaven— 
which we know will never be done in the mixed condition of the Church 
and world down to the Second Advent—infers it. (5) The harvest at the 
end of the age, by a comparison of the Scriptures bearing on it, teaches it. 
(6) Separate prophecies which speak of the perpetuity of the Kingdom, 
etce., after the Advent of Christ, such as Dan. 7, Isa. 65 and 66, etc., can- 
not be consistently explained on any other ground. (7) The same truth is 
contained in the predictions, that He shall have all rule, all enemies under 
Him, etc., after His Sec. Advent, He being at the same time the Restorer. 
(8) The Pre-Mill. Advent, with the results attending it here on earth. evince 
the same. (9) The throne and Kingdom—the inheritance of David’s Son, 
cannot be received, as covenanted, unless the perpetuity of the earth after 
His Coming is upheld. In brief, (10) the restitution, the heirship of the 
world (Rom. 4 : 13), removal of the curse, the predicted reign of the saints 
on the earth, the occurrences after the Miilennial era, as related by John 
and the prophets, etc., all inculcate the same truth. 


Obs. 6. Besides this, it may well be asked whether an earth so highly 
honored by the birth, presence, sufferings, and death of Christ (and which 
is His also by inheritance), can possibly be blotted out of existence. Events, 
the most intensely interesting in the moral government of God, have here 
taken place ; the most astounding display of Divine attributes is linked 
with its history ; the marvellous Redemptive process has magnified this 
globe into a prominent place among all the worlds of the Universe, and, 
unless specifically declared, ¢¢ 7s opposed to all our higher and nobler views 
of God’s grandeur, Christ’s honor, and the Spirit’s agencies, to suppose 
that such an earth, which witnessed the humiliation, tears, sufferings, 
agony, and blood of Jesus ; which was hallowed by His infant, childhood, 
and manly feet and voice, and. consecrated by His miracles and works of 
mercy and love, shouid ever be utterly destroyed. Neither piety nor reason, 
neither the glory of God nor the welfare of man, desire an earth containing a 
Bethlehem, a Jerusalem, a Gethsemane, or a Calvary to be erased from the 
Universe. The thought is revolting. Aside from God’s glory in Redemp- 
tion, it does not accord with our feelings or wishes that this earth, in which 
we were renewed, the witness of our pilgrimage, the scene of most intimate 
and endearing relations, the place of ennobling associations, should be 
blotted out of existence. From such a belief, a reduction to nothing, etc., 
enlightened piety and reason, and even feeling, shrink as inconsistent with 
the Divine attributes and the utterances of Scripture. And it is a matter. 
of amazement, that through a mystical conception of God’s Kingdom, 
divines ever entertained a view so derogatory to truth and God’s dealings, 
as welkas to the noblest instincts of man ; just as if the latter could desire 
that his own childhood’s home—the spot on earth sweetest to memory— 
should forever perish and attribute the same feeling to Jesus. 


It is in view of such sentiments in connection with scriptural proof that Fairbairn 
(although opposed to Millenarianism), advocating “a redeemed and glorified earth,” adds 


Prop. 141. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 433 


(Typology of Scripture, p. 461): “Were I left to choose out of all creation’s bounds the place 
where my redeemed nature is to find its local habitation, enjoy its Redeemer’s presence, 
and reap the fruits of His costly purchase, I would prefer none to this.’’ McNeile, Noel, 
Cummings, Seiss, and others, have expressed themselves forcibly on this point. This, 
then, teaches us (1) how untenable is the theory advocated by some (as stated by Clark in 
Man all Immortal, p. 444), that an entire new world is to be created out of nothing after 
this one is destroyed (for this makes Redemption incomplete, gives Satan the victory, etc.), 
and (2) how extravagant and unscriptural is Pres. Edwards (His. Red., p. 421) in turn- 
ing this earth into a hell, ‘‘ a great furnace, wherein all the enemies of Christ and His 
Church shall be tormented forever and ever,” etc. (just as imaginary as Keerl’s—so Bib. 
Sac. Oct., 1863, p. 769 —comets composing whirling, flying hells, ete., and which Sworm- 
stedt in his End of the World Near, pp. 131177, and 179, has reproduced, “‘ the earth and 
the moon fleeing away es comets,” ‘‘ turned into wandering comets,’’ and sent away as a 
hell). How refreshing to turn from such imaginings to the utterances of the early 
Fathers. Thuse.g. Irenzus (Ag. Hers., 5, 32), referring to this earthly inheritance and 
the saints reigning in it after their resurrection, adds: ‘‘ For it is just that in that very 
creation in which they toiled or were afflicted, being proved in every way by suffering, 
they should receive the reward of suffering ; and that in the creation in which they were 
slain because of their love to God, in that they should be revived again ; and that in the 
ereation in which they endured servitude, in that they should reign. For God is rich in 
all things, and all things are His. It is fitting, therefore, that the creation itself, being 
restored to its primeval condition, should, without restraint, be under the dominion of 
the righteous.” 


Obs. 7. The renewal and perpetuity of the earth is requisite ¢o secure the 
Redeemer’s glory, in the perfecting of His Redemptive work, etc. Tf the 
earth should only contain the Church in its mixed condition, the entail- 
ment of the curse, the products of selfishness manifested in wars, etc., down 
to the Sec. Advent, and it should then be utterly destroyed and ever remain 
thus, then it follows that the Scriptures respecting the Christ would ever- 
more remain unfulfilled. For down to that Sec. Advent, owing to the 
postponement of the Kingdom, He does not reign in the covenanted King- 
dom ; down to that Second Advent, owing to that postponement and a 
consequent preliminary gathering out of saints, He does not fulfil the prom- 
ises respecting His own reign, or those pertaining to the saints inheriting 
the Kingdom. HisSec. Advent being for purposes of salvation, constitutes, 
in the work then performed, Him a perfect Redeemer. It is fully admitted 
that down to that Advent salvation 1s imperfect—the forfeited blessings are 
not restored. Hence it follows, that if the earth is destroyed, as many 
hold, soon after that Advent, there is o place for the fulfilment of covenant 
or covenant promises. More than this: it gives, so far as this earth is 
concerned, the victory to Satan ; for, if the curse is not repealed ; if evil is 
not extirpated ; if the forfeited blessings are not restored ; if man’s long- 
lost home is not given back to him in its Kdenic loveliness ; if the race is 
not brought back to its original condition and dwelling in a purified earth, 
then Satan triumphs in the ruin accomplished, just as he would triumph 
if the grave should evermore hold our bodies in confinement ; just as he 
would gain the victory if our hearts would never more exultantly swell with 
love supreme to God. But in the redemption of the earth itself, in the 
recreation and perpetuation of it, in the fulfilment of the promises pertain- 
ing to it, as embracing the Kingdom extending over it, etc., Christ’s power 
and glory as Redeemer, as King, as the All-sufficient, is duly manifested. 


There is no end to the vagaries of man. In a recent work, Arena and the Throne, the 
author, Townsend, advocates the dissolution of the Universe (the old monkish doctrine) 
from anew standpoint, viz., in view of the greatness of man, when God perfects the 
ideal of that greatness as given by the writer. In this ‘‘ ideal” the Universe, including 


434 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 141. 


all other worlds, is made solely for man, and as he advances in knowledge and progress 
so vast ‘‘ the physical Universe will have no further end to subserve ; it shall be dis- 
solved,” etc. In other words, all things become stale, grow effete, and new things must 
be introduced to please this greatness, just as parents substitute new playthings when 
their children are tired of the old ones. This imaginary and sensational view ignores 
covenant end prophecy, in brief, the plainest statements of Holy Writ, and that which 
pertains to God’s honor and glory and the happiness of His redeemed. 


Obs. 8. The proposition is apparent even from the manner in which the 
Bible begins and ends. It commences with an earthly Paradise lost, an 
earth cursed ; it ends with an earthly Paradise regained through Christ, 
just as Milton, Cowper, Heber, C. Wesley (and other poets), but above all 
the sacred writers, so sweetly describe. The last scene, showing the ability 
of Jesus to save, is one here on a redeemed earth, for that which is of the 
third heaven is expressly declared to come down, from God, out of heaven 
upon it and remains (at least there is no record of its removal afterward). 
It must be so, or else the Plan of Redemption is imperfect, and the King- 
dom of God cannot be manifested as covenanted and predicted. We are 
sinners, the Plan makes us holy ; we lose our bodies by death, the Plan 
recovers them again ; we lost Hden, the Plan restores it again ; we lost the 
personal Presence of God, this Plan recovers that soul-satisfying Presence 
when God again dwells with man ; we lost the contemplated visible Theo- 
cratic rule of God, this Plan makes, in the sacred Person of Jesus Christ, 
the most ample amends in filling the earth with His sovereignty, etc. Thus, 
in brief, every blessing with the removal of every evil, is linked with the 
culmination of this Divine Plan, and is inseparably fixed with the continua- 
tion of the earth itself. It is a Divine Purpose, culminating in the King- 
dom, which shines forth at the end of the Bible in actual realization upon 
the earth—pertaining as it does to this world—and triumphant in over- 
coming the evil, and in bestowing the blessings contemplated by it. And 
if men would read the Word unbiassed, this relationship to the earth would 
appear as strongly to them as it did to the Karly Church, which clung to 
it as something pertaining to Christ’s honor and to man’s happiness. UHow- 
ever much the caution given by Luther is violated, yet there is profound 
wisdom in his saying: ‘‘ It is important for us to recur to Adam’s original 
condition, as we expect all things to be brought back again to that.’? Man’s 
fall is on the earth, and hisrecovery 1s ov the earth, and, therefore, the earth 
itself is called upon to rejoice and exult in witnessing his glorious restora- 
tion. 

Fred. Den. Maurice in his Theological writings contends, in forcible language, that 
Redemption is not subject to limitations of space and time. Some able philosophical 
arguments are adduced in support of the theory, but it is antagonistic to the covenant, 
which embraces definite limitations of both space and time, without, however, discarding 
an ultimate entrance into the eternal ages and a constant extension of both, which last 
is a result of Redemption completed. The Bible deals with the provisions of Redemp- 


tion and with Redemption perfected, and presents us but little beyond that, excepting 
in'the most general manner. 


Obs. 9. The perpetuity of the earth isso much taken for granted, is so 
undoubted, that numerous promises are based upon it. Thus e.g. 
** Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.’’* Wow this passage 
is to be understood is apparent from the prophets, who predict the time 
coming, still future, when this shall be realized, under the reign of David’s 
Son, when the Jewish nation is restored. Ps. 37 alone, from which Jesus 


Prop. 141. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 435 


quoted, contains this promise several times, and describes its occurrence to 
be when (as takes place at the Second Advent) the wicked shall be 
destroyed and utterly rooted out of the earth. The identical earth, occupied 
and so largely controlled by the wicked, is to be possessed by the righteous. 
The auditors of Jesus could not mistake the tenor of the promise, seeing 
that they all believed that the land was promised to Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob individually and to their seed to inherit ; and certainly we ought 
not to spiritualize it away when an inspired apostle, taking into a compre- 
hensive view the covenanted relationship of Abraham, calls Abraham (Rom. 
4 :13),? ‘* the hevr of the world.’’ ‘The inheriting (as even the Jews believed) 
follows the resurrection of the just, and Christ’s promise is only the con- 
firmation of a general belief on the subject founded upon covenant and 
prophets. It assumes, as a necessary contingency or result, the perpetuity of 
the earth, recalling at once the fact that Palestine itself is pronounced to 
Abraham and his Seed to be ‘‘ an eternal inheritance.’”’* The Millennial 
predictions, embracing the promises of the removal of sorrow, suffering, 
disease, and even death, portray events here on the earth which are posi- 
tively located after the Second Advent, so that for their realization the 
continued existence of the earth is constantly implied, and asserted. Mes- 
siah’s Kingdom and the blessings relating to it are all experienced here, 
where the T'heocracy was once established—where David’s throne and 
Kingdom once existed ; the Bible closing with leaving Jesus, the saints, 
and the New Jerusalem here on the earth ; the Word locating the ‘‘ we 
shall reign with Him on the earth’’ after the Advent ; Holy Writ speaking 
of ‘* the day of Christ,’ ‘‘ the world to come,’’ etc., in which a Kingdom 
under the whole heaven shall be witnessed, after the Sec. Coming here in 
the world ; Revelation making the will of God to be done on the earth in 
the coming Kingdom as it is done is heaven only after ‘‘ the appearing’’ 
or “‘revelation of Jesus Christ ;’’* in brief, the Word of God giving so 
many intimations and declarations as have already preceded (and as will 
immediately follow), in various propositions, it is wmpossible, intelligently, 
to entertain any other belief than the one advanced. ‘The Divine Purpose 
is expressed in Isa. 60 : 21, “‘ Thy people also shall be all righteous ; they 
shall inherit the land forever ; the branch of my planting, the work of my 
hands, that I may be glorified.”’ 


1 Tn reference to the perversion of this passage to a present fulfilment (against the per- 
secution, poverty, etc., of believers), it is only necessary to refer to the early church view, 
and to notice how under the severest trials Christians consoled themselves (acknowledging 
themselves to be “ pilgrims and strangers”) with the hope that at the end of the age the 
dominion of the wicked over the earth would cease, and the righteous would inherit the 


same. So much was this the case, that even Gibbon notices that this hope excited the 


hostility of some of the Pagan emperors. Many of the ancient and more recent com- 
mentaries, and a multitude of writers, express the intent of the promise, when they 
declare that this earth, purified and renewed, shall become the home of the Redeemed. 
Many of the comments of Luther, Calvin, Knox, Chrysostom, Augustine, etc., the writ- 
ings of Mede, Newton, Bickersteth, McNeile, Noel, Knapp, Tholuck, etc., the works of Dr. 
Chalmers (Ser. on New Heavens, etc.), John Wesley (Ser. on Behold, I make all things new), 
Dr. Hitchcock (Fut. Destiny of the Earth), etc., all contain valuable declarations favoring 
a literal fulfilment of the promise. Luther especially expresses a childlike faith that is 
marked by its contrast to the prevailing beliefs as e.g. ‘‘ God will make not the earth only 
but the heavens also much more beautiful than they are at present. At present we see 
the world in its working clothes ; but hereafter, it will be arrayed in its Easter and 
Whitsuntide’’ (for he expected for some reasons the Advent of Jesus on Easter) ‘‘ robes.’’ 
See Meurer’s Life of Luther, p. 573-4, etc. Compare the following Prop., as well as others 
linked with the same, e.g. Props, 154. 


436 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 141. 


3 Dr. Schaff (Lange’s Com. Rom., p. 150), on this passage, pertinently remarks : *‘ The 
promise will be literally fulfilled when the Kingdoms of the world are given to the peo- 
ple of the Most High, and Christ will rule with His saints forever and ever, Dan. 7 : 27; 
Apoc. 11:15, and 12:10; Matt.5:5; 2 Tim. 2:12.’ We refer the reader to Prop. 49 
for the original promise to Abraham, and it will be seen, that while Canaan is specially 
designated, yet in the promised possession of the gate of his enemies, in the blessing to 
the nations of the earth, in the anticipated Theocratic prominency and occupation of 
the seed, this final glorious dominion—as amplified by the prophets—is already em- 
braced. 

3 Also ‘fan everlasting possession’’ (Gen. 48) in which they shall ‘‘ dwell forever’ 
(Ezek. 37 : 25). In more senses than one is Chrysostom’s strictures on Origen correct : 
*‘ Who can bear Origen giving to us a Paradise in the third heaven and transferring to 
heavenly places that Paradise which the Scripture describes as belonging to the earth,’’ ete. 
(Quoted by Cumming, Lec. on Romanism, p. 226.) Many who are not prepared to 
indorse Origen’s view of the first Paradise, make no scruple to interpret the regained 
Paradise in the same way. 

4 We cannot too strongly insist upon it that this portion of the Lord’s prayer has refer- 
ence to man’s complete restoration to the condition occupied before the fall—to an obe- 
dience, holiness, etc., identified with the prayed-for Kingdom ; to the removal of all 
rebellion, all evil, and bringing the world into subjection to God. Comp. Prop. 105. 


Obs. 10. The perpetuity of the earth is so frankly admitted and even 
advocated in works especially intended against Millenarianism, that it seems 
to require no additional proof. Thus e.g. Brown (Christ’s Sec. Coming) 
receives the doctrine of the earth being renovated at the Advent of Jesus 
and forming the continued home of the saints, ‘‘ a congenial abode for the 
glorified Church.’ He defends this view against the charge of ‘‘ carnalism’”’ 
or a lowering of the celestial state, ascribing the objection to ‘‘ some tinct- 
ure of morbid spiritualism, which shrinks from the very touch of material- 
ism, as if separation from it in every form would be the consummation of 
happiness ;’’ and he pertinently asks, ‘‘ May not the Gnostic element of the 
essential sinfulness and vanity of matter, be found lurking beneath it?” 
Barnes on Isa. 45 : 18 says: ‘“‘ The Jews from this passage infer, that the 


earth shall be inhabited after the resurrection—an idea which has every — 


probability, since there will not be fewer reasons why the earth should be 
inhabited then than there are now ; nor can there be any reasons why the 
earth should then exist in vain any more than now.’’ Various writers have 
held that, whatever changes or transformations may ensue hereafter at the 
consummation, the earth’s continuance will not be interfered with even 
by a destruction as great as that occasioned by the flood, alleging as proof 
Gen. 8 : 21, 22. Others have inferred the same from the phrases ‘‘ an ever- 
lasting Kingdom,” which shall not pass away or be destroyed Dan. 7), 
from the reigning ‘‘ forever and ever’ attributed to Christ (Rev. 11 : 15) 
in relation to the earth, etc. To this period evidently belongs 1 Chron. 
16 : 30, *‘ the world also shall be stable, that it be not moved,’’ i.e. enjoying 
the stability induced by God’s reigning in the Theocratic order. For this 
Kingdom, prepared from the foundation of the world (Matt. 25 : 34), neces- 
sitates (as we have previously shown) the laying of ‘‘ the foundations of 
the earth that they should not be removed forever”’ (Ps. 104 :5). One of 
the works specifically attributed to Christ is (Isa. 49 : 8), ‘‘ to establish 
(raise wp) the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages,’’ so that the 
significant address is made through Him (Isa. 51:16): ‘‘Z have put my 
words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in the shadow of My hand, 
that 1 may plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the earth, and say 
unto Zion, Thou art My people.’’ Thus taking the Plan of Redemption, 


am. sa 


Prop. 141.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 437 


which includes ‘‘ the redemption of the purchased possession,’’ the restora- 
tion of order to the world through Messiah’s Kingdom ; taking the faith 
of the Jews, the Karly Church and many eminent believers; taking the 
concessions, etc., of opponents, this doctrine—a requisite link in our 
argument—is wnmistakably confirmed. It crops out, undesignedly, in 
various portions of the Word, as e.g. in Ps. 148 : 6, where the heavens, 
heights, angels, sun, moon, stars—all things created are mentioned as 
praising God, and their perpetuity is announced in ‘‘ Let them praise the 
name of the Lord, for He commanded and they were created ; He hath also 
stablished them forever and ever.’’ The earth has been created to show 
forth the praise of God, and sin shall not mar this laudation of the Most 
High (as it now does through the imperfection and evils entailed), and 
hence the time is coming when the declaration (Rev. 4 : 11) will be veri- 
fied : ‘‘ Thow hast created all things, and for Thy pleasure they are and 
were created.’’ God’s pleasure concerning the things created by Him is 
to be glorified by and through them ; this, in the nature of the case, can 
only be effectually attained by their continuance, etc. Therefore it is, 
that in the description of the reign of David’s Son, as given in Ps. 72, the 
perpetuity of the Kingdom, of the Kingship of Christ is contrasted with the 
perpetuity of the Sun and the Moon—both are represented as enduring 
forever—the former dispensing blessings and the latter (creation) acknowl- 
edging them with grateful praise, under a supremacy over the world 
(inhabitable, Heb. 2 : 5), only realized after the Second Advent. ‘The state- 
ment of Ps. 115 : 16 is true, and the promise made to Noah (Gen. 8: 21, 
22) is ever faithfully preserved. 


We cannot refrain, in view of the abundant proof on this point, to again express amaze- 
ment that such an able man as Pres. Edwards (His. Redemp. ch. 9, sec. 7) makes the per- 
petuity of the earth only available as an eternal hell for Satan and the wicked. After telling 
us that this world is to ‘‘ be set on fire and turned into a great furnace wherein all the ene- 
mies of Christ and His Church shall be tormented forever and ever ;’ after making this 
so “‘ fierce’ ‘‘ that it shall burn the earth into its very centre,’ he pronounces it an ‘‘ ever- 
lasting fire,’’ in which “ all the wicked shall burn, and be tormented to all eternity, and 
never be consumed,” and adds: ‘‘ This world, which formerly used to be the place of 
his (Satan’s) kingdom, where he set up himself as God, shall now be the place of his 
complete punishment, of full and everlasting torment.” Alas! in a work on Redemption 
—Redemption itself is made imperfect, and the curse, instead of being repealed, is pressed 
with increased and eternal intensity upon creation, converting it into a monkish fancied 
hell. Alas! when men so talented, and able, and pious, grossly misconceive the cove- 
nants and their relation to the earth, and thus indoctrinate multitudes in unscriptural and 
misguiding tenets! The high esteem that must be given to Edwards, and the fact that 
his work is extensively circulated by the Amer. Tract Soc., causes us to select him in 
preference to others. Whatever may be Bible teaching respecting hell, one thing is cer- 
tain, viz., that Paradise regained forbids this earth from being converted into such a 
place. /Over against Dr. Brown, however, other opponents urge, in their zeal to make © 
2 Pet. 8 : 7-10 impregnable against us, an utter destruction of the earth, and reject the 
doctrine of mere change and a renewal ; as e.g. Waldegrave (New Test. Mill. Lec. 6). So 
bitter are such against materiality (as if it was necessarily sinful), that as e.g. a writer 
in The Princeton Review, Jan., 1853, p. 81, positively asserts : ‘‘ We believe that this 
physical, material world will be no more.” Even some Millenarians—as e.g. ‘‘ Gray- 
beard ”’ (Graff) in his Lay Sermons, No. 95—seem to imbibe the Gnostic idea of matter, 
in that they have it ultimately when it has sufficiently presented ‘‘ the drama of Redemp- 
tion,” swallowed up wholly in the spiritual. Thus ‘‘ Graybeard’’ says: ‘‘ At the close 
of the Millennial Messianic Age, after the setting up of the great white throne and the 
destruction of all evil, this ‘ insubstantial pageant,’ which we call visible nature, will 
have vanished forever, and God will be all in all.’’ We may well ask, what, then, becomes 
of God’s promises respecting the perpetuity of the earth, the inheritance of the Christ and 
His brethren? Brethren who retain this Gnostic element evidently transcend the 


438 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 141. 


divine Record, and blot out that which is ever intimately connected with the glory of Jesus 
and the saints. By this assumed higher spirituality, we only remove the blessed evidences 
of Redemptive love. No! the places consecrated by God’s love, honored by the presence 
and rule of David’s Son and Lord, endeared by the blessed experience of saints, will 
never, never disappear from the Universe. It ever, ever will be true, that “‘ the earth is 
the Lord's and the fulness thereof ;” so that we firmly hold with Dean Alford (Com. loci), 
that ‘‘ the general tenor of prophecy and the analogy of the divine dealings point un- 
mistakably to this earth, purified and renewed, as the eternal habitation of the blessed.”’ 
So conclusive does this appear to a student, that Dr. Hodge (Sys. Theol.) well says : 
“* Many of the old theologians thought that the whole existing physical universe was to 
be destroyed. This view is now universally discarded.” (Comp. e.g. Campbell (Chr. Sys., 
p. 304), Clarke (Com.), Hugh Miller (Test. of the Rocks, Lec. 5), and others, who reiterate 
such statements, advocating a regeneration, restoration, refinement, and perpetuity of 
the earth.) (See remarks of Lange, Com. Rev. p. 403, etc.) 


i ii a ae. 


_— 


Prop. 142. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 439 


Proposition 142. Zhe Kingdom being related to the earth (ex- 
tending over it), and involving the res. of the saints (in order 
to inherit it), vs sustained by the promise to the saints of their 
inheriting the earth. 


It has been shown that the land is covenanted to the Patriarchs 
personally (Prop. 49), and that a res. is indispensable to its fulfil- 
ment; that (Rom. 8: 18) ‘‘ the promise’ to Abraham involved, 
‘‘that he should be the heir of the world,”’ and that all believers 
inherit—being identified with him as his seed—the same promise 
with him. This, of course, includes their res. also, for it promises 
them to inherit the land or earth. Having shown the res., let us 
notice those special promises as a confirmation of our doctrinal 
position. 


Obs. 1. The re-establishment of the Davidic throne and Kingdom here on 
earth, as Covenant, Prophets, pious Jews, Rabbis, disciples, Apostolic 
Fathers, etc., teach, and as presented in previous Propositions, demands, 
if God reveals at all the destination of saints, a specific mention of their 
receiving the earth as an inheritance. This has indeed already been 
established (see e.g. Props. 49 on covenants and Props. 116 and 122), but 
God has accumulated proof, as if purposely to rebuke and render inexcus- 
able the prevailing unbelief in this particular. 

It would be uncandid to consider this Proposition isolated from its connection with 
others. The student will observe that this inheriting is founded in the covenant (Prop. 
49), in the Theocratic ordering (Props. 33, 50, 51, etc.), in the nature of the Kingdom 
given to “the Son of man’’ (Props. 81-89), in its establishment here on earth (Prop, 
116), and in the inheritance belonging to David’s Son (Prop. 122). These and other par- 
ticulars have been discussed. But in connection with these, in order to obtain a compre- 
hensive view, must be noticed Prop. 168 on the place of manifested royalty, Prop. 117 
on the visible Theocracy, Prop. 118 on the barren woman, Prop. 121 on the Pre-Mill. 
Advent, Props. 131 and 132 on the reign and judgeship of Jesus, Prop. 133 on the judg- 
ment day, Prop. 137 on “the world to come,” Prop. 188 and 139 on ‘‘ the day of the 
Lord Jesus,” Prop. 148 on ‘‘the Rest,’’ Prop. 140 on ‘‘ the end of the age,’’ Prop. 141 
on the perpetuity of the earth, Prop. 158 on the transfiguration, Prop. 170 on ‘‘ the 
Father’s house,’’ Prop. 169 on the New Jerusalem, and Prop. 154 on the reign of the 
saints. These and others contain an abundance of confirmatory matter. Indeed, the 
present Proposition seems only introductory to what follows. 


Obs. 2. The declaration of Jesus, Matt. 5 :5, that the meek shall inherit 
the earth, ought to be decisive. But men under the influence of a plastic 
system of interpretation, urged on by a preconceived notion, leave the 
plain meaning of the promise and explain it away. One gravely tells us 
that it is ‘‘ a proverbial expression,’’ not seeing that, as employed by the 
Jews, it favors our view. Another informs us “‘ that the Jews considered 
Canaan a type of heaven,’’ without an attempt of proof, and against their 


440 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 142. 


expressed hopes on the subject. Onc tells us that it means that the meek 
man isin this world the most prospered, against innumerable examples to 
the contrary. Another passes it by with some generality or vague expres- 
sion, that it is ‘‘a symbol,’’ or ‘‘ an outward possession.’? Some tell us 
that it is ‘‘a spiritual inheritance’’ over the earth by individuals and the 
Church ; others again, not satisfied entirely with such meanings attached, 
inform us (as Gerlach, Lange’s Com.) that the promises will only be fully 
accomplished at the Sec. Advent, or (as Neander, Life of Christ, s. 149), 
that it is not merely to be confined to “‘ the blessedness of the Kingdom 
of God, ”’ but denotes a ‘‘ world-dominion which Christians, as organs of 
the spirit of Christ, are ever more and more to obtain as the Kingdom of 
God shall win increasing sway over mankind and the relation of society, 
until, in its final consummation, the whole earth shall own its dominion.”’ 
Every writer too acknowledges that it includes this inheriting in the Mes- 
sianic Kingdom. Rejecting the manner of introduction suggested by 
Neander and others, they certainly are correct in the main idea of its 
including the notion of ‘‘a world-dominion,’’ thus identifying it, as it 
should be, with the possession of the earth given to the saints in Dan. 7, 
etc. The position of some German and other commentators, as well as 
that of the Early Church, is alone tenable, viz., that this promise yet 
remains unfulfilled, and pertains to the future. Now aside from the 
various and numerous arguments already given to show this, we are con- 
tent to let only one passage indicate the time of its fulfilment. Let the 
reader turn to Psalm 37, where this same promise is repeated five times,* 
and he will find it in vs. 9, 11, 22, 29, 34, directly joined to and following 
a complete removal of evil-doers, not preceding it or contemporaneous with 
the continued presence of the wicked. It is significantly pointed out as 
future by the exhortation to *‘ wait,’’ ‘wart patiently’’ for the Lord, and 
the blessedness that Christ alludes to is also attributed to it. Jesus wa- 
doubtedly quoted it, and if so, a reference to the connection in which the 
promise stands is all that we need to establish ¢he time of its fulfilment—a 
time too, which the most uncompromising of our opponents fully and 
frequently admit—is only to be witnessed at the Sec. Advent, for volumes 
could be filled with the concessions made that ‘‘ evil-doers’’ shall exist 
down to the Advent itself. 


It is observable that even Sir John Maundeyille (Travels), in his Prologue, asserts 
that Palestine “is the same land that our Lord promised us in heritage ;’’ and, not 
observing that this promise is in other passages linked with the Sec. Advent, founds 
upon this fact an argument why Christians should claim the heritage and drive out the 
unbelievers. The reader need scarcely be reminded how this plea was used during the 
Crusades, and in support of Papal claims. The critical student will not forget to con- 
sider how such promises were understood by the early Church for several centuries, so 
that even in the Nicene forms of Eccl. Doctrine (recorded by Gelasius Cyzicenus in His. 
Act. Con. Nic.), Matt. 5:3; Dan. 7:18; Isa. 26 : 6, are united with the resurrection and 
Sec, Advent. Thus: ‘‘ We expect new heavens and a new earth, according to the Holy 
Scriptures, at the appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. And as 
Daniel says: ‘ The saints of the Most High shall take the Kingdom.’ And there shall 
be a pure and holy land, the land of the living and not of the dead ; which David, fore- 
seeing with the eye of faith, exclaims : ‘I believe to see the goodness of the Lord in the 
land of the living ’—the land of the meek and humble.  ‘ Blessed,’ saith Christ, ‘ are the meek, 
for they shall inherit the earth.” And the prophet saith : ‘ The feet of the meek and humble 


* Oftener, if we take the Vulgate, Aithiopic, and Arabic versions (Dr. Clarke Com. loci) 
in their rendering of v. 3, etc. 


Prop. 142.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. A4] 


shall tread upon it.’”’ (See this quoted by Mede, Homes, Brooks, Bickersteth, etc., comp.) 
The writings of the Apostolic and Primitive Fathers, as well as the Apocryphal 
and Jewish, inculcate this inheriting of the land, and, as we give, in various places, 
numerous extracts, they need not be repeated or enlarged. 


Obs. 2. 'To avoid repetition, we leave direct arguments bearing on this 
point under following Propositions, and only give some allusions to this 
future possession of the earth by the righteous. Thuse.g. Prov. 11 : 31, 
‘* Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth ;’’ Prov. 12:7, 
** The wicked are overthrown and are not, but the house of the righteous 
shall stand ;’’ Prov. 10 : 80, “* The righteous shall never be removed, but the 
wicked shall not inhabit the earth,’’ evidently refer to the time Ps. 76 : 9, 
when God shall cast the wicked, ‘‘ the stout-hearted,’’ into a * sleep,’’ when 
He shall be ‘* terrible to the kings of the earth’’ (comp. Rev. 19, etc.), and 
shall ‘* cut off the spirit of princes,’’ and ‘‘ when God arose to 7udgment to 
save all the meek of the earth.’’? Under this period too fall the many prom- 
ises to the righteous, that they “* shall be blessed on the earth,” confirming 
the importance of our seeking true wisdom, ‘‘ For (Prov. 2:21, 22) the 
upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it, but the 
wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the trangressors shall be rooted 
out of tt.’?* Hence in this Millennial period, when, as our argument in- 
dicates, this is to be realized, the promise is reiterated. Thus e.g. in the 
sublime description of Isa. 60, itis added : *‘ they (the righteous) shall inherit 
the land forever ;’? and in Isa, 54, “‘ this is the heritage of the servants of 
the Lord,’’ so that, Isa, 57 : 13, it will be verified that ‘‘ he that putteth his 
trust in Me shall possess the land, and shall inherit My holy mountain.’’ If 
we take the translation given by some (Clarke’s Com. loci) to the clause 
** for His mercy endureth forever,’’ in Ps. 136, viz., ** For His tender mercy 
is to the coming age,’’ or if we only keep in view the idea of perpetuity or 
futurity in the phrase, and apply the same to vs. 21, 22, then the land is 
for “‘ a heritage unto Israel’’ in the time yet to come. In Ps. 115 this 
doctrine is evolved, for, declaring the people of Israel are the ‘‘ blessed of 
the Lord,’’ the Psalmist adds, ‘‘ the heaven, even the heavens, are the 
Lord’s : but the earth hath He given to the children of men. The dead praise 
not the Lord, neither any that go down into silence. But we’’ (notice the 
implication sustained by the proof already adduced : we who are raised up 
from the dead, we who remain not thus in silence, we who shall receive 
the earth thus bestowed) ‘‘ will bless the Lord from this time forth and for 
evermore.’? The land of Canaan is called ‘* rest,’? and it is God’s ‘* rest’’ 
(Ps. 95 : 7), as shown under Props. 122 and 148. It is not typical of some- 
thing else, for that would overthrow the covenant and its promises. It is 
His *‘ rest,’’? because in it the headship of the Theocratic government shall 
be specially manifested. A comparison of Scripture shows that, after a 
res. from the dead, an entrance into this ‘‘ rest’’ is to be obtained. Thus 
e.g. Ps. 116 has ‘‘ return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath 
dealt bountifully with thee. For Thou hast delivered my soul from death, 
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. I will walk before the 
Lord in the land of the living.’? The identical ‘‘ rest’? promised is the 
one obtained after ares. ‘The Jews thus understood the “ rest’’ to denote 
the land, and the making of this rest glorious, etc., to mean that under the 
Messiah it would be renewed and beautified. Paul in writing to Jews does 
not contradict, but positively confirms this idea of the future inheritance, 


442 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 142, 


for instead of calling this rest the third heaven (as many unwarrantedly 
add), he (Heb 3 and 4) quotes Ps. 95, and designates the same “ rest’’ the 
Psalmist does into which certain ones could not enter, but fell in the 
wilderness. He argues that through unbelief we too shall be cut off, but 
through faith in Christ, and by the power of Jesus, we too shall enter in 
‘* His rest’? according to the promise. In the same epistle he declares 
that the promise is realized when this Jesus comes the second time unto sal- 
vation. If the Jews were mistaken in their conception of ‘* the rest,” 
surely an inspired teacher like Paul ought to have corrected their views 
when adyerting to the subject. But he could not, dared not contradict the 
plain truth, which they also held, and, therefore, as the wnity of the Spirit 
and Divine Plan required, employs the-reasoning Jest calculated to establish 
them in the only true idea of the inheritance promised to the Patriarchs 
and to all God’s people. (Comp. Prop. 143, on Sabbatism, etc.) This is 
strongly corroborated by other phraseology also employed by the Jews, 
indicated further on.’ 


1 Clement (A.D. 97, First Epis.) quotes Prov. 2:21, as follows: ‘‘ The kind-hearted 
shall inhabit the land, and the guiltless shall be left upon it, but transgressors shall be 
destroyed from off the face of it.’’ Then shall be fulfilled such sayings as Proy. 11 : 31, 
“ Behold the righteous shall be recompensed in the earth ; much more the wicked and 
the sinner,’’ as illustrated e.g. Mal. 4. Comp. 2 Esdras 7 : 67 and 9 : 13. 

2 Even such promises as are contained in Eph. 6 : 2, 3 would not be verified in a mul- 
titude of cases (for many who have honored father and mother have not lived long in the 
land), unless in and under them was implied —as God’s Purpose teaches—a future inherit- 
ing of the earth. If the student will turn to Prop. 82, he will find additional reasons for 
this inheriting of the earth, and of such a conclusive nature—involved in the Divine 
Plan of Redemption—that many of our opponents (as e.g. Fairbairn and others, quoted 
under it) fully admit of such a future inheriting. - 


Obs. 8. Attention is again called to the confirmatien our doctrine receives 
from the alleged omission of any but earthly blessings promised to believers 
in the Mosaic record, and long after. Bh. Warburton and others contend 
that we find nothing but what relates to this earth ; some, as Edwards and 
others, that heavenly blessings are inferred ; others, as Dr. Graves, that it 
can be found in a state of very gradual development ; others again, as 
Horne, think that heavenly rewards, etc., are presupposed as an adopted 
article of religion. These, and opinions similar, reveal a darkness on the 
subject which the Jews and Early Church never possessed. ‘The cause of 
the perplexity in such writers is simply this: coming to the Bible with 
the foreign derived idea of the saints’ inheritance, they find themselves at 
the very outset confronted with its direct opposite, and they are forced to 
resort to arbitrary conjectures and suppositions to support an wnealled-for 
theory. Rejecting Warburton’s explanation of the fact, yet he is correct in 
asserting that nowhere do we find in any of those records any other but az 
earthly inheritance promised. This has been noticed extensively by Ger- 
man critics, and even enemies of Christianity have sought to make it (on 
the supposition that the monkish notion of the third heaven inheritance is 
the true one) a fatal objection to the Bible. Let, however, the entire scope 
of the Bible speak ; let Moses, David, Paul, let a// speak ; let covenant and 
covenant promises declare what is this promised inheritance, and in perfect 
harmony each and every one, proclaim it to be the inheriting of the land, 
of the earth, of the world, and the possessing of it for the ages. There is 
nothing hidden in these promises ; they mean precisely what the words in 


Prop. 142.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 443 


their general usage indicate. Moses promises not merely, if the people 
are obedient, a temporal possession of the land, but a perpetual one. Those 
who died are still promised the same, implying a triumph over death and 
the grave ; and, what ought to suffice, the assurance that God’s promises 
would, in this respect, de faithfully realized, is the golden chain which 
binds Moses, Prophets, Jesus, Apostles, pious Jews, Apostolic Fathers, and 
other worthies to hold that the time will most certainly arrive when all the 
meek shall inherit the earth. 


The simple fact is self-evident, that just so soon as the Primitive Church view was 
discarded and the Popish notion of the third heaven or the Universe, as an inheritance, 
was substituted, then a conflict was established between the Mosaic Record, the prophet’s 
predictions, and the supposed corrected view. Men, in their wisdom, ingenuously 
sought to reconcile an antagonism, when, if the Word is taken in its strictly grammatical 
and logical connection, none exists. The truth is, that the Bible is censured for much 
that it does not contain, and the supposed conflict (Draper, His. Intel. Dev. of Hurope, 
etc.) between science and the Bible is only one between science and persons who mis- 
conceive the Bible. Unfortunately, men are not willing to discriminate, and therefore 
the Bible is too often made to bear the errors of its interpreters and supporters. It is 
even a matter of surprise that such promises as we have quoted should be, over against 
the express predictions relating to the future, so persistently limited to the present 
period, when utterly unsustained by experience and history. The critical student will 
observe that the modern views, especially the one so often expressed (i.e. that the earthly 
Paradise was a type of heaven), were not entertained by the quite early Fathers ; they 
held to a restoration of Paradise (as part of Redemption) and to an inheriting of it here 
on the earth. Various writers (as e.g. Fairbairn, Typology, vol. 1, p. 168) have shown that 
the later views were inculcated and gained adherents just “ as the speculative influence 
of the Greek philosophy gains strength in the Church.” 


Obs. 4. Surely those who write so confidently that ‘* the land (the earth) 
is of little worth to such as have tasted of the higher bliss of a heavenly 
state ;’’? that it would be ‘‘ an alarming retrograde of being from a heav- 
enly state back to an earthly one ;”’ that the saints themselves, on account 
of their heavenly experience, would be ‘‘ unfit for any degree of blessedness 
this side of heaven itself,’’ besides a host of similar expressions, should well 
ponder lest they be found underrating, and sitting in judgment over the 
inheritance itself and its desirableness. This all may appear very foolish to 
man, but after all it may prove to be ‘‘ the wisdom of God.” All such 
criticisms arise from making more of the intermediate state than the Bible 
warrants. If the pious dead are rewarded, crowned, inherit (Prop. 136), 
etc., as Popery and some Protestantism make it, then there would be some 
propriety in the objection. But until this is first established, the criti- 
cisms have no force. Again, they overlook what has been repeatedly stated 
by us, that this very possession of the earth is part of the Divine Plan in 
the Redemption of the race of man, and promotive of the greatest glory. 
The facts that we have urged, the passages presented, together with the 
belief of so many of God’s children in different ages, ought in themselves 
to be amply sufficient to prevent such disparaging remarks. 

Frazer (Key to Proph.) asks : ‘‘ Shall we esteem it an additional happiness to quit the 
presence of the Lord for the society of men? Is it desirable for those who have arrived 
at their heavenly Father’s house to return again to the land of their sojourning?” , Such 
questions, to be pertinent, ought first to ask whether we advocate a leaving the presence 

eof the Lord when the Lord Himself comes ; and whether the Father’s house (Prop. 170) 
is really where Frazer locates it. To reply to, or notice such, criticisms would be a thank- 
less and endless employment. Do such ever really consider what is (he covenanted inheri- 


tance of Jesus as David’s Son (Prop. 122), and that believers are coheirs with Him in the 
same inheritance? Is all the Scripture bearing on this point to be ignored or arbitrarily 


444 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 142. 


set aside by spiritualizing it? Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 311), after having forcibly 
described the redemption of the earth as man’s glorious inheritance, says : ‘‘ No; when 
rightly considered, it is not a low and degrading view of the inheritance, which is reserved 
for the heirs of salvation, to place it in possession of this very earth, which we now 
inhabit, after it shall have been redeemed and glorified. I feel it for myself to be rather 
an ennobling and comforting thought ; and were I left to choose, out of all creation’s bounds, 
the place where my redeemed nature is to find its local habitation, enjoy its Redeemer’s 
presence, and reap the fruits of His costly purchase, I would prefer none to this. For 
if destined to so high a purpose, I know it will be made in all respects what it should be 
—the Paradise of delight, the very heaven of glory and blessing, which I desire and 
need, And, then, the connection between what it now is, and what it shall have become, 
must impart to it an interest which can belong to no other region in the universe. If any- 
thing could enhance our exaltation to the lordship ot a glorious and blessed inheritance, 
it would surely be the feeling of possessing it in the very place where we were once miser- 
able bondsmen of sin and corruption.’’ (See specially Prop. 203 for a statement.) 


Obs. 5. Truth demands the correction of esteemed writers, such as 
Jones, Shimeall, Butler and others, who make this inheritance to extend 
to the possession of other worlds, or the third heaven, or the Universe, in 
brief, ‘‘all things.”? Leaving this theory for examination, especially as 
held by Shimeall, under the Prop. pertaining to the New Heavens and 
New Earth, and not objecting to the view that the saints in their glorified 
condition have access to other worlds, etc., we object to the theory on the 
ground that it makes the inheritance something very different from the one 
alone promised to the Patriarchs and to David’s Son, and under which 
promise the saints only inherit. ‘That inheritance 7s the earth and not the 
third heaven or the Universe. The proofs assigned by Judge Jones (Notes 
on Scrip., p. 560) are purely inferential and opposed by direct covenant 
promises. The texts given against our view are the following: 1 Cor. 
3:21, 23 (which says nothing contrary, merely specifying ‘‘ things to 
come’’) ; Rom. 8 : 38, 39 (which only asserts that nothing can separate us 
from the love of God) ; 2 Tim. 2:12 (that only declares the reign with 
Christ); Rev. 22:5 (which asserts a perpetual reign); John 20:17 
(which has no reference to the subject). Indeed, we might ourselves select 
stronger passages than these, but over against any and every such selection 
can be placed the impregnable covenant, and the multitude of explicit 
promises based on, and derived from, it. 


Millenarianism, to be consistent, must ever keep in view its foundation in the cove- 
nant, and this necessitates the positive rejection of the Universe theory, however plau- 
sibly and eloquently expressed. This will be shown at length hereafter. So it rejects 


the monkish theory that the Sec. Advent, instead of bringing blessing and happiness to | 


this earth, is ‘‘ the end of all sublunary things,” as hostile to the entire tenor and spirit 
of the Scriptures. It also repudiates the anti-scriptural notion (so Pres. Edwards, 
His. Redemp.) that this earth is to be constituted ‘‘ the hell” of the wicked, thus giving 
the victory to Satan. In brief, it—if logically correct—refuses credence to every 
hypothesis which ignores the covenanted land and inheritance, and which makes the restitu- 
tion to Edenic forfeited blessings incomplete.| Hence, we must totally reject Barbour’s 
views (The Three. Worlds, p. 36 and 46), who accuses us of holding to ‘‘ an agricultural 
heaven,’’ where the glorified saints build, plant, dig, etc. In The Herald of the Morning, 
Sep. 15, 1877, he thus, under the plea of a higher spiritual discernment (which ignores 
the plain grammatical sense of covenant and promise), takes our view to task : ‘* While 
the apostle affirms ‘our inheritance is reseryed in heaven,’ they claim the earth—-prom- 


ised only to the Jews and other nations in the flesh—as theirs ; ‘ While Christ affirms, * . 


“I go to prepare mansions for you,’’’ they claim, Isa. 65 : 2 (a promise only for Jews in the 
flesh), as their own, and expect to plant vineyards and build houses ; while Paul affirms 
of the dead in Christ, that they are to be raised ‘ spiritual bodies,’ they claim that the 
same literal earthy, fleshly body is to be raised, and an immortal soul or an immortal 


PRop. 142. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 445 


spirit of some kind is to take possession of it and permeate its fleshly substance.’’ This 
is an utterly unfair and prejudiced caricature of our real views. No one of us teaches 
that the future body raised and glorified is a fleshly body, or that saints, who are kings 
and priests, plant and build. It is easy to establish a preconceived theory by quoting 
just as much of a passage as suits, and leave the rest, which is contradictory—as e.g. the 
revealing of the inheritance reserved at the Sec. Advent (see 1 Pet. 1 : 5, 7, 13, and Props. 
on same) ; the scriptural conception of the Father’s House and its connection with the 
Coming again ; the manner in which Peter claims the realization of Isa. 65 : 2 in behalf 
of believers (comp. Props. 148, 151, 170, etc.), ete. Barbour’s theory is a rejection of 
covenant (both Abrahamic and Davidic) promises, and cannot rise to the conception that 
in this restored Theocratic Kingdom the saints as rulers and coheirs with Christ enjoy a 
higher plane than the nations of the earth ; that with an earthly inheritance (which restores 
one of the forfeited blessings of the Fall and completes Redemption) they also inherit a 
Kingdom, higher spiritual and eternal good, with a New Jerusalem position, etc. ; that 
to ridicule ‘* the inheritance of the land” is to scorn the inheritance of the Messiah and 
His coheirs ; that to inherit a Kingdom, a Theocracy, here on earth, must necessarily 
bring the inheritors into earthly relationship with their subjects, etc. A close adherence 
to the plain grammatical] sense of the covenants, and the promises based thereupon, 
effectually disposes of all these mystical and spiritualistic theories which are so numerous. 
We say, in reference to the Obs. itself, with Dr. Tyng (see Hill’s Saints’ Inheritance, p. 
271) : ‘‘ In the great view of the Saviour’s personal reign on a regenerated earth, as the 
final and everlasting abode of His redeemed, I rest with confidence and delight.’’ 


Obs. 6. We append a few statements, out of many that could be adduced, 
in behalf of our position. Fairbairn (whose testimony is the more valuable, 
being an opponent to Chiliasm) justly refers (7'ypology, vol. 1, p. 314, 15) 
this inheriting to the renewed earth after the Sec. Advent, and observes 
that Christ could not have called a prosperous life in the present world as 
constituted ‘‘ blessed,’’? but would rather (as He did) warn against the de- 
ceitfulness of riches and the abundance of honors ; because ‘‘ to be blessed 
in the earth as an inheritance, must import that the earth has become to 
them a real and proper good, such as it shall be when it has been trans- 
formed into a fit abode for redeemed natures.’’ He approvingly quotes 
(p. 316) Usteri (as given by Tholuck on Rom. 8 : 19) as saying that the 
‘“‘ conception of a transference of the perfected Kingdom of God into the 
heavens, is, properly speaking, modern, seeing that according to Paul and 
the Apocalypse (and he might also have added Peter and Christ Himself), 
the seat of the Kingdom of God 1s the earth, inasmuch as that likewise par- 
takes in the general renovation.’’ Such, he informs us, was the view 
‘‘adopted by the greatest number, and the most ancient, of the Exposi- 
tors,’? such as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Jerome, Augustine, Ambrose, 
Luther, etc. He quotes as indorsing this view Jerome (on Isa. 65), Justin 
Martyr (Semisch’s Life and Times of Justin, Bib. Cab., vol. 42, p. 336), 
Calvin (Rom. 8 : 21), Haldane (Rom. 8 : 21), Fuller (The Gospel its Own 
Witness, ch. 5), Thiersh (His., vol. 1, p. 20), and Olshausen (on Matt. 8). 
How extended this list can be made is readily seen in the Props. on the his- 
tory of our doctrine. Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 292) argues that the 
possession of Canaan by the Jewish nation was ‘‘ an earnest of the whole 
inheritance, and, as the world then stood, an effectual step toward its real- 
ization. Abraham, as the heir of Canaan, was thus also ‘ the heir of the 
world,’ considered as a heritage of blessing.’’ The tendency to make the 
one simply typical of the other, or of heaven, vitiates the reasoning and 
conclusions of many writers, who forsake the covenants for mere human 
opinions. The Kingdom and the earth sustain an inseparable relationship, 
and the inheriting of the one is the inheriting of the other. Rothe (Dog- 
matic, P. 2, p. 58) clearly apprehends this, and says: ‘‘ He, moreover, des- 


446 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ' [PRop. 142, 


ignates the blessedness of this Kingdom as an inheriting the earth, for fo 
this Chiliastic Kingdom the passage, Matt. 5 : 5, must be referred.”’ 


Bengel (Gnomon) makes Matt. 5:5 parallel with Rev. 5:10; Meyer (Com. loci) also 
makes it to refer to the future Messianic Kingdom ; Nast (Com. loci) says: ‘‘ The full 
import, however, of the promise seems to be the possession of the new earth, which God 
will create with the new heaven (Isa. 66 : 22), and which is the realization of the original 
destiny of Adam.’’ Fausset (Com. Isa. 65 : 17) says: ‘‘ As Caleb inherited the same 
land which his feet trod on (Deut. 1 : 36 ; Josh. 14 : 9), so Messiah and His saints shall 
inherit the renovated earth which once they trod while defiled by the enemy (Isa. 
$4 24, and 61:16, and 66:22; Ezek. 21:27; Ps. 2:6, and 37:11; 2 Pet gaaee 
Heb. 12 : 26-28; Rev. 21:1); and in his comment on Ps. 25 : 13, and 37: 9, ete., he 
makes the phrase ‘‘ inherit the earth” to be an “‘ alluding to the promise of Canaan, 
expressing all the blessings included in that promise, temporal as well as spiritual.’ 
Such testimonies could be multiplied, which declare with Luthardt (Lehre Von Der Letzten 
Dingen) that ‘‘ the earth, not heaven, is the abode of the glorified Church” (comp. also 
p. 35, where he has “ the glorified Church” reigning over ‘‘ the unglorified humanity,” 
etc.). Men of the greatest learning and biblical research find this doctrine clearly 
expressed, and joyfully and hopefully cling to it. 

On the other hand, we give a few illustrations of the perversion of the passage. 
Brown (Com. Matt. 5 : 5) makes this a figure drawn from the possession of Canaan, and 
its secure possession, of ‘‘ the evidence and manifestation of God’s favor resting on 
them and the ideal of all true and abiding blessedness,’’ but he does not tell us how the 
possession of a land ‘‘ for a little while,’’ from which the native was driven, etc., can 
appropriately be used as ‘‘ the ideal of all true and abiding blessedness.” The Ch. 
Union, Ap. 28, 1879, answers an inquirer respecting the meaning of inheriting the earth, 
thus : ‘‘ The enjoyment of earthly blessings belong not to the grasping but to those who 
hold them lightly. ‘ Selfish men,’ says John Woolman, ‘ may possess the earth, it is the 
meek alone who inherit it from the Father free from all defilements and perplexities of 
unrighteousness.’” So, then, there is an inheriting without having a possession. Dr. 
Rutter (Life of Christ, p. 176) renders it : ‘‘ Blessed are the meek, for they shall possess 
the land,” and interprets ‘‘ land’’ as an equivalent to “‘ heaven,’’ for, he adds, if the 
meek are ‘‘ ill-treated and driven from their possessions by the ambition and rapacity of 
others, heaven, upon that title, becomes their due, as their own land and inheritance.” 
This needs no comment. In the same work, he (like Edwards’s, see preceding Prop.) 
thus (pp. 423-5) disposes of the earth: he has the reprobate, at the Sec. Advent, left 
“on the earth to receive their eternal doom,” and the execution of a judicial sentence is 
thus described : ‘‘ Yes, the reprobate shall be consigned to everlasting burnings ; the abyss 
of hell shall open under their feet, and they shall be precipitated into it, surrounded by 
those raging flames which shall have consumed the whole material world,” i.e. hell 
replaces the earth. We turn with relief from such outrageous perversions of Scripture 
promise to others, who inculcate the perpetuity and inheriting of the earth. To indicate 
how covenanted promises (Prop. 49) were clung to by the early Church, we refer e.g. to 
Justin Martyr (Dial. Trypho, ch. 139) who, instancing Palestine as the land specially 
covenanted to Abraham and his seed, says : ‘‘ There shall be a future possession of all 
the saints in this same land. And hence all men.everywhere, whether bond or free, who 
believe in Christ and recognize the truth in His own words and those of His prophets, 
know that they shall be with Him in that land, and inherit incorruptible and everlasting 
good.’’ A multitude of writers like Tomlinson (Ser. on the Mill., and who in Ap. appeals 
to “ Wesley, Doddridge, Macknight. Newton, Clarke, Chalmers, and a host of others,’’ 
as holding similar views) could be quoted, advocating this earth, renovated at the Sec. 
Advent, as the future home of the redeemed. (Comp. authors quoted under Props. 146, 
148, 151, etc.) Many accord with Eleazer Lord (The Messiah, p. 324): ‘‘ The course of 
things eventually to be realized on earth will be such as would have taken place from 
the beginning, had no apostasy occurred. The apostasy and the curse on man and the 
earth will be overcome. ‘The antagonism between the Mediator and the adversary will 
cease. The earth, freed from the curse and from all enemies, renovated, restored to its 
original beauty, will be the perpetual scene of holiness and happiness.” Such testi- 
monies could readily be multiplied, indicative of a faith fixed on Bible promise. We 
attach one more, Dr. Moll’s (Lange’s Com. Heb. p, 41): “ The anticipated reintroduction 
of the Firstborn into the inhabited world, forms the goal of the ways of God in history, 
and promises a revelation of glory to which, in hope and faith, we are to look ; which, in 
the patience of the saints, we are humbly to await ; and for which, in the sanctification 


Prop. 142.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 447 


of our persons, as children of God born anew to be brethrer in Jesus Christ, and called 
to be fellow-heirs with Him, we are earnestly to prepare, that we may join the adoring 
worship of angels.” 


Obs. 7. This doctrine teaches us how to regard the various theories of 
inheritance, such as the third heaven idea, the central universe notion, the 
metaphysical heaven (of Good’s, etc.), which gives no place of existence, 
the spiritualist’s visible unfolding of the invisible, ‘* the Sun our Heaven’’ 
(so Mortimore, Wittie, etc.), and the infidel’s no future inheritance. By 
overlooking the plainest promises and oath-bound covenants, or by spirit- 
ualizing them, men manufacture inheritances of their own. No matter 
that the inheriting of the earth was a favorite Jewish doctrine based on the 
Messianic prophecies and the predicted supremacy ; when Jesus uttered 
this promise it must be modernized and accommodated to the supposed 
advanced theological opinions of the age, moulded by the influence of some 
favorite philosophy. No matter that the Patriarchs are personally prom- 
ised such an inheriting ; that the Messiah is personally to receive the land 
as an inheritance ; that the saints, as part of a perfected Redemption, are to 
realize it ; that a thousand predictions direct attention to it, the leaven of 
the old Gnostic spirit against matter and the claimed higher spirituality, 
deliberately refuses the plain grammatical sense, and substitutes another 
sense at the will of the interpreter. 


The objections usually made are met under Prop. 107, 122, 148, 146, etc. Thus e.g. 
Pressense (The Early Days of Chris., p. 249), taking 1 Pet. 1 : 4, isolated and overlooking 
its context, says: ‘‘ 'The hope of the Church reaches far beyond the horizon of the Theoc- 
racy. It is fixed no longer onan earthly inheritance, like the land of Canaan ; it is changed 
into the lively hope of ‘‘ an inheritance incorruptible and undefiled, and that fadeth 
not away, reserved in heaven, 1 Pet. 1:4.” Now, the exact reverse of this is the script- 
ural truth, confirmed by oath. Weare to look for a gloriously restored Theocracy under 
David’s Son, its central location in Canaan and extending over the whole earth. But 
this restoration includes much that is heavenly, as the descending New Jerusalem, the 
descending Mighty Heir, the descending resurrecting power and glorification, the 
heavenly derived Kingship and priesthood, all of which is to be revealed (as the same 
apostle asserts in immediate connection) at the Second Coming of the Restorer. Our 
opponents seem to be willingly ignorant of the fact—-often expressed by us—that the 
saints, in virtue of their relationship to the Divine-human Saviour and King, have a 
twofold inheritance, the earth redeemed and the Kingdom, with all its heavenly endow- 
ments and accompaniments, established on the earth. Pressense is not consistent with 
his own theory, for (p. 286) he makes Peter contradict Paul ; we quote under Prop. 146. 
Indeed, such passages as Gal. 3 : 16-18 comp. with Heb. 9 : 9, 10, 18, Rom. 4 : 13, Deut. 
ch, 28, etc., are amply sufficient, when contrasted with the covenant (Prop. 49) to estab- 
lish the matter of the inheritance ; for Abraham’s inheritance and Christ’s inheritance 
is likewise the saints’ inheritance. If we look for any other, we deceive ourselves and 
dishonor God's promises, 


448 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


Proposition 143. The early church doctrine of the Kingdom is 
supported by “the Lest,” or keeping of the Sabbath, men- 
tioned by Paul. 


If it can be shown that the Sabbath was regarded as typical of 
the Kingdom of the Messiah as covenanted, and of the Millennial 
era, and then if it is found that Paul adopts the phraseology 
current on this point and uses it, without change of meaning, ina 
way to confirm the opinions existing, it forms an additional argu- 
ment 77 favor of the primitive view of the Kingdom. 


Obs, 1. Observe how the Jews believed on this subject. Bh. Newton has 
well stated (Dis. on Proph., p. 587) on the thousand years of Rev. 20, 
*“that the Jewish Church before John, and the Christian Church after 
him, have believed and taught that these one thousand years will be the 
seventh Millenary of the world. A pompous heap of quotations might be 
produced to this purpose, both from Jewish and Christian writers.’’ He 
then produces a few quotations from Rab. Ketina, from ‘‘ the tradition of 
the house of Elias, who lived two hundred years or thereabouts before 
Christ,’’ etc. Mede, Burnet, Lightfoot, Russell, Brookes, Taylor, Elliott, 
Bush, and many others, give various extracts establishing the general view 
thus entertained. As impartial authority, we may give what Dr. Whitby 
observes on Heb. 4:9, quoting R. Eliezer (c. 18, p. 41) as saying, “ the 
blessed Lord created seven worlds (i.e. aidnas, ages), but one of them is all 
Sabbath and rest in life eternal,”’ and then adds : “he refers to their (the 
Jews’) common opinion that the world should continue six thousand years, 
and then a perpetual Sabbath should begin, typified by God’s resting on the 
seventh day and blessing it.’’ Llliott notices that this same Rabbi 
makes (Midras Till., p. 4) ‘‘ The days of Messiah are one thousand years.” 
Whitby also quotes Bereschith Rabba: ‘* If we expound the seventh day of 
the seventh thousand of years, which is the world to come, the exposition is, 
‘He blessed it,’ because that im the seventh thousand all souls shall be 
bound in the bundle of life.’’ ‘‘So our Rabbins, of blessed memory, have 
said in their commentaries on ‘ God blessed the seventh day,’ that the Holy 
Ghost blessed the world to come, which beginneth in the seventh thousandth 
of 3 years. Again, Philo is copious on the same subject, stating that the 

Sabbaths of the law were allegories or figurative expressions. 

For the convenience of the reader several more are quoted to illustrate the manner 
of statement. Bh. Newton (Diss. on Proph.) : ‘‘ Tradition assents to R. Ketina: As out 
of seven years every seventh is the year of remission, so out of the seven thousand years 
of the world the seventh Millenary shall be the Millenary of remission, that God alone 
may be exalted in that day.’’ The tradition of Elias gives the following : ‘‘ The world 
endures six thousand years, two thousand before the law, two thousand under the law, 
and two thousand under the Messiah,’’ and Newton from Mede (giving the original) adds 


that then followed the seventh thousand or Millenary embracing in its commencement 
the resurrection of the just and a renewal of the earth. Brooks, I. of Proph. Interp., ch. 


~—_— >}. << =e 


Prop. 148. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 449 


3, quoting from the Targums, R. Eliezer, R. Gamaliel, Book of Wisdom and Tobit, refers 
to the tradition concerning the seventh Millenary that in it the world ‘‘ was to be 
renewed, and all the promises of God made to the fathers accomplished.’’ He asserts 
(appealing to Pezron’s Antig., ch. 4, 37) that so general was the opinion among the Jews 
that after the destruction of the temple, when the Christians urged that the Messiah had 
come, they deemed it a sufficient reply to point to the fact that the six thousand years 
had not yet expired. He gives several opinions, as stated in Rabbi Asche, that some 
thought the Messiah would come at the beginning of the fifth, some of the seventh, and 
some of the latter end of the sixth, but that the tradition of the house of Elias was the 
most prevalent. Mede (Works, B. 4) declares that the general opinion of the Jews was 
the tradition of Elias, gives a number of authorities, shows that in the seventh Mille- 
nary the earth was to be renewed, the resurrection of the just realized, etc. Compare 
the statements of Bush (The Mil’., ch. 4), Bh. Russell (Dis. on Mill.), The Time of the End, 
by a Congregationalist (which quotes Gregory of Oxford, R. Menasse, and Aben Ezra, 
the latter of whom links the Sabbatism with Isa. 65 : 17), and the articles on the same 
in our Bib. Dicts. and Cyclops., ete. Delitzsch (Com. Heb.) gives the fullowing from 
Sanhedrin 97a, “ As the seventh year furnishes a festal time of a year’s duration fora 
period of seven years, so the world enjoys, for a period of seven thousand years, a festal 
season of a thousand years,” and justly argues that this Sabbath merges into the eternal 
Sabbath or blissful eternity. Similarly in a Rab. Treatise on Ps. 92 : 1 (Elijahu Rabba, 
c. 2, quoted Lange’s Com. Heb., ch. 4, Doc. 7), it is said : “ We mean the Sabbath which 
puts a stop to the sin reigning in the world, the seyenth day of the world, upon which, 
as post-Sabbatic, follows the future world, in which forever and ever there is no more 
death, no more sin, and no more punishment for sin, but pure delight in the wisdom 
and knowledge of God.’ For Jewish idea of Sabbatism see also Bush, Com. Gen., vol. 
1, p. 47, and for their present cleaving to it, see e.g. Levi's Cer. of the Jews, p. 206, and 
Mission of Inquiry to the Jews, p. 409. The fact is, as stated by Bh. Russell, Bush, and 
others, that traces of this opinion, a future coming Sabbatism, is to be found ‘‘ in the 
writings of Pagans, Jews, and Christians,’’ ‘‘in the Sibylline oracles, in the poems of 
Hesiod, in Plato,” and is ‘‘ expressed by the Chaldeans, the Persians, the Egyptians, the 
Greeks, the Romans, and by orators, poets philosophers.” Dr. Mombert (Lange’s Com. 
1 Pet., p. 26) refers (giving authorities) to ‘‘ The Jews saying, ‘ When God created the 
world, He held forth His hand under the throne of Glory, and created the soul of the 
Messiah and His company, and said to Him, Wilt Thou heal and redeem my sons, after 
six thousand years ? He answered, Yes. God said to Him, If so, wilt Thou bear chas- 
tisements to expiate their iniquity, according to what is written (Isa, 53 : 4) Surely, He 
bore our griefs?’ He answered, I will endure them with joy.” 


Obs. 2. Writers inform us that this Jewish opinion of the seventh Mil- 
lenary, however we may account for it, was continued in the Christian, 
Jewish, and Gentile churches established by the apostles and their succes- 
sors, and that it was entertained both by Millenarians and their opponents. 
This isabundantly confirmed by a little research. Papias (frag. Ante-Nic. 
Lib., vol. 1, p. 447, inferred from Euseb. His., B. 3, s. 39) makes the days 
of creation typical. Barnabas (Zpzs., c. 15), commenting on the words : 
“** And God made in six days the works of His hands and He finished 
them on the seventh day and He rested in it and sanctified it,”’ says: 
‘Consider, children, what that signifies, He finished them in six days. 
This it signifies, that the Lord God will finish all things in six thousand 
years. For a day with Him is a thousand years; as He Himself testifieth, 
saying : ‘‘Behold this day shall be as a thousand years.’’ ‘Therefore, chil- 
dren, in six days, that is in siz thousand years, shall all things be consum- 
mated. And He rested the seventh day; this signifies that when His Son 
shall come, and shall abolish the season of the Wicked One, and shall 
judge the ungodly and shall change the sun, and the moon, and the stars, 
then He shall rest gloriously in that seventh day.’’’* Such also is the opin- 
lon of Ireneus (Adv. Her., 5), Justin Martyr (Ques. and Ans., 71, Dial. 
with Try.), Polycarp (see testimony of Irenzus concerning him as given by 


450 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


Brooks, Zl. Proph. Inter., p. 38, etce.), Tertullian (Ag. Marcion, B. 3, ¢. 
24, etc.), Lactantius (Div. Jnsti., c. 14, 24, 26), Cyprian (See Lxh. Mart., 
11), Ambrose (Jn Luc., 8 : 23), and others.* So deeply rooted was this 
notion of the Millenaries that even Origen, Jerome, and Augustine 
indorse it. The student knows that Bh. Taylor (Lid. of Prophesying, s. 5) 
ranks Origen among the Millenarians, and critics suppose that it arose 
from Origen’s expectation of the renovation of all things at the end of six 
thousand years. Jerome’s statements are to be found in his letter (139) 
to Cyprian, Comment on Ps. 90:4, and Micah 4. As Augustine aided 
largely in overthrowing and darkening the early Church view of the King- 
dom, we may, in this respect, more particularly specify his opinion. In 
De Gen. contra Manich., he proposes that the six days give a prophetic 
sketch of the epochs in the history of man, making the sixth the Christian 
dispensation, etc. In City of God, B, 20, c. 7, he says that he would not 
object to a literal resurrection to be succeeded by a Sabbath rest during one 
thousand years, provided it were spiritual : ‘‘ a kind of seventh day Sabbath 
in the succeeding thousand years ; and it is for this purpose the saints rise, 
viz., to celebrate this Sabbath. And this opinion would not be objection- 
able, if it were believed that the joys of the saints 72 that Sabbath shall be 
spiritual and consequent on the presence of God ; for I myself too, once 
held this opinion.’’ That his opinion concerning the Millenaries under- 
went 20 change, is seen by reference to the City of God, last chapter, where 
he makes the days ages, counting his own age in which he lived ¢he sizth, 
calling the seventh age the Sabbath in which we shall have rest, and this 
last day or age he has closed by the ushering in of an eighth and eternal 
day or age. It has been noticed by various writers that many of the later 
Anti-pre-millenarians explained the seventh day to be typical of an eternal 
Sabbath. So generally was this theory of the Millenaries held that, adopt- 
ing the chronology of the Septuagint, at different periods, when it was sup- 
posed that the six thousand years were ending, an almost universal belief 
in the ending of the world was entertained. ‘The duration of the world for 
six thousand years, to be followed by a Sabbath of rest, was so rooted into 
the Church that the Reformers frequently expressed their faith in a speedy 
end, even after the Hebrew chronology was adopted in place of the Septua- 
gint. Elliott (Hore Apoc.), Taylor (Voice of the Church), and others (as 


Seiss, Brooks, Shimeall, Lord, etc.) have given nwmerous extracts from — 


Luther, Melanchthon, ete., indicating this remarkable feature, viz., their 
belief in a near closing of the dispensation, etc.* It would be easy to intro- 
duce a long list of eminent names in the Church who have continued to 
hold to this ancient belief, not only Millenarians, but many of their oppo- 
nents ; and, account for it as we may, such an opinion, if not susceptible of 
definite scriptural proof, deserves, in view of its reception and retention, the 
respectful attention of the Biblical student.* 


1 This, according to Gregory of Oxford, is the former Jewish argument, which he gives 


as follows : ‘*‘ Because God was six days about the creation, anda thousand years with Him 
are but as one day (Ps. 90 : 4), therefore, after six days, that is, after six thousand years 
duration of the world, there shall be a seventh day or millenary Sabbath of rest,” 
quoted by ‘‘ A Congregationalist’’ in Time of the End, who adds to this Menasse, an 


ee ee 


my ol 
a ne 


ancient Jewish Rabbi, Aben Ezra, D. Kimchi, Eph. Cyrus, ete. Comp. Taylor’s Voice of — | 


the Church, for same. 


* Commodianus (The Instructions, 8. 80) says that the res. of the saints takes place \ 


‘when six thousand years are completed.” Clement (First Hpis., ch. 35) employs the 


phrase ‘‘ ages,” calling the Creator the ‘‘ Father of the Ages,’’ having, evidently, the — 


> 
ea 


Prop. 148, ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 451 


prevailing opinion in view. The martyr, Victorinus (On the Creation of the World), 
remarks, “‘ that the true Sabbath will be in the seventh Millenary of years, when Christ 
with His elect shall reign.’’ Lactantius (Div. Insti., B. 7, ch. 14) gives the ideas enter- 
tained : ‘‘ The six thousandth year is not yet completed, and that when this number is 
completed, the consummation must take place, and the condition of human affairs be 
remodelled for the better.’’ He appeals to the work of Creation, the six days as 
typical of the duration of the earth until the Sabbath or Mill. age is introduced ; the 
six days indicating ‘‘six ages, that is, six thousand years,’’ quoting Ps. 90 : 4, and the 
seventh day representing the seventh age or thousand years in which “all wickedness 
must be abolished from the earth and righteousness reign.” Bardesan (Book of the 
Laws, see Ante-Nicene Lib.) speaks of ‘“‘the establishment of a new world,” after an 
expiration of six thousand years, thus showing how widespread was the opinion that 
the earth in its present form would only endure the six thousand years. 

8 Melanchthon’s views are so to. the point, embracing the early Church belief, that a 
transcription may be in place. Elliott (Horw Apoc.) gives the following : ‘‘‘ The words 
of the prophet Elias should be marked by every one, and inscribed upon our walls and 
on the entrances of our houses. Six thousand years shall this world stand and after that 
be destroyed ; two thousand years without the law ; two thousand years under the law of 
Moses ; two thousand years under the Messiah ; and if any of these years are not ful- 
filled, they will be shortened (a shortening intimated by Christ also) on account of our 
sins.’ Dr. Cox, after quoting the above from Melanchthon’s Com., gives the following 
manuscript addition, that he had found, in Melanchthon’s hand, in, Luther’s own copy 
of the German Bible: ‘ Written A.D. 1557 and from the Creation of the world 5519 ; 
from which number we may be sure that this aged world is not far from its end.’”’ It 
occurs to the author that he somewhere read (cannot now recall the authority) that this 
Bible referred to is found in the British Museum. Vide Bh. Latimer’s Third Ser, on 
Lord’s Prayer, where he asserts that ‘‘ all learned men’’—‘‘ excellent and learned men’’ — 
—affirm that the world was to endure six thousand years, etc. Dr. Seiss in A Question in 
Eschatology, p. 4, quotes from Walch’s Luther's Schriften 14, 1117, Luther’s prefacing his 
chronology of the world with* this tradition of Elias, and also refers to Melanchthon. 
Lord in Apoc., p. 238, etc., extensively quotes Luther and Melanchthon. Comp. Proph. 
Times, Ap., 1870, ete. 

4 Bh. Russell (Anti-Millenarian) in his Dis. on Mill., testifies to the extended preva- 
lence of the tradition “in the writings of Pagans, Jews, and Christians,’’ holding to 
‘a blessed Millennium, the Sabbath of this terrestrial globe,” ete. In Jeffries’s Chart 
of the Churches is found the opinion of the Corinthian (A.D. 81) Church. In Twenty 
Reasons, p. 25, Bh. Burnet is quoted as saying, ‘‘ Nothing yet appears either in nature, 
science, or human affairs, repugnant to this belief of the 6000 years’ and the re- 
sultant Sabbatism. The following persons are mentioned as teaching it: ‘* Augustine, 
Cyprian, Justin Martyr, Clement, Origen, Jerome, and others among the early Fathers ; 
Luther, Melanchthon, R. Abraham, Aben Ezra, R. Ben Israel, Mede, Newton, Bengel, 
Chas. Wesley, Cowper, Adam Clarke, Fleming, and many others, in later times.” And 
Bh. Latimer (p. 24)is thus quoted : ‘‘ The world was ordained to endure 6000 years. There 
will be great alterations then. Then shallthey seetheSon of man coming with power and 
great glory.’’ The influence that this doctrine had in estimating the nearness of Antichrist, 
the Sec. Advent, and Sabbatism is noticed, Prop. 160, Obs. 3, note 2, as e.g. the Primitive 
Church, owing to its adopting the Sep. Chronology (which largely increased the time 
past), supposed the end of the 6000 years was nigh, as observed by numerous writers 
(e.g. Prof. Bush, The Millennium, p. 23, Gibbon’s Decl. and Fall, vol. 1, p. 533). The fact 
is, the student will find it imbedded in nearly all the early and modern estimates respect- 
ing the nearness of the Mill. age. It is asingular fact, as the reader must already have 
noticed in the names of advocates adduced, that not merely Pre-Millenarians, but those 
who are Post-Millenarians—who spiritualize the res. and Mill., etc.—also adopt this 
view in reference to their spiritual Millennium, or as Anti-Millenarians in relation to 
the ending of this dispensation. Thus e.g. Bogue (Dis. on Mill., p. 608), Johnston 
(On the Rev., vol. 2, p. 319) speak of the ‘‘ glorious Sabbatic day of rest and peace and 
joy,” ‘‘ the great Sabbath of the whole earth,” which is to follow the 6000 years. So 
Tomlinson (Ser. on Mill.) recognizes the Mill. to be ‘‘ a grand Sabbatical era of a thousand 
years’ continuance,’’ which follows ‘‘ the completion of the first 6000 years of the human 
family.’’ §S. T. Browne (Christian Morals, P. 2, S. 5) remarks: ‘* The world which took 
but six days to make, is like to take 6000 to make out’’ (comp. P. 3, 8S. 29, and S. 26). 
Josiah Priest in his View of the expected Mill., advocates a spiritual Mill. in the 7th Chiliad. 
In Dr. Rutter’s Life of Christ, p. 414 (Rom. Cath.), speaking of the rise of Antichrist and 


452 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


the Sec. Advent, he says: ‘‘ Various have been the sentiments both of the ancients and 
moderns concerning this final period, but the most prevailing opinion fixes it about the 
end of the 6000 years,’’ but regards it as uncertain, Even Buck (Theol. Dic., art. Mill.), 
after his erroneous representation of our doctrine, presents his own spiritual Millennial 
theory, and faintly indorses the view as follows : ‘* The time when the Millennium will 
commence cannot be fully ascertained ; but the common idea is that it will be in the 
seven thousandth year of the world.” Asa curiosity and indicative of prevailing opin- 
ions, we give Browne’s note to Roger Bacon’s Cure of Old Age, Ch. 1:‘* This year, 1682, 
with the Astrologers, is celebrated the Climacterick grand Conjunction of the highest 
Planets. And Divines after St. Peter’s Chronology do reckon that the Sabbatical Mille- 
nary isnot far off ; nor without great reason. For if Moral Symptoms, such as Nations 
rising against Nations, Divisions in Families and between Friends, do portend the last 
days, we must conclude the world in its testy Old Age, and that thet day, the Angels in 
Heaven, no nor the Son of man Himself, knew not of, is coming on.” So deeply is this 
idea incorporated in past eschatology, that even such a commentator as Scott cannot 
entirely rid himself of its influence. For (Com. Rev. 20 : 4-6) he remarks: ‘* Whether 
the general opinion, that this thousand years will be the seventh thousand from the crea- 
tion, or the Sabbatical Millenary, the event must determine ; it is evident, however, 
that the dawn of this glorious day cannot be very distant.” The Jewish and early Church 
view thus given by Neander (Genl. Ch. His., vol. 2, p. 396) has never been eradicated : 
‘* As the world had been created in six days, and, according to Ps. 90:4, a thousand 
years in the sight of the Lord is as one day, so the world was to continue in its existing 
condition for six thousand years, and the end with a thousand years of blessed rest, cor- 
responding to the Sabbath.” Even Clement of Alexandria (so quoted by Dr. Burnet in 
his Theory of the Earth, and by others) observes “ that the seventh day has been accounted 
sacred by the Hebrews and Greeks, because of the revolution of the world, and the 
renovation of all things,’’ and this, Burnet alleges, ‘‘ can be in no other sense than that 
the seventh day represents the seventh Millennium (or thousand years) in which the 


Kingdom and renovation are to be.” 
e 


Obs. 3. A few remarks may suggest reasons for there being so widespread 
and deeply imbedded a feeling that the seventh Millenary will introduce 
something extraordinary in the Divine Purpose. Students of deep reflec- 
tion have considered that about the two thousandth year the call of, and 
promise to, Abraham was given, that about two thougand years after was 
the Coming of the promised seed to make a sacrifice, and that, judging 
from analogy, we may reasonably expect something remarkable to occur at 
the expiration of two thousand years more. Besides this, eminent writers, 
as Kurtz (His. of Old Cov.), Prof. Stuart (Com. Rev.), and others lay 
stress on the symbolical character of the numbers ten, seven, three, etc. 
Among their statements we find it frequently asserted that ‘‘ seven ts the 
seal of the covenant with Jehovah,”’ of ‘* rest?’ and ‘‘ completeness,’’ and is 
applied to the Abrahamic. But such writers overlook the important and 
significant fact that 7f it 1s such, then it embraces the Davidic Covenant 
also, which is an outgrowth or enlargement of the Abrahamic. If so (for 
we are only taking their deductions for granted), ¢hen it legitimately fol- 
lows, provided the symbolical import is adopted, that we are directed to the 
seventh chiliad as the period when the covenant shall in every particular be 
realized. Any other explanation makes their use inexplicable. Again, the 
typical nature of certain seasons has caused many to regard this theory with 
favor. Thus e.g. the feast of trumpets, which came in with the new moon 
of the seventh month. The moon is regarded (Dr. Etheridge’s Targum, 
2 vol. pref.) as an emblem of the Church, and the new moon of the seventh 
month is selected to indicate that at the seventh period of time the Church 
in its renewed state shall be the cause of rejoicing, etc. Whatever may be 
thought of this and similar typical comments, it is certain that the Sabbati- 
cal year, introduced once in seven years, has been esteemed by Jewish and 


a 


Prop. 1438. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 453 


Christian writers as a type of the repose, etc., to be enjoyed in the seventh 
age or the Great Sabbath. ‘The Year of Jubilee, or Great Year of Redemp- 
tion, after the lapse of seven Sabbatical years, when there was a general 
release and restitution, has been regarded as a more striking type of the 
same future Sabbath, when man shall be fully restored, re-instated to all 
forfeited blessings. With Isa. 63:4; Isa. 27:13; Matt. 24:31, etc., 
apparently alluding to the same, thoughtful readers of the Word have been 
slow to discard the ancient belief in these things. 


These types have been regarded so striking that they are used in the titles of books, 
as e.g. The World’s Jubilee by Anna Silliman, The Jubilee of Jubilees or Multum in Parvo, 
Anon., etc. Lange (Com. Heb. 4 : 9) renders ‘‘ there remaineth therefore a Sabbath rest’’ 
(or in note : ‘‘a Sabbath Festal celebration’’), and says (Doc. 6): ‘‘ The Sabbath rest which 
commences only at the Sec. Coming of Christ and the accompanying renovation of the 
world, and which is realized only when the whole people of God have entered into eter- 
nal rest.” Kurtz (Sac. His., p. 128) remarks: “ The year of Jubilee was a type of the 
great year of that widely extended Redemption (restitutio in integrum) in which all bondage 
shall cease, all debts be cancelled, all that was lost be recovered, and a new age of the 
world begin.’’ Comp. ‘‘ Sabbath and Jubilee-Year’’ by Dr. Oehler in Herzog’s Cyclop., 
which distinctively states that these were typical of ‘‘ a redemptive restitution and a return 
of the Theocracy to its primeval Divine ordering.” It is admitted by all that the ‘‘ Year of 
Jubilee’ is typical of the future ; some making it a type of the present dispensation 
(which does not meet its requirements) ; others of the resurrection (which only partly 


meets its demands) ; and others more correctly of the Mill. age (which amply fulfils it). 


Let the critical reader consider that the ‘‘ Sabbatical Year’ was the “ Year of Rest,” owing, 
not only to release from bondage, indebtedness, the recovery of alienated possessions, 
and general restitution, but to a spontaneous yield of fruit, to a public manifestation 
that God will provide. It also impressed the Theocratic idea that all, the land and people, 
belonged to the Lord, and that all from the highest to the lowest, the rich and the poor 
alike, were the objects of God’s care, so that selfishness and oppression could not prevail, 
but justice, mercy, and love were to be extended. We have no historical evidence of 
the observance (as legally enacted) of the Sabbatic Year (the institution of which, Mil- 
man, His. Jews, vol. 1, p. 206, etc., shows, is proof that the laws of Moses must be earlier 
than Ewald and others hold, since a retrospective legislation, which facts do not corrobo- 
rate as existing, would be mere assumption). Why isthis? Let it be evidence of the 
sinfulness and perverseness of the nation, or, as Milman aptly says, of ‘‘ the unfitness of 
the nation for their wonderful destination,” still the question occurs, why did God so 
minutely enact in this direction, foreseeing its practical neglect? The answer alone is 
found in the Theocratic idea which it enforces, and which will be realized when the Theoc- 
racy is restored under a people and power capable of sustaining it. Gibbon (Decl. and 
Fall, vol. 6, p. 458, footnote) cannot forego his usual sneer when he says : ‘‘ The Sabbatic 
Years and Jubilees of the Mosaic law, the suspension of all care and labor, the periodical 
release of lands, debts, servitude, etc., may seem a noble idea, but the execution would 
be impracticable in a profane republic ; and I should be glad to learn that this ruinous 
festival was observed by the Jewish people.’’ The reason why it was not observed as 
given, is presented by the prophets ; and they also show that it requires a pure Theocracy 
(not a ‘‘ profane republic’), as shall be restored under the Messiah, to institute such a 


Jubilee. The restored Theocracy alone can fulfil it, as the promises plainly declare, and 


hence we can wait in hope for the time when the deliverance, typified by a grand restitu- 
tion in present human relations, shall be realized ; for God does not institute a type 
(whether the same is practically carried out or not by those who receive it) to utterly 
fail ; the antitype will come in good time. ‘'To the critical reader, it may be observed : it is 
very significant that Fairbairn in his work 7 ypology, a book valuable and suggestive, 
carefully omits all mention of the typical application of the Sabbath, the Sabbatical 
Year, and the Year of Jubilee as presented by many able writers. This omission is the 
more remarkable, when on other points he can make abundant references to ancient and 
modern writers, and his work being specially designed to discuss typical application. 
As a mere matter of information, some notice of this view, so prominently held in the 
Church, seems to be required, but he appears to have been either afraid of its antiquity 
and force, or at aloss how to incorporate it into his own system. Lange (comp. e.g. 
Rev. pp. 56, 344, 406, etc.) makes the Mill. age (like Sander and others) a kind of fore- 


454 THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 143. 


Sabbath, while the perfect antitype follows it. But this view is based on a miscon- 
ception of the duration of the Messianic Kingdom introduced at the Sec. Advent (see 
this discussed under Prop. 159), and of the identity of Isa. 65 :17 and Rey. 21 : 1 (see 
this examined under Prop. 151). Starke (Synopsis, N. Test., B. 10, p. 179) assigns as 
one of the reasons why he holds the one thousand years of Rey. 20 to be literal, their 
relation to this very Sabbatism. Others express similar views. We conclude by giving 
an illustration of interpretation based on the sacred number ‘‘ seven.” Thus e.g. Dr. 
Fronmiiller (Lange’s Vom. Jude, Pp. 23 and 24) on the phrase ‘‘the seventh from 
Adam,” remarks: ‘‘ The epithet‘ the seventh’ cannot be without meaning; Calvin 
thinks that it is intended to denote the great age of the prophecy ; others see in ita 
secret, mystical meaning. Bengel: ‘Every seventh is the most esteemed,’ Steir: 
‘The seventh from Adam is personally a type of the sanctified of the seventh age of 
the world (of the seventh Millennium, of the great earth-Sabbath) ; therefore, he 
prophesies for this time.’ Menken: ‘ The number seven was esteemed in the ancient 
world as an important signature pointing to the sacred and mystery. The fact that after 
sin and death had freely exerted their unhappy power during the first six generations, 
in the seventh generation mankind appeared in the person of one man (who had led a 
godly life, and was taken by God to God without seeing death) in a state of high com- 
pleteness and blessed freedom from death, has a kind of prophetico-symbolical 
significance, and intimates that mankind in general, after having duly completed its 
course and fought its battle under the oppression of sin and death through six long 
world-periods, shall appear in the seventh world-period in a state of higher completeness, 
in a more Divine life and more biessed freedom from death. The seventh world-period is 
the Kingdom of God on earth. To Adam, the first, was revealed and promised the 
appearance and advent of the Lord, as a Helper and Saviour ; to Enoch, the seventh 
from Adam, was revealed the last Advent of the same Lord, Helper and Saviour, as a 
Judge and Avenger, and he was the first prophet, who spoke and taught this among 
men.’” (With this, the student will contrast our remarks under Prop. 130.) Dr. Mom- 
bert adds to the above the following : “‘ ‘ The number seven is sacred above all ; Enoch 
is seventh from Adam and walks with God ; Moses is seventh from Abraham ; Phineas is 
seventh from Jacob our Father, as Enoch was seventh from Adam. And they correspond 
to the seventh day, which is the Sabbath, the day of rest. Every seventh age is in the 
highest esteem.’ Wetstein, citing Rabbinical writings, p. 737. Wordsworth deems it 
worthy of remark, that Enoch lived as many years as there are days in a solar year, viz., 
365, and was then translated, Gen. 5 : 24.” (To the advanced student, the following 
query—suggested by the last clause—is proposed : Query: Does this singular fact possess 
a prophetic-symbolic meaning, pointing us to the probable length of life of mortal man 
#in this year of Jubilee before experiencing a translation ?) 


Obs. 4. Now, to return to the use made by Paul of this opinion enter- 
tained by the Jews. Brought up under Gamaliel, he must have known how 
the Jews regarded the Sabbath as typical of the reign of the Messiah, ete. 
Hence, the references made by him to this opinion, and their future appli- 
cation to Jesus Christ is a virtual indorsement of the same. We have, 
first, his declaration, Col. 2:16, 17, that ‘‘ the Sabbaths are a shadow of 
things to come,’’ viz., typical of things future as related to Christ. Sec- 
ond : the ‘‘ Test’? which the Jews attributed to the Messianic reign, he ap- 
ples, 2 Thess. 1 : 7, to the period of the future revelation of Jesus from 
heaven. ‘lhe very phrase current to designate the Millennial glory (comp. 
Isa. 11 : 10), Paul refers to the Second Advent. Zhird: The manner in 
which he employs. the word ‘‘ Rest’? in Hebrews, being addressed to Jews, 
could not but confirm them in their belief of the future reign of the Mes- 
siah during the seventh Millenary. (1) In chap. 3 : 11, 18 he calls the | 
promised land, the land of Canaan, the covenanted land— the ‘“Rest.”? He | 
locates, as our argument based on the covenant necessitates, the Rest here . 
on the earth. (2 ) Then, without any change of meaning, he speaks of the | 
same Lest, ch. 4:1, 3, etc., as promised also to us. (3) If we take the | 
rendering of verse 3, ch. 4, given by Bloomfield (after Kuin, Wets. and 


q 
4 | 


Prop. 148. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 455 


Schoettg.), Stuart, etc., then there is an evident admitted ‘‘ Jewish cast of 
reasoning,’ making the Sabbath typical. (4) This is done, verse 4, where 
‘“ the seventh day’’ is specially mentioned as a type. (5) This same ‘‘Res?’’ 
is spoken of as future, v. 9. (6) An important and significant change is 
observable in verses 9 and 10, for this ‘‘ Rest’’ still in the future is called in 
the original ‘*Sabdatism’’ (or marg. read. ‘* Keeping of a Sabbath’’), thus 
andorsing the Jewish septenary or Millenaries. Kven Whitby, Com. loct, 
admits that the change from ‘‘ Rest’’ to ‘* Sabbatism”’ leads us ‘‘ to the 
spiritual Sabbath of which the Jewish doctors speak so generally as the great 
thing signified by their Sabbath.’? Commentators generally confess that 
allusion is made to the then existing view held by the Jews.’ What abun- 
dantly confirms this is the manner in which John introduces the one thou- 
sand years in Rey. 20. The Jewish notion of the septenary is pointedly 
reproduced by the Spirit, and referred to the future, being also connected 
with a resurrection. Now, it is impossible to conceive, if the Jewish idea 


of the Millenaries is an erroneous one, of a more effectual way of re-estab- 


lishing and confirming the Jewish conceptions than is done in the Apoca- 
lyptic portrayal of the Millennium. This is fully evinced by the profound 
impression in this direction made upon the early churches. All this, 
however, only teaches us that, as the Jewish conception of the Kingdom 
was invariably identified with the future Sabbatism, the language of the 
apostles indorsing such a Sabbatism, is also virtwally the reception of their 
doctrine of the Kingdom. Otherwise, the matter would have been ex- 
plained, and a new meaning attached to it. But, seeing that the Covenant 
promises were linked with the seventh Millenary by the Jews, that they be- 
lieved that David’s Son would inaugurate in His Kingdom the Great Sad- 
bath, we may well contend that, as the apostles employ the same phra- 
seology without the least hint of a change in meaning, that they also held to 
the fulfilment of the covenanted Kingdom at that period, or, to say the 
least, taught that such aSabbath should, in the future, be witnessed here 
on earth, following regularly preceding ages.’ 


1 But very few have the candor to draw the proper inference, viz., the indorsement of 
the same. See Bloomfield, etc., and then compare Alford, Jones, etc. Some writers, as 
Brown, endeavor to dispute the septenary meaning by making out that the word simply 
means rest, over against Schleusner, Shoettg, etc., and against the express mention of 
“the seventh day’’ and the Jewish ideas concerning it. If Paul only meant ‘‘ Rest,’’ and 
not the Land of Canaan, he was unfortunate in selecting the word, seeing how it resulted 
in confirming Jewish views. Besides, such a meaning would not help the matter any, 
since in the Jewish mind ‘‘ The Rest” was associated with the seventh Chiliad, ete. 
Notice Barnes’s comments on v. 9, making out that this ‘‘ Rest” is the third heaven, 
which is @ perversion of the entire reasoning of the apostle. It is somewhat singular to 
observe, that some of those (as Whitby just quoted) who are desirous to retain in some 
measure the idea of a Sabbatism, can speak of the Jewish notion as ‘‘a spiritual Sab- 
bath,’’ which they, however, discard as ‘‘ carnal ’’ etc., when directly opposing us! Prof. 
Stuart (Com. Heb. 4 : 3) takes the unwarranted liberty of saying that this “ rest’’ cannot 
mean the rest in Canaan, for v. 3 says, ‘‘ Believers now enter into rest.’’ Now, the text 
does not say so, for the word now is not used ; it only gives a promise. ‘ For we 
which have believed do enter into rest,” i.e. in the future (comp. e.g. 2 Thess. 1 : 7), the 
certainty being specified and not the time (otherwise the absurdity must be reached that 
while the apostle was writing, believers were in the enjoyment of their rest). Moll 
(Lange’s Com. Heb.) correctly calls this ‘‘ a Sabbath Rest,’’ ‘a Sabbath Festal Celebra- 
tion,” ‘‘ that Sabbatic Rest which commences only at the Sec. Coming of Christ, and the 


accompanying renovation of the world, and which is realized only when the whole 


people of God have entered into eternal rest in and with God, and in which all the 
ransomed are at home forevermore’’ (see next note). He also quotes Von Gerlach as 
saying : ‘‘ And thus the entrance into the rest of God still awaits the people of the 


<a 


456 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 148. 


Lord ; the celebration of the eternal Sabbath, after the second creation, of which that 
of the earthly Sabbath is but the type.” 

2 Various writers have noticed the indorsement of the Sabbatical idea by the mention of 
the one thousand years in the Apoc. We append an illustration: Rey. Birks (Lectures 
during Lent, p. 185) remarks : ‘‘ ‘ They lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.’ 
Why is this precise period thus marked off, as it were, from the immeasurable ages of 
eternity? The words of St. Peter suggest an answer : ‘ A thousand years with the Lord 
are as one day.’ And what mysterious day can be here designed? The key is given us 
in the very opening of the Word of God. There, in the birth-week of creation, the out- 
lines of God’s providence in redemption are set before us. In six days these lower 
heavens and earth were made, and on the seventh God rested from His works. So, for 
near six thousand years, the mystery of redemption is carried on, till at length, at the 
sounding of the seventh angel, the mystery of God shall be finished, and the Millennial 
Sabbath shall complete and hallow the new creation of God.’’ We have under various 
Propositions quoted the Jewish belief in reference to this thousand years. We append 
Dr. Moll’s (Lange’s Com. Heb. p. 89), quoting the Sanhedrin 97a, as follows: ‘As the 
seventh year furnishes a festal time of a year’s duration for a period of seven years, so 
the world enjoys, for a period of seven thousand years, a festal season of a thousand 
years ;’ so also a Rabb. treatise on Ps. 92 :1 (Hlijahu Rabba, c. 2) says: ‘‘ We mean the 
Sabbath which puts a stop to the sin reigning in the world—the seventh day of the 
world, upon which, as post-Sabbatic, follows the future world, in which forever and ever 
there is no more death, no more sin, and no more punishment for sin ; but pure delight 
in the wisdom and knowledge of God.” It is disagreeable to point out the defects of 
writers, but for the sake of truth, the unpleasant duty must be performed. This right is 
justified by the public statements made in attack upon our system of belief. Thus e.g. 
Prof. Sanborn in his Essay on Millenarianism (comp. a severe Review of same in the Theol. 
and Lit. Journal, Jan., 1856), positively asserts : ‘‘ The Church in all ages has believed 
that the rest that remaineth for God’s people was in heaven.’’ This is refuted (1) by the 
Jewish belief ; (2) by the primitive belief; (3) by the belief of many even of our oppo- 
nents, who make this renewed earth the rest ; (4) by the long line of believers in an inter- 
mediate state, who looked only for the promised rest at the Sec. Advent. Prof San- 
born’s view is now indeed popular and prevailing, but it can be distinctively traced in 
its rise through the Alexandrian school, and its nourishment by mystics, etc. This 
would make an interesting field for investigation, giving the proof in detail. 


Obs. 5. Another feature, which has materially served to perpetuate and 
enforce this Sabbatical view, is the following : Whatever application pro- 
phetical writers or commentators have made of the prophetical dates of 
Daniel and Revelation, which precede the ushering in of the Mill. era, they 
have been almost universally made to end within the 6000 years. This 
prophetical Chronology thus harmonizing with the idea of a Sabbatism fol- 
lowing the closing of 6000 years, has necessarily resulted in keeping the 
Sabbatical idea prominently before the Church. For so limited are the 
prophetical dates, and within the seven thousandth year, that they serve 
materially to impress the tradition of Elias, 


From an immense array of such applications of prophetical dates, a few illustrations 
are in place. Thus, take Melanchthon (Op. tom. 2, p. 525), who lays special stress on 
these 6000 years, repeating the saying of Elias, and then proceeds to show that 458 years 
(unless shortened) must intervene before their close, the Advent of Jesus, the destruction 
ot Antichrist, and the triumph of the saints : ‘‘ It is known that Christ was born about 
the end of the fourth Millenary, and one thousand five hundred and forty-two years 
have since revolved. We are not, therefore, far from the end. Daniel asked in respect to 
the time of the end, and a number was given which, although it seems to respect the 
time of the Maccabees, yet undoubtedly has a reference to the end of the world, and the 
application is easy, if days be taken for years. They will be two thousand six hundred 
and twenty-five. We do not endeavor to ascertain the moment when the last day is to 
dawn. That is not to be sought. But, inasmuch as this number happily agrees with the 
words of Elias, I regard it as denoting the years through which the world was to subsist 
from the time of Daniel. There were six hundred, or near that, from Daniel to the birth 
of Christ. There remained, therefore, two thousand years as the last age of the world.” 


fe Se en 


Prop. 148. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 457 


Luther (Op. tom. 4, f. 730) took precisely a similar view of the seven thousand years, and 
thought that the sixth thousand commenced with the eleventh century. This was 
simply following what the more ancient Fathers had asserted, as e.g. Cyprian (De 
Exhort.), who said that ‘‘ Now six thousand years are nearly completed,’’ basing it on the 
world’s seven days of creation and rest typifying seven Millenniums. So also Bh. 
Latimer (Sermon on Lord’s Prayer, No. 3), after speaking of the age of the world, follow- 
ing Melanchthon, Osiander and others, he says : ‘‘ The world was ordained to endure, as 
all learned men affirm, ... six thousand years. Now, of that number there be past five 
_ thousand five hundred and fifty-two years, so that there is no more left but four hundred 
and forty-eight years. Furthermore, those days shall be shortened for the elect’s sake. 
Therefore, all those excellent and learned men, whom, without doubt, God hath sent into 
the world in-these latter days to give the world warning, do gather out of Scripture that 
the last day cannot be far off.’’ Dr. Clarke (Ser. on Dan. 2 : 41-45) refers to the ancient 
traditions, indorses the six thousand years and the ushering in of a Sabbatism, and 
(Com. Dan. 2) supposed that about one hundred and seventy-one years would yet inter- 
vene before the Sabbatical year arrived. Thus we might quote Rengel, Sir I. Newton, 
Chytrzeus, Pareus, Dr. Scott, Wesley, and many others, thus establishing the correctness 
of our statements. A number of writers (Barbour and preceding ones) deduce an in- 
teresting calculation based on the fulfilment of the Jubilee Sabbath by referring us to 
the 70 years’ desolation, making them 70 years of Sabbaths (i.e. Jubilees), basing it on 
the fact ‘‘ that the land might enjoy her Sabbaths’ which the Jews did not properly 
keep. By a chronological calculation of such Jubilees, it is likewise inferred that we 
are near the close of the 6000 years. Even Hos. 6 :2 is supposed by many to havea 
latent reference to this Sabbatism. It is well known that the Jews applied this period 
to the res., as e.g. the Chaldee paraphrase has it: ‘‘ He will revive us in the days of 
Consolation which are to come ; in the day of the res, of the dead He shall raise us up, 
and we shall live before Him.’’ Bh. Horsley and many others believe that the two 
days and the third day denote three distinctive periods of the Jewish nation, and that 
the third day is related to their restoration at the Sec. Advent. ‘The Jews (ase.g. R. 
Solomon, R. D. Kimchi, and others) thought that these days related to the period of their 
captivity, and that in the third day they would be restored under the Messiah. Many 
thoughtful men have deemed these expressions declarative of some definite time relating 
to Jewish restoration. The key evidently is in this Sabbatism, i.e. in the 6000 years fol- 
lowing by a Sabbatism, keeping in view the scriptural statement of one day being asa 
thousand years. Taking the time when Hosea wrote, and allowing a thousand years for 
each day, brings us far into the third day, the time spoken of as the one of glorious de- 
liverance, connected with a resurrection, etc. How the Sabbatic idea seems to be 
expressed by ‘‘ The Great Pyramid,” we must leave the writers on the subject present, as 
e.g. Dr. Seiss in his ‘‘ Miracle of Stone,” p. 88, etc. 


Obs, 6. There is something remarkable in the contrasts presented by this 
Sabbatism. Man, when created, immediately entered upon the Sabbath, so 
when re-created (the resurrection being such) he again enters upon one, for 
the Sabbath is a following after a creation, and it is but reasonable to sup- 
pose that the Mill. age, preceded as it is by an astounding exertion of crea- 
tive energy and power, should be a glorious Sabbatism. God, instituting 
the Sabbath, assigning the reason of resting or ceasing from creation, 
refers us (as Lewis, Siz Days of Creation) to “‘a greater Calendar’’ in — 
which a special Day of the Lord is thus expressed, and as sons of His (made 
such in realization, as David’s Son was, by the power of the resurrection), 
we enter into the same kind of a rest after a baptism of creative power is 
experienced, thus in actual experience constantly representing in a lesser 
state or condition that occupied by God Himself. For being incorruptible, 
immortal, fashioned after Christ, etc., there is no more creative power to 
be exerted to bring us to the destiny intended. Creation ceases : a Sab- 
bath follows—a Sabbath, however, in which works of Providence (‘‘ He 
hath worked hitherto and yet worketh’’), works of mercy, love, etc., are 
still continued. With the Sabbath begins man’s inheritance ; with it be- 
gins his divine calling to bless God ; with it begins the dominion over the 


458 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


earth : it is fitting that another Sabbath should re-introduce the inheri- 
tance which he lost, the divine calling which he prostituted, and the 
dominion which he forfeited. Hence as Adam in company with Eve went 
forth into the Sabbath to participate in the rest and enjoyment of God, so 
the Second Adam accompanied by His ‘*‘ Helpmeet’’ go forth upon their 
inheritance, calling, and dominion, in the glory of a Sabbath, which the 
Spirit of God, which knoweth all things, eulogizes in the most exalted 
terms. 


Unbelievers in the scriptural account of creation have ridiculed the weekly division 
of creation, making sport of the six days followed by the seventh as a Sabbath. But toa 
believer, it is found, by a careful comparison of the Word of God, that a profounder mean- 
ing is designed—reaching even to the coming dispensation and into the eternal ages—than 
man unaided by Revelation is able to fathom. Lactantius, who wrote (Clarke’s Writings 
of Lact., p. 460, etc.) largely on the subject, met persons (who abound at the present day) 
who rejected the Biblical account of creation, for, after referring to Plato, Cicero, and 
‘‘many others of the philosophers,’’ he says: ‘‘ Therefore let the philosophers, who 
enumerate thousands of ages from the beginning of the world, know that the six thou- 
sandth year is not yet completed, and that when this number is completed the consum- 
mation must take place, and the condition of human affairs be remodelled for the 
better,’ etc. Authentic, reliable human history, notwithstanding the sneers of such phi- 
losophers of the present day, does not extend back as far as the chronology given by the 
Bible, and we may well rest content with Lactantius’s statement. This reminds us that 
indirectly our position is sustained by the fact that this dispensation is called ‘‘ the last 
time,’’ ‘‘ the last days,” which implies that a larger portion of time preceding this must 
have transpired so that this period can appropriately be thus designated ; this being a 
final period, after others, preparatory to the ushering in of the Mill. day. 

This subject throws additional light on two early Church observances : (1) The early 
Christians regarded Sunday asa day of rejoicing, so that fasting on that day was es- 
teemed disreputable and dishonoring (comp. Bh. of Lincoln’s Jilustrations, p. 338, Lord 
King’s Inquiry, pp. 17, 113). The usual explanation is that given by one of the Fathers, 
viz., that it commemorated the resurrection. This is true, but to observe the full force, 
the relation that the res. sustained to the ushering in of the Sabbath and Kingdom must 
be noticed. (2) That even those who ‘‘ contended that the ritual and ceremonial law of 
Moses had ceased,’’ also observed the seventh day as a festival as well as the first day, 
i.e. both Saturday and Sunday. The explanation generally given is, as Bish. Lincoln : 
** perhaps to be ascribed to a desire of conciliating the Jewish converts.’’ The deeper 
reason lies in the Millenarian sentiments entertained, which made both the Jewish Sab- 
bath and the Christian Sunday precious as typical of that which was to come. Comp. 
Bingham’s Antiquities, B. 20, ch. 3. According to Bingham, both days were at first kept, 
and then he notices the change that was introduced, so that the Sabbath, originally also 
kept as a festival by the Western Church, was kept as a fast by the Western Church, but 
continued to be observed as a festival by the Eastern Church. See the reason assigned 
by him, sec. 5, pp. 58-60. This very change proves our position, seeing that the Eastern 
Church retained much longer the Chiliastic views which favored the idea of a festival, 
while the Western portion fell under the Alexandrian influence, and lost the Chiliastic 
influence, 


Obs. 7. The student scarcely needs to be reminded that the Sabbatism 
presented needs not necessarily be pressed in its chronological aspect, 
although great stress has been laid on the same. For, so far as owr argu- 
ment is concerned (which is not a chronological one), it will be amply suffi- 
cient, if it be only conceded that the times, past and present, will be suc- 
ceeded here on earth by another period containing this Sabbatism. This 
has been fully established, for Pre-Christian and Christian interpretation— 
aside from the chronological feature, almost invariably attached—takes it 
as fundamental that such an era will follow other past eras (as the Sabbath 
follows the days of the week), that it pertains to the earth, and that in it 
the glorious Messianic blessings will be fully realized. 


~ 


2S AE i Or bg 


Prop. 1438. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 459 


Obs. 8. As indicative of the class of men who hold to this Sabbatism 
view, we present a few more illustrations. Rothe (Dog., P. 2, p. 60) says : 
‘‘The Apostles describe the Chiliastic Kingdom. Paul, in his letter to 
the Hebrews, calls it ‘a Sabbatism’ for the people of God.’’? Archb, Will- 
iam Newcome (Bickersteth’s Diss. on Proph., p. 106), referring to Rey. 
20 : 4, and advocating our view of it, adds: ‘‘ This is the great Sabbatism 
or rest of the Church.”’? John Bunyan (first Chaps. Genesis) advocates 
‘the glory that the Church shall have in the latter day, even in the seven 
thousandth year of the world, that Sabbath when Christ shall set up His 
Kingdom on earth.’? Hippolytus (Clarke’s Ante- Nicene Ch. Lid., vol. 6, 
p. 447) remarks: ‘‘ And 6000 years must needs be accomplished, in order 
that the Sabbath may come, the rest, the holy day, on which God rested 
from all His works. For the Sabbath is the type and emblem of the future 
Kingdom of the saints, when they shall reign with Christ, when He comes 
from heaven ; as John says in his Apocalypse: For a day with the Lord 
is asa thousand years.’’ Gnieseler (Ch. His., vol. 1, p. 100), after stating 
the universality of Chiliasm in the second century, adds: ‘‘ The Millen- 
nium was represented as the great Sabbath which was very soon to begin, 
and to be ushered in by the resurrection of the dead.”’ | 


Quotations could be readily given from Starke (Synopsis, New Test.), Elliott (Hore 
Apoc.), Hofman (Prophecy and Fulfilment), Olshausen (Com.), Gill (Com.), Alford (Greek 
Test.), and a host of others, including the fine—oft-quoted— passage of Cowper (beginning 
with; ‘‘ The time of rest, the promised Sabbath comes. Six thousand years of sorrow 
have well nigh,” etc.), and the admirable eulogy heaped upon this Sabbatism by Steir 
(Words of Jesus). Sufficient is given to show that it is no novelty, but is entertained by 
able men, and that it admirably sustains our position eschatologically. 

Our line of reasoning would be incomplete, if we did not answer an objection which 
must have occurred to the intelligent prophetical student. The difficulty to be met is 
this : How do you reconcile the seventh Milliad to follow the six thousand years with the 
fact that six thousand years have—if we accept of various chronological tables—already 
transpired, and no such Sabbatism, as the ancients believed in, has commenced? In 
this work we have not committed ourselves to the adoption of any chronological reckon- 
ing for the simple reason that, owing to several designed chasms in the Bible, no two 
chronological tables are alike, although given by able men. The diversity is so great 
that the differences between the lesser and the more extended reach to five and six 
hundred years. According to Usher, Jarvis, and others, we have not yet reached the 
close of the six thousand years (e.g. Usher allowing one hundred and four years still to 
come, and Jarvis ninety-eight years). But according to Bowen, Clinton, Lovell, Hales, 
Cunninghame, and others, we have entered into the seventh Milliad, since they give 
from Creation to the Vulgar Era, respectively, 4120, 4128, 4231, 5411, 5478, etc. Nowif 
we accept of the more extended chronological tables, then the difficulty above suggests 
itself. Strongly inclined to receive the extended tables as the most consistent—without 
indorsing the correctness of any one in particular—we propose the following solution. 
The key is found in our remarks and application of the Seventy Weeks of Daniel (see 
Genl. Index, at the close of the third volume, for ‘‘ Seventy Weeks,” and refer). There 
we show in detail that between the last week and the preceding weeks there is an inter- 
regnum or lengthy interval, of which, not being Jewish time, no account is taken. This 
interregnum embraces a large portion of the time in this dispensation. In illustration 
of our meaning, let us take e.g. Cunninghame’s date, which gives, from Creation to the 
birth of Jesus, 5478 years ; to this we must add as reckoned the time to the destruction 
of Jerusalem and, at least, a portion of the interval—the remainder of the time falling 
exclusively within ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles” is not counted, pertaining to the interreg- 
num. This teaches us (1) that the chronology of the Bible is purposely framed to meet 
the tender of the Kingdom to the Jewish nation, the rejection of the Christ by the 
nation, and the dispersion of the nation ; (2) that in view of this interregnum and the 
related portraiture of prophetical periods, it is utterly impossible for any human being 
—as Jesus Himself said—to declare the exact time of His Coming ; (3) that the immi- 
nency of the Second Advent is shown to be dependent, not upon chronolegical data 


460 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 148. 


(which at best are only approximative), but upon the Divine Purpose (as e.g. pertaining 
to the gathering of the predetermined number of Kings and Priests, etc.) ; (4) that the 
shortening of the time for the elect’s sake may refer to Jewish time as expressed in the 
last week—the predetermined brevity of which is thus exhibited in prophecy ; (5) and 
that the Sabbatism pertaining and covenanted to the Jewish nation relates to prescribed 
Jewish time, and hence will only be reckoned and realized according to the time that 
does not fall under the period of dispersion and rejection, entailed for the fearful sin of 
putting the Messiah, ‘‘ the King of the Jews,’ to death. God thus shows His abhor- 
rence of the crime by even refusing to acknowledge the time of sore punishment. The 
shortening of the days referred to may, for aught we know, extend to Gentile times ; if 
so, it can be easily seen how, in virtue of the fulfilment of time in general, the Sabbatical 
year may be, at God’s pleasure, introduced. His Will in this matter is supreme, and when 
the number of His elect are completed (which is only known to Him), then we may expect 
the immediate measures introductory to the Sabbatism or Rest. The shortening of the 
time, either us to Jewish or Gentile times, is dependent upon the gathering of the pre- 
determined elect to carry out the Theocratic Purpose, and therefore it leaves the exact 
time of the Second Advent purposely indefinite. In view, too, of the whole period of 
Israel’s dispersion being called ‘* a small moment” (Isa. 54: 7), we may well ponder what 
the Spirit means when He speaks of ‘‘ shortening” time, and be, as Jesus advises, in the 
posture of watching servants. 


Prop. 144. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 461 


Proposition 144. This Kingdom embraces “ the times of refresh- 
ing” and “the times of the restitution of all things” men- 
tioned, Acts 3: 19-21. 


Having had occasion several times to refer this passage to the 
Pre-Mill. Advent and the Millennial refreshing that follows, it may 
be advisable to give, more at length, the reasons for such an ap- 
plication. 


Obs. 1. Before entering into a discussion, the reader is exhorted to notice 
that Peter is addressing Jews who were familiar with, and employed, the 
phraseology used. ‘The very phrases derived by the Jews from the typical 
year of Jubilee, from the typical Sabbath, and from the promises of the 
prophets, and applied by them ¢o express the restoration of the Davidic 
throne and Kingdom and the happy times resulting therefrom, Peter takes, 
without explanation, to be fulfilled at the repentance of the nation and at 
the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. This is so evident that a number of 
writers on this ground reject Peter’s statements as too exclusively ‘‘Jew- 
ish.”’? If the present time or dispensation was intended, ¢hen Peter ought, 
as an honest man, to have explained the phrases accordingly.’ If the 
phrases were to be spiritualized, he ought to have stated the fact, and 
assigned the reasons for such a transmutation. Those who differ from us 
should explain, if they can, how Peter could possibly employ the current 
Jewish phraseology in the connection of a future Coming Messiah, know- 
ing how the expressions were applied, wnless he fully indorsed the opinion 
entertained by his hearers. If the Apostle meant something else, then 
they ought also to show how it came to pass that all the churches organized 
by the Apostles still retained a firm and continued belief in the Jewish view 
of ‘‘the times of refreshing’ and ‘the times of restitution,’’ and looked 
for the same in the prayed-for Coming of the Son of man. If the predicted 
refreshing and restitution under the Messiah was, as modern writers tell 
us, to be experienced 17 this dispensation, why is it that the faith and hope 
of the Early Church was so constantly directed to the speedy Second Ad- 
vent? Consistency and the preservation of the integrity of the early faith, 
covenant and prophecy, all require us to receive those expressions as s¢vll 
relating to the future. : 

1 Aside from the uncritical application, the absurdity of Dr. Knapp’s (Christ. Theol., 
p. 349) explaining this passage as solely relating to this dispensation—‘ this happy 
period of the New Testament,’ etc.—is seen at once by considering how those phrases 
were used by the hearers, and that Peter’s language is adapted to confirm their faith in 
its accustomed usage. It is flatly contradicted by the admissions of Knapp in other 
places respecting the Jewish view of restitution. Barnes (Com. loci) is more guarded 
than Knapp, and includes the present dispensation and what will be performed at and 
after the Second Advent in the phraseology, but this embraces too much, and is liable 


to the same objections. The least reflection will show that the sad trials, troubles, per- 
secutions, etc., to which the Christians were then subjected, did not, and could not, in 


462 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 144, 


any sense meet the requirements of the usage of such phrases ; and hence, if Knapp- 


and Barnes, etc., are correct, then an explicit disavowal, in justice to the hearers, ought 
to have been made of the universal belief in them. 


Obs. 2. Notice the meaning of ‘‘ the times of refreshing.’’ Barnes. 


(Com. loct) tells us that ‘‘ refreshing means properly the breathing or re- 
freshment after being heated with labor, running, etc ; hence denotes any 
kind of refreshment, as rest, or deliverance from evils of any kind.” He 
speaks of ‘‘ the common belief of the Jews” concerning it, and adds: 
‘*The idea, however, that the times of the Messiah would be times of rest, 
and ease, and prosperity, was a favorite one among the Jews, and was coun- 
tenanced in the Old Test. Sce Isa. 28 : 12, ‘To whom He said, This is 
the rest wherewith ye may cause the weary to rest ; and this the refresh- 
ing,’ ’”’ ete. Prof. Bush (Anastasis), after giving ‘‘ refreshment, produced 
by cooling after excessive heat’’ (so Vulgate : tempora refrigerti—times of 
refrigeration), including, as some have it, ‘‘ free respiration,’’ and adding 
the idea of ‘‘ comfort, consolation,’? and, as Syriac, ‘‘ times of tran- 
quility,’’ informs us that it means ‘‘ refreshment and invigoration,’’ and 
then adds: ‘‘ It implies a kind of return to the body of its animating 
principle.” ? Bloomfield (Com. loct) says: ‘‘ ‘ Refreshing’ properly de- 
notes a regaining one’s breath after it has been interrupted ; a breathing 
time from some labor, a rest from trouble or deliverance from evil gen- 
erally ; in which sense it occurs in the Sept. and Philo cited by the com- 
mentators.’’ ‘This interpretation accords with that given by a large num- 
ber of Writers, which need not be repeated, seeing that there is no material 
difference existing. The differences of opinion arise from the location of 
the fulfilment of the refreshing. Barnes, however, anxious to apply the 
phrase exclusively to this dispensation, is forced to acknowledge that it 
‘includes the restitution of all things and the return of Christ,’ etc. Bloom- 
field, utterly rejecting its application to this present period, adopts its con- 
nection with the Sec. Advent and makes “‘ the refreshing”’ ‘‘ the same with 
the ‘rest,’ 2 Thess,1:7.’’? Olshausen (Com. loct) contends that ‘‘ the times 
of refreshing’’ and ‘‘ the times of restitution”’ are the same, being identical 
in point of fulfilment. After showing that any other translation is incon- 
sistent with the laws of language, he adds : The Coming of Christ (i.e. his 
parousia) is therefore to be conceived as coincident with the times of 
refreshing, and His sojourn in the heavenly world closes with His return 
to the earth for the completion of His work.’’ ‘‘ The expression occurring 
here, ‘ times of refreshing,’ is easily explained. Life in this sinful world is 
conceived as a time of conflict.and distress, and it is followed by rest 
in the Kingdom of the Messiah. The phrase is only to be found in this 
passage of the New Test., and has but feeble parallels in the Old Test., 
as e.g. 2 Sam. 23:7. Probably it takes its origin from a comparison 
of the Messianic era with a Sabbath day in the higher sense, which, 
it is known, was very current among the Jews.’’? Let the reader pass 
over the predictions of this Kingdom under the Messiah, and see how (Isa. 
35) ‘* waters shall break out in the wilderness and streams in the desert ;° 
how ‘* the parched g ground shall become a pool and the thirsty land springs 
of water,’’ and ‘‘ the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion 
with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads : they shall obtain joy and 
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away ;”’ how (Isa, 41 : 17, 18 ; 
Tsa. 43 : 19, 20, etc.) drink will be given to His thirsty people ; how the 


4 


| 


Prop. 144. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 463 


righteous (Isa. 25) shall enjoy “‘ a feast of fat things full of marrow’’ with 
victory over death, etc. ; how (Rev. 19) they are called to the marriage 
supper of the Lamb, etc. ; and surely the phrase‘ times of refreshing’’ is 
well chosen to designate the period when “‘ the rest’’ is obtained, and God 
wipes away all tears. Consider, also, that this refreshing proceeds ‘‘ from 
the presence (face) of the Lord’’ (which, while it denotes that the Lord is 
the author of it, really with the views of the hearers means more), and to . 
show how this will be done by the Messiah personally, the Apostle proceeds 
to state that this same Jesus, crucified, preached and ascended to heaven. 
God will send, thus meeting the objection of the Jew that might be urged, 
viz., where is the personal Messiah who is to introduce this refreshing ? 
Peter thus transfers the anticipations of the Jews to the time of the Sec. 
Advent. Lechler’s remarks (Lange’s Com. loci) are pertinent : ‘‘ Of that 
time (i.e. refreshment and blessedness) G'od ts the author and source ; it 
commences with the return of Christ, whom heaven receives during the in- . 
terval, but whom God will send personally ; it consists of all that which God 
had hitherto promised through the prophets.’’ (See also Doc. and Eth. Re- 
mark, s. 6.) Prof. EH. W. Hengstenberg (The Jews and Christian Church), 
although having no sympathy with our views, is forced to say that ‘‘ the 
times of refreshing are identical with the regeneration,’’ and ‘‘ that the de- 
tailed description thereof is given in Rev. 21 and 22, 7s as certain as that 
its advent vs set forth as contemporaneous with the re-appearance of Christ.’’ 
This view is correct, and how it harmonizes with ours will be seen under 
following propositions. It is only necessary to add that the varied render- 
ings of “‘when,’’ “* that,’ ‘‘in order that’’ or ‘‘ until,’’? the times of 
refreshing °‘ shall’’ or ‘‘ may’’ come, etc., do not affect the application of 
the passage, since Millenarians from Irenzeus and Tertullian down to Judge 
Jones (Notes) have received one or the other rendering.® The rendering 
itself, whichever is attached, forbids the reception of a then existing pres- 
ent condition of things, and embraces the notion of a future occurrence. 
It is true, as Judge Jones has most ably shown (Notes on Scripture, loct), 
that if the rendering of the English Version is discarded for ‘* that times 
of refreshing may come’’ (which Jones adopts), ¢hen ‘‘ Peter connects the 
national conversion of Israel with the promised times of refreshing,’’ ete. 
His argument is that the Apostle urges the Jews, as a people, to repentance 
and conversion, because the times of refreshing, as the prophets abun- 
dantly testify, are connected with just such a repentance and conversion. 
It is implied that until this is done, such promised times cannot come, see- 
ing that the Kingdom cannot be set up, as predicted, without it. The 
delay in carrying the Gospel to the Gentiles, the priority given to the Jews, 
the sparing of the nation for some time, etc., was to still mercifully tender | 
to them—in view of their being nationally entitled to the blessings—the 
promised times of refreshing on condition of repentance. ‘The continued 
national unbelief and impenitence prevented—as had been already foreseen 
and predicted—God’s gracious purposes, and delayed them until the 
‘‘ times of the Gentiles’? would be fulfilled. It is unnecessary to declare 
that if this is the meaning, how well this meets the conditions given under 
previous propositions. On the other hand, if ‘‘ when’’ is to be retained, 
then the idea of Calvin and others may be the correct one, viz., to refer 
the times of refreshing and the peace, etc.,-to the Advent of Christ—or 
Jones’s view can be received, implying that then the sins of the nation 
(under which it is even yet suffering) shall be entirely removed when, owing 


464 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 144. 


to its repentance, etc., these times will be introduced. As stated, no mat- 
ter what rendering is adopted, the allusion is directly to the future as 
related to the Advent of Jesus.* 


1 The careful student, only too glad to receive such valuable hints from studious op- 
ponents, will here see a vein opening worthy of consideration. For Bush goes on to say 
that the Septuagint usage intimates ‘‘ freshened animation,’’ and ‘‘ This idea is closely 
related to the resurrection.”” “Some commentators have been led to compare this phrase 
with the Syriac and Chaldaic formula ‘ day of consolation’ for ‘ day of resurrection,’ Hos. 
6 : 2, ‘ He will revive (vivify) us in the days of consolation, which shall come in the days of 
the vivification of the dead.’ He goes on to show that as refreshment and consolation 
were considered analogous, and as consolation and resurrection were anciently kindred 
conceptions, so refreshment or reanimation is linked with the notion of a resurrection. For 
Heinsius remarks (Ever. S. 8., p. 272), that ‘‘ the Rabbinical writers call the future life 
a refreshing—respiration in the world to come, as when they say one hour of refresh- 
ment in the world to come is better than a whole life in the present world.” Now, if the 
word ‘“‘ consolation” was used by the Jews in reference to the resurrection (giving com- 
fort, etc.), notice how it serves to explain some passages. Thus, e.g. Luke 2 : 25, etc., 
Simeon ‘‘ waited for the consolation of Israel.’’ May not this refer to the resurrection, 
seeing also Simeon’s willingness, instead of desiring to remain and witness Christ’s life, 
etc., to die, the Spirit evidently also revealing to him that the consolation experienced was 
future —seeing that he makes a reference to Dan, 12 : 2 in “‘ the rising again of many in 
Israel.” One thing is certain, that many believers have associated this phrase and that 
of restitution to the resurrection—as including it—and some have translated it to bring 
out this idea (as e.g. Sirr, First Res., p. 144) ‘* Times of reanimation.’’ Hence, instead of 
this ‘‘ refreshing’ being (as Schulz) ‘‘ the time of the dead ”’ or ‘‘ the future rest of the 
dead in the Lord ” (i.e. in the intermediate state), it has reference to their resurrection. 

2 He regards the views which apply this promise to the present as unworthy of serious 
refutation. We may, therefore, pass by the ideas which few follow, that this prediction 
applies to release from the ceremonial law and conversion of the Jews (as Kraft) ; or to 
the delay of divine judgment upon the Jews introducing a time of long-suffering (as 
Barkey) ; or to freedom from Jewish persecution and calamities (as Grotius); or to a 


higher stage of religion (as Déderlein) ; or to the present dispensation (as Eckerman) ;_ 


seeing that all such ignore the Jewish and early Church conceptions, the return of Jesus, 
and the general analogy of Scripture. 

3 If only the Jewish usage and general tenor of the Word are observed, good sense can 
be made with either of them. The simple fact is, that according to these the time alluded 
to is not merely one when sin is obliterated (as the force of ‘‘ blotted out’’ conveys—see 
Bloomfield, loci), but the results of sin, including death, shall be removed The Jewish 
hearer thus understood Peter as embracing that era, the ultimate hope of the nation, and 
this view was uninterruptedly transmitted in the early Church. Hence whatever prelim- 
inary blessings were enjoyed, whatever earnests of the future were given, whatever 
refreshings of grace were bestowed, these were regarded as merely preparative to the prom- 
ised future refreshing and restitution. Rev. Carleton, in the Theol. and Lit. Journal, Ap., 
1861, has an able article on the question whether the ‘‘ when’’ of our version should be 
retained, or ‘‘ so that’? be substituted, and at length defends the former, giving strong 
reasons and illustrations in its support. On the other hand, Dr. Alexander renders it 
** so that, in order that,” saying that the English version is a ‘‘ violation of a uniform and 
constant usage.” Dr. R. W. Clark, in his Hope of Christ’s Coming, prefers, with Lange, 
Alford, Alexander and others, ‘‘ in order that” or “‘ so that,” and adds: “ It can have no 
other meaning,’’ repeating Alford’s view: ‘ it can have but one sense—in order that.”’ 
While either interpretation makes good sense, we are at present inclined to the latter, for 
this reason : such a rendering is in forcible unity with the simple revealed fact (see e.g. 
Props. 65, 86, 124, etc.) that the Millennial period, “ the times of refreshing and restitu- 
tion,” can never be introduced until a certain predetermined number of persons have 
been gathered out. Those ‘‘ times’? then, as here enforced, are dependent for their 
arrival upon a previous repentance and faith of a certain determined number, and “ in 
order that’’ or ‘‘ so that’’ more distinctly embraces this idea than ‘‘ when.” The reader 
must determine for himself the rendering, as both are sustained by good authorities. 

4 Jones’s Notes are interesting on this point, for if his view isthe correct one, it mate- 
rially aids to explain why during this period (i.e. before the temple was destroyed and 
the people scattered) the apostles could address the Jews as a nation, how they could 
consistently observe Levitical rites and permit their Jewish converts to do the same. 


——_ + 


Prop. 144. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 465 


The destruction of the temple and dispersion of the nation forms a new epoch, showing 
that Divine forbearance in allowing the nation, as such, further space for national repent- 
ance was past, until a certain time had elapsed, etc. To the critical student it may be 
well to say that Jones gives a most satisfactory answer to Barnes’s inquiry (Com. loci), viz., 
“ that it is not easy to see how their repenting, etc., should be the means of introducing 
the times of refreshing.” It is very easy to see it, provided the prophecies which condition 
the setting up of the Kingdom on such repentance, etc., are noticed (Prop. 113). Barnes, 
in addition to the authorities given by Jones (as Lightfoot, Doddridge, Scott, Clarke, 
and Alexander) for “ that,’’ gives Kuinoel, Grotius, Syriac Version, etc., as favoring the 
same. On the contrary, Calvin, Beza, Latin Vulgate, Schleusner, etc., translate ‘‘ when’’ 
and saying : ‘‘ meaning that they might find peace in the day when Christ should return 
to judgment, which return would be to them a day of rest,” ete. Again, many writers 
suggest that the ‘‘ blotting out of sins’’ has reference also to the future, that there is a 
difference between forgiveness of sins and blotting them out, the former being prelimi- 
nary to the latter, and that the latter is only experienced when all the effects or results 
of sin, as death, corruption, etc., are removed, or as others have it, when the nation—if 
it be applied to them—is reinstated in its forfeited position, etc. See a writer, J. G. W., 
in Proph. Times, April, 1874, and also art. 1, for May, 1869. The sins of the nation are 
_ specifically mentioned by the prophets as not only forgiven but entirely removed, when 
this Kingdom is established, so that it is evidenced by their ever-enduring faithfulness 
and the attainment of the highest prosperity, honor, etc. This is merely suggestive. 


Obs. 3. In reference to the meaning and application of “‘ the times of 
restitution,’’ we shall again chiefly rely upon the comments of opponents 
and others. Barnes (Com. loci) says: ‘‘ It means properly ¢o restore a 
thing to its former sitwation,’’ and while inclined by this theory to apply it 
in a measure to the present dispensation, yet he admits that it includes the 
return of Jesus and the work that He may then perform. Bloomfield : it 
‘* properly signifies a restoration of anything to some former state,’’ and he 
unhesitatingly applies its fulfilment at the Sec. Advent. Prof. Bush 
(Anastasis) says the word “‘ restitution’’ means a restoration to a former 
condition, restitution to original state, and quotes philologists who give 
such a rendering, and refers it ¢o the future. Scott (Com.) remarks that it 
denotes the restoration of a thing to the state from which it had fallen, and 
that 16 must include the Sec. Coming and the restoration of Israel. Dr. 
Bell (The Times of Restitution) says: ‘*‘ The word translated ‘ restitution ’ 
might be rendered ‘ restoration.’ Calvin has it, ‘ The times of restoring.’ ”’ 
The remark of Calvin on the passage is worthy of our notice. He says: 
“If at this time we see many things confused in the world, let this hope 
refresh us, that Christ shall once come, that He may restore all things.’’ 
_ This was the view of the Reformers generally, several of whom we have 
already quoted in another connection. Prof. Hackett (Com. ‘on Acts) 
makes it: ‘‘The times of the restoration of all things i.e. to a state of 
- primeval order, purity, and happiness, such as will exist for those who have 
part in the Kingdom of Christ at His Sec. Coming.’? Olshausen (Com.), 
of course, makes Jesus the Restorer at His Coming again, and restitution to 
he *‘ that of bringing back to its originally pure condition,’’ etc. Lange 
(Com. loci) says: ‘‘ It (‘ restitution ’) denotes a restoration or return of an 
_ earlier condition,’’ and declares : ‘‘ it commences with the return of Christ,” 
ete. So Lechler and Gerok in Doc. and Eth. remarks, s. 6, confirm this 
usus loquendi, refer its fulfilment to the Advent, and show that, according 
to the prophets, it is even more than restorative, transcending all that ever 
existed. ‘The student, who has investigated this subject, well knows that 
a multitude of eminent theologians and writers can be adduced, who pre- 
sent similar definitions, and apply its fulfilment to the Sec. Advent. Indeed, 


466 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 144, 


this is the almost universal interpretation—both ancient and modern. * 
But what is to be restored, brought back to its former condition with in- 
creased glory? Gerok (Lange’s Com. loci, Doc. 6) quotes Baumgarten (Die 
A postelgeschichte, 1, p. 80) as saying: ‘‘ Nothing else than the Kingdom T 
Israel, the whole power and glory of the Israelitic Kingdom.’’? While Gerok 
justly observes that it includes more, as the prophets predicted, yet Baum- 
garten is right in laying stress on the restoration of the Theocratie King- 
dom; for that is the burden of prophecy, that is the main, leading object to 
which the eye of faith and hope is directed. The idea of restoring this 
Kingdom is stated in Acts 1: 6, and is plainly repeated in Acts 15 : 16, 
the same idea running through—from the time of its overthrow and even 
before—the Old and New Tests. Peter, well knowing how his hearers un- 
derstood this phrase as directly including the rebuilding of the fallen throne 
and Kingdom of David, instead of giving it another meaning, tells those 
hearers that it is postponed until the Sec. Advent of Jesus, thus fully cor- 
roborating the statements of the Master concerning the postponement. 
But, as stated, it embraces more than this, for the persons addressed by 
Peter—owing to the portraiture given of the things pertaining to, and 
accompanying, this Kingdom—were accustomed to ally with it the resurrec- 
tion and the renewal of nature itself, and, as is well known, this uninter- 
ruptedly continued to be the belief of the Christian Church for several 
centuries until the Origenistic interpretation prevailed. The restitution, 
in the very nature of the case, includes all things specified by the cove- 
nants, both the Abrahamic and Davidic, and the promises based upon the 
same, extending not only to the Jewish nation and to the Gentile nations, 
but even to creation. For the Kingdom in which this restitution is to be 
experienced, is the bringing forth the Divine Purpose in a manifested form 
as the consummating of the Infinite Plan, which has for its object the 
restoring of man and the world ¢o their originally destined place. 'The 
restoration of the Theocracy—thus bringing God again to earth as the 
Ruler in the Person of Jesus Christ—makes the restoration of all other 
things not only possible but a requisite measure to preserve the dignity 
and glory of the then prevailing Theocratic relationship. ‘‘The days of 
heaven,’’ Ps. 89 : 29, to which even Moses alluded (Deut. 11 : 21 ‘‘ as the 
days of heaven upon earth’’), will through the throne then established and 
by the power of the Mighty King (The Restorer) produce that ample deliv- 
erance from all evil and that perfected salvation of which the prophets so 
sweetly predict—all resting upon and resulting from the displayed authority 
and rule of the God-man—the Theocratic King. It is impracticable for a 
Theocracy-—in the pure and high form covenanted—to exist side by side 
with a prevailing curse, and hence its very establishment is a triumph (in 


the resurrected and glorified ones, etc.) over the curse, insuring its repeal — 


and ultimate destruction. In brief, this, this will form the day of com- 
pleted Redemption.* 


! Let another be given: Luther (quoted by Dr. Seiss, Zast Times, Third Dis.), ‘* All 
things are now disordered and decayed ; whence Peter says that the heavens must 
receive Christ until the time when all things shall be restored again to what they were in 
Paradise ; thus agreeing with Paul, that the whole creatureship has been made subject to 
vanity, and that it is to be hoped that not man only but the earth and heaven shall again 
be brought back to their Edenic state.’’ The few exceptions gain nothing by departing 
from the generally received usus loquendi. Thus e.g. some (art. Mill. in Ency. Brit.) make 
restitution ‘‘ accomplishment,” but Lord (Lit. and Theol. Journal for April, 1856, p. 633) 
shows that even with such a rendering it sustains our position. So the leaning of Barnes 


% 


ao ee ees 


P RORY 144. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 467 


to the idea of ‘‘ consummation, completion, or filling up’’ giving the Syriac, ‘‘ until the 
complement, or filling up, or fulness (so Bush) of the time of all things,” and the Arabic, 
‘‘ until the times which shall establish the perfection or completion of all the predictions 
of the prophets,’’ etc.; or as Bush, ‘‘ until the times in which all things shall be per- 
fected,” etc. For Millenarians, entertaining the common view, have almost substan- 
tially, as also corresponding with their doctrine, given the same phraseology, as e.g. 
Trenzus, “ until the times of the disposition of all things’’ (so Bush), and Tertullian : 
“* Until the times of the exhibition of all the things,’’ etc. (so Bush). The simple idea in 
the versions and the quotations given is that all the things predicted by the prophets shall 
be realized, experienced, when this time of the Sec. Advent has arrived, or the allotted 
period of fulfilment hascome. The reference in all is still to the future and associated with 
the Advent, so that, as Archb. Trench (quoted by E. M., Proph. Times, Dec., 1865) does, 
*‘the restitution of Acts 3 : 21, ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth” of Rev. 21 : 1, and the 
day of which Paul speaks, Rom. 8 : 21-23, must all be located within the same period. 
Alford (Com. loci) says of the effort to limit ‘‘ restitution” by the substitution of ‘* fulfil- 
ment,’’ ‘‘ is against all precedent,” and Brookes (Maranatha) observes that ‘‘ it proves too 
much,” because its advocates admit that Jesus will come again before “ all things” (as 
e.g. resurrection, judgment, re-creation) are fulfilled. 
_ 2 For opinions of the Jews, see Propositions on Resurrection, World to Come, ete. 
We append a few Jewish interpretations given by Prof. Bush (Anastasis, p. 360). R. 
Moses Nachmonides in Deut. 45, says : ‘‘ Man shall be restored in that time, namely, in 
the days of the Messiah, to that state in which he was before the first man sinned.”’ 
R. Becai, in Schilcan Orba, fol. 9, col. 4: ‘‘ In that time (i.e. of the Messiah) the whole 
work of creation shall be changed for the better, and shall return into its perfect and 
pure state, as it was in the time of the first man, before he had sinned.’’ RK. Berakyah 
in name of R. Samuel, Bereshith Rabba, fol. 11, col. 3, said: ‘* Although things were 
created perfect, yet when the first man sinned they were corrupted and will not again 
return to their congruous state till Pherez (i.e. the Messiah) comes,’’ etc. As to the con- 
tinued view, this is seen in the apostolic and Christian Fathers, in the Sibylline books, in 
Eccl. Histories, Dogmatics, etc., and in numerous commentaries. 


Obs. 4. While the view of restitution, embracing the restoration of the 
Theocracy and the return to the condition of things before the fall of 
Adam, is consoling and grand, yet even this would limit its meaning, for a 
more sublime and scriptural aspect of it is, that, while including those 
mentioned, it is a restoration to that very condition which Adam and his 
descendants would have attained to had they not fallen. Adam himself is 
restored in that immortal condition which he forfeited by sin (i.e. to that 
which he had not yet attained), and in the entire restitution God indicates, 
not merely the bestowment of blessings previously enjoyed, but that of 
others superadded to qualify those participating init for the exercise of that 
government which the number, state, etc., of Adam’s descendants and 
God’s purpose in creation makes important or even necessary. Hence in 
some of its aspects, transcending all experience and knowledge, it may be 
beyond our comprehension ; at least, the Bible intimates in a number of 
places that it is scarcely possible for us now, situated as we are, to form 
adequate conceptions of its extent and glory. Hence, also, as we shall show 
in a following proposition, it extends to the restoration of the race (not of 
the wicked) as a race to its lost, forfeited condition. 


The idea of Origen and others, recently revived by Barbour, that this ‘‘ restitution” 
embraces at least a partial, if not complete, restoration of the wicked to God’s favor, etc., 
is based solely upon inference. Unable to receive, on the one hand, the ultra views of 
the soul, sheol and hades popularly entertained, and, on the other hand, the gross mate- 

-rialistic views of the same, yet we cannot see that, scripturally, the idea of ‘‘ restitution” 
can be pressed to include the wicked of past generations. The teaching of the Bible 
seems to be that no hope exists for those who reject the truth, that they shall be beaten 
with few or many stripes proportionate to their guilt, that they shall not inherit, etc., 
and that they shall ultimately perish, being utterly destroyed from off the face of the 


468 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 144. 


earth. Whatever difficulties may exist in relation to the ultimate destiny of the wicked, 
we need not dogmatize on the subject, or advocate any special view, seeing that such a 
destiny does not affect the establishment of the Theocracy. But, nevertheless, as that 
destiny is connected with eschatology, it may be said that we cannot possibly receive 
the Universalist and Restorationist application of this ‘‘ restitution.’’ Barbour, Russell, 
Paton (in Herald of Kingdom, Three Worlds etc.) make it to include a restoration of all 
nations (the dead) back to ‘‘ their former state” (i.e. a fleshly one), and placing them 
under a second probation, with the doom of ‘‘ the second death’’ (from which there is 
no release) before them if unbelieving, ete. This is based, specially, on the old favorite 
theory that Christ died for every man, and the word ‘‘ all’’ is made conspicuous after 
the Universalist mode, and the inference is drawn that ‘‘ all’’ must be saved, or have a 
chance of salvation. Now, we do not propose to say what God may do in reference to 
heathen, etc., in the future, but we do say that these writers break the force of *‘ all”’ 
and their salvability, because Christ died for them, in view of the fact that they them- 
selves allow that some shall die the second death, thus showing that some, notwithstand- 
ing the provision made, are not saved. Now, to those who have had access to the truth 
and obstinately reject it, are incorrigibly wicked, no salvation in the future is tendered. 
Let the reader observe that “ the spared nations” (Isa. 66) are nations then living, who, in 
the judgments poured out upon Antichrist and his armies, are spared, and that the Mill. 
age is composed of such existing nations and the glorified saints ruling over them. For, 
instead of salvation being predicated of the dead who are wicked, we are expressly in- 
formed that they “ live not again until the thousand years are ended,” and then when raised 
up atits close, instead of a state of probation, we find a judgment which consigns them to 
the second death. Jukes (Z’he Second Death and the Restitution of allthings) even makes the 
second death the means of life and glory, and thus reverses the Bible order. The order, 
the nations spared, the reign, etc., will be developed under various propositions follow- 
ing, to which the reader is referred for the reasons determining our position. Whatever 
of truth may be in Tholuck’s idea of a future probation for heathen, etc., one thing is 
self-evident, viz., that all such views, dogmatically expressed, are derived from mere in- 
ferences, for no one can find a single passage of Scripture that asserts a resurrection of 
the heathen dead or wicked dead (comp. Prop. 127) at the beginning of or during the 
Millennium. Theories of reconciliation comprised in Universalism, Restorationism, 
Destructionism, Partial Restorationism, etc., do not affect our argument, which looks 
forward to and advocates the establishment of the covenanted Theocratic Kingdom. 
When this is done we may safely anticipate clearer light and a full vindication of God’s 
justice and ways. 


Obs. 5. Again, let it be distinctly understood that Jesus *‘ the Christ’’ is 
the Refresher or Reanimator, the Restorer, the Mighty Deliverer. This 
power and honor He has delegated to no one in this future dispensation 
(whatever the glorified saints may, associated with Him, perform through 
Him in the world to come), and He justly claims that it belongs to Him- 
self exclusively, as e.g. ‘‘Behold, I make all things new,’’ etc. Before 
restitution comes, Jesus must first come; this is the divine order plainly 
laid down. In this dispensation, whatever the love and grace of God in the 
hearts of believers, etc., it cannot remove the curse, renovate the earth, or 
restore a single forfeited blessing ; it cannot save from pain, sickness, or 
death, from trial, sorrow, or bereavements ; it cannot deliver self or our 
neighbor from the troubles incident and allotted to the present life. The 
caution thus briefly expressed is the more needed, since believers in the 
Word too much overlook it. 


Thus e.g. those efforts at colonizing Palestine with the idea of beginning ‘‘ the Resti- — 


tution’? must prove failures. As the American Colony in Palestine, of which (1866) Rey. 
Adams (Israelite Indeed, May, 1867) writes : ‘‘ Palestine will soon shake herself from the 
dust of ages and arise in glory and grandeur, as in the days of old. The great Restitu- 
tion, as foretold by the Prophets and Apostles, has now commenced,” etc. Such language 
is a prostitution of the Word, and an attributing to man what only belongs to Christ (see 
Prop. 120). Such caricaturing of the work ascribed to Jesus must be displeasing to God, 
who honors the Son, etc. On the other hand, the reader need scarcely be reminded how 


pac. = 


Prop. 144. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 469 


this doctrine disposes of the opposite extreme arising from Fatalism, Necessism, or 
Pessimism, which hopes for no change. The Divine Plan, attested by historical provi- 
sions, which are existing facts, effectually meets, consistent with the highest reason, the 
evils existing, and shows how they can be removed, etc. For a singular notion of a 
Restorer, prevailing for centuries, see Von Déllinger’s Essay, pp. 360-62, 399 and 410, 
Proph, Mid. Ages. 


Obs. 6. As various writers (e.g. Lord, Judge Jones, Brookes, Bicker- 
steth, etc.) have intimated, these ‘‘ times’? may include successive eras, 
economies, ascending stages of glory. Beginning with the Millennial 
period, restitution manifests itself magnificently in the Theocratic order, 
in the persons of the saints, in the dispensing of blessings, etc.; and by a 
comparison of Scripture there is reason to believe that the work is—so 
far as the whole earth and the nations are concerned—progressive, for at 
the close of the distinctive thousand years additional facts, indicative of 
the removal of the last vestiges of evil, are mentioned. While the Millen- 
nium is thus, in a manner, initiatory to succeeding dispensations or ages, 
yet, as we shall show hereafter (Prop. 159), the restitution thus affected is 
not displaced by another one, for it is always spoken of as eternal (see Prop. 
159). Whatever of an additional nature is introduced, forms only an 
increased glory (resulting from continued Redemption), added to that which 
already exists. As the design of this work is only to take the reader to the 
close of the Millennial era and the entrance into the eternal ages (where 
the Bible takes and leaves us), when already refreshing and restitution 
have been experienced and tested in all their preciousness, it is proper for 
us to avoid giving, what can only be conjecture, any decisive opinion con- 
cerning the phraseology which seems to involve a succession of eras in the 
continuation of a restored world. 


We only remind the reader that this Biblical conception of glorious restitution, sets 
aside the Optimistic theory of Leibnitz, that this world, as it now exists, is the best, and 
that evil is a necessary (being mere imperfection or negation) condition of the highest 
good, seeing that it once was better and is again restored to a better one, evil being 
removed as unnecessary and antagonistic to the highest good. On the other hand, it 
shows that the Pessimist theory of Shopenhauer—that the existing world (because of 
preponderating evil) is worse than no world at all, and that (as Von Hartman added) it is 
still the best possible (because every possible world is necessarily a bad one)—is refuted 
by the use made of evil and its ultimate removal (comp. The Pessimist’s View of Life, Lit- 
tell’s Liv. Age, May 6th, 1876). Williamson (Rud. Theol. and Moral Science, p. 204) argues 
in detail that evil is a necessary result of creation, and adds: “ We cannot conceive it 
possible that there should be a material universe, as limited in space and conditioned in 
time, and filled with all forms of life, in all grades and degrees, without involving the 
necessity of the relations of evil that emerge from its processes and movements.” Now 
such a restitution (with which compare the deliverance of creation in next proposition), 
to which the Bible leads us, indicates that this plea of necessity is a grave mistake. We 
may add, in this connection, that this restitution is indirectly corroborative of the view 
held (Delitzsch, Kurtz, Lewis, etc.) that creation was produced in a regular order of suc- 
cession of ages, following one another. The six days of Creation and the past history of 
the world (in its dispensations) evidences such a succession of ages, and when we enter 
the Millennial age we find other ages still following, so that the end, as predicted, is in 
harmony with the past, evidencing a continued advancement and growth. (Comp. 
Lewis’s Sia Days of Creation, which has some good remarks concerning the restitution and 
ultimate deliverance of creation.) 


% 
Obs. 7. So interesting is this subject, that the utterances of others 
may prove acceptable, and several more illustrations are appended. The 
Art. ‘‘ Restitution’”’ in M’Clintock & Strong’s Cyclop., after making ‘* res- 


A470 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 144, 


titution’’ to mean ‘‘ emendation, restoration to a pristine condition, change 
to a better state,’’ says: ‘‘ By the expression ‘until the times of the 
apocatastasis of all things which God has spoken’ etc., Peter means the 
time when all affairs shall be consummated, all the prophetical announce- 
ments shall be accomplished, including the inauguration of the Kingdom 
of the Messiah and its attendant events, the full extension of the Gospel, — 
the resurrection, judgment, etc., in short, the end of the world.’? The 
reader will observe that the writer—taking the definite Jewish and early 
Christian view, as well as the analogy of the Scriptures—crowds entirely — 
too much into his definition. Pressense (Zhe Harly Days of Christ, p. 48), 
speaking of ‘‘ the first Christians,’’ says: ‘‘ They believed in an immediate 
return of Jesus Christ ‘¢o restore all things.’ 'They supposed that the 
end of the world was at hand, and that the last days foretold by Joel had 
begun to dawn, Acts2:17 and 3:19, 20. Thus they awaited those days 
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord which were to inaugurate the — 
Second Coming of Christ.’’ Pressense is incorrect when he says ‘‘ the end 
of the world,’’ for they located this refreshing and restitution in this world 
after the Advent, and hence only held to “‘ the end of the age or dispensa- 
tion.”’ Dr. Schaff (His., Apos. Ch., p. 631), in reference to Acts 3 :19- 
21, correctly remarks : ‘‘ He (Peter) points to a still future time of refresh- 
ing, a restoration of the physical and moral world to the state of perfection, 
to be accomplished at the visible return of Christ, who now fills heaven—a 
time when all the predictions of the holy prophets of God shall be com- 
pletely realized.”’ Alford (Com. loci) refers both the refreshing and — 
restitution to the Second Advent, and says of the former, ‘‘ The times of 
refreshment (is) the Great Season of Joy and Rest, which, it was under- 
stood, the Coming of the Messiah in His Glory was to bring with it,’? and — 
of the latter, ‘‘a glorious and Complete Restoration, especially of ‘the 
Kingdom to Israel,’ Acts 1:6.’ This introduction of the Kingdom brings 
out the distinctive meaning always attached to it by the Jews, disciples, 
and early believers. Fairbairn (7ypol., vol. 1, p. 314) remarks on Acts 
8:21, that ‘‘the Apostle Peter represents the time of Christ’s Sec. 7 
Coming as ‘ the time of the restoration of all things,’ that is, when every- 
thing should be restored to its pristine condition—the same condition In 
kind, all pure and good, glorious and blessed, but higher in degree, as itis 
the design of Redemption to ennoble whatsoever it touches.’”’? It is a pity 
that he could not apply this, then, to the restoration promised of the The-— 


ocratic-Davidic Kingdom as seen e.g. Acts 15:16. The Comprehensive — 


Com., so largely addicted to spiritualizing, makes the following comment : 


‘‘ That times of refreshing will come from the presence of the Lord, y. 19, 


and that they will be times of the restitution of all things, v. 21. There is — 
a future state, another life after this: those times will come from the — 
presence of the Lord, from His glorious appearance at that day, His Coming 
at the end of time.’ This we may receive, excepting the Popish idea of — 
time ending, seeing that these ¢imes are to be realized in ‘‘ the day (or — 


time) of the Lord Jesus.’? This Com. in a foot-note correctly associates 


these times with the restoration of the Jews, just as Meyer (Com. loci), — 
Baumgarten (Apos. His.), Da Costa (Israel and the Gentiles), and many 

othefS. Indeed, they are inseparable ; and to the critical student it may 
be observed that these words were exclusively addressed to Jews, some time 
before the call of the Gentiles, and therefore must have been based on the 
prophecies relating to that nation. Dr. Brown (Com. loci) comments: 


Prop. 144. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 471 


‘* When the times of refreshing shall come—rather ‘ in order that the times 
of refreshing may come ;’ that long period of repose, prosperity, and joy, 
which all the prophets hold forth to the distracted Church and this miser- 
able world, as eventually to come, and which is here, as in all the prophcts, 
made to turn upon the national conversion of Israel.’’? ‘* Restitution of all 
things—comprehending, probably, the rectification of all the disorders of 
the fall.’ This comment, if logically applied, is an ample reply to much 
of his reasoning against us in his polemic work Christ’s Sec. Coming ; and 
especially does 1t contradict that portion of it which leaves out or denies 
the restoration (as advocated by us) of important blessings forfeited by 
the fall, and giving us, in place, an imperfect Redeemer and Redemption. 
M’Clintock & Strong’s Cyclop., Art. ‘‘ Restitution,’’ quotes from Kuindél 
Com. loct as follows: ‘‘ Morus and Rosenmiller make ‘ times of refresh- 
ing’ to mean ‘ happy times, not merely the day of the resurrection of the 


- dead, but also spiritual benefits of every kind which Christians enjoy in 


this and the future life (Morus : the Messianic times), and refer the ‘ times 
of restitution’ (full and perfect fulfilment of prophecy) to the consumma- 
tion of that auspicious period when all enemies shall be subdued (1 Cor. 
15 : 25 sq.; Heb. 10: 12,15; Comp. Ps. 101 : 1) and every influence oppos- 
ing true religion removed.’’ ‘‘ De Dieu, Limbach, Wolf, and others, un- 
derstand by the times of ‘refreshing’ and ‘ restitution ’ (i.e. the pre- 
dicted period when the due position will be assigned each one) the days of 
the last judgment, the times of affliction to the impious and contumacious, 
but of relief, quiet, and safety to the saints, In support of this view they 
adduce the frequent arguments of the sacred writers to induce Christians 
to diligence and hope drawn from the prospect of the last day (Acts 17 : 
30, sq. ; 2 Pet. 3:7; 2 Thess. 1:7 and 2:16),‘and the fact that Jewish 
writers were accustomed so to speak of it (Pirke Aboth. 4:17).’’ It may 
be said that if the scriptural idea of judgment is received, then such 
declarations may be accepted, excepting the reference to this life, concern- 
ing which Olshausen aptly (Com. loci) remarks: ‘‘ The grammatical con- 
nection admits only the first view, which regards the two expressions (viz., 
times of refreshing and times of restitution) as identical, and as not refer- 
ring to the present time.’’ Dr. Craven (Lange’s Com. Rev., p. 339) gives 
an interesting note on this passage, well worthy of notice. He refers to the 
plural ‘‘ times”’ as indicative of lengthened period (to which we also attach 
the idea of successive stages or periods), and fully advocates our position. 
We give this extract : ‘‘ The following seem to be the elements of the resti- 
tution predicted in the foregoing Scriptures: 1. A restoration of the hearts 
of the fathers to the children, Mal. 4:6. 2. The restoration of the 
rejected seed of Jacob to holiness and the subsequent favor of God, Isa. 1: 
25; Jer. 24:7. 38. The restoration of Israel to their own Jand, passim. 
4, The establishment of Israel not again to be dispersed, Jer. 24:6, 7. 5. 
The establishment of the Kingdom of righteousness as a visible Kingdom, 
in power and great glory, with its seat at Jerusalem, Isa. 1 : 25, 26 (2: 2, 
3); 58 :12-143 Jer. 23 :5-8; 23: 7 sqq. 6. The gathering of all nations 
as tributary to Israel or the Church. 7%. The Palingenesia, Isa. 11; 65: 
17 sqq.”’ \ 


Compare with those given the following, who favor our position. Nast (Com., Matt. 
24 :29-36), who makes the restitution future,.and the predictions of Joel (inchoately 
fulfilled) to be then realized. Gloag (Com. on Acts), Doddridge (Com. Acts), John Bunyan 
(Confession of Faith, in Works, vol. 2, p. 206), Martensen (Ch. Dog., s. 289), Gill (Com. 


472 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 1449 


loci), Steir (Words of Jesus), Greswell (Exp. of Parables), Jones (Notes), Keach (Exp. of 
Parables), Cocceius (Op. Omnia), Benson (Com. loci), Coke (Com. loci), Delitzsch (On Gene-— 
sis), Demarest (Exp. of Peter), Sir Isaac Newton (Proph. of Dan. and Apoc.), Daubuz (Com. on 
Rev.), Koppius (Com. Thess.), Piscator (Com. Old and New Tests.), Ebrard (On Rev.), Liseo 
(The New Test.), Haldane (On Rom.), Brightman (Exp. Dan.), Goodwin (Exp. Rev.), as 
well as Auberlen, Elliott, Bellett, Lord, Seiss, Cumming, Woodhouse, Kelly, Pridham, 
McIntosh, Snel], and many others, either on the passage or in their expositions of Daniel 
or Revelation, may be consulted with profit and interest. Hackett (Com. loci), who 
refers this fulfilment to the Sec. Advent, and declares the passage ‘‘ demands this inter- 
pretation,” presents one of the most forcible and interesting statements of the early 
Church view, which will repay perusa]. When men speak of introducing these times we 
may well quote John Knox (Treat. on Fasting) : ‘‘ What were this else but to reform the 
face of the whole earth, which never was, nor yet shall be, till that righteous King and 
Judge appear for the restoration of all things.’’ We say, in conclusion, that so long as we 
live in ‘*‘ the times of the Gentiles” (which now exist, and will continue to exist so long 
as Jerusalem is trodden down by the Gentiles), these glorious and predicted ‘‘ times”’ 
are not to be realized. This relationship will be fully enforced under following proposi- 
tions. (Comp. Prop. 70, Obs. 6, for the concessions of Pressense, Schmid, and Fairbairn 
quoted.) 


Prop. 145. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 473 


Proposition 145. Zhis Kingdom includes “ the regeneration” of 
Matt. 19 : 28. 


This follows from previous Propositions, especially the one 
relating to the resurrection (which was shown, as in Christ?s own 
person, to be expressed by a renewed or new birth or regeneration 
through the power of the Spirit),* that this Kingdom can only be 
established, as promised, ‘** in the regeneration.’’ For, its rulers 
are immortal and reign ever more. Embracing a most precious 
promise, it is worthy of a more extended notice, making it con- 
firmatory of our position. 


1 It is in view of this fact that the punctuation of the passage does not affect its appli- 
cation to our doctrinal position. Favoring that which unites the regeneration (resurrec- 
tion) with the Coming and enthronement of the Son of man, yet if it be insisted that it 
must be connected with the preceding clause, thus reading : ‘‘ Ye which have followed 
me in the regeneration,” this, too, can be accepted. The objection urged by Barnes 
(Com. loci) to such a punctuation is not valid on the ground assumed, viz., ‘‘ Christ was 
not born again, and in no proper sense could it be said that they had followed Him in the 
new birth.’’ True in the sense (moral regeneration) Barnes really intends, but his lan- 
guage is too sweeping, since it is declared that Jesus was born from among the dead, and 
that all His followers, in the resurrection-regeneration morning, shall experience the 
power of the same birth, through the same Spirit, etc. Therefore we do not limit the 
passage, not knowing positively which meaning the Spirit intended, for both are proper 
and available. 


Obs. 1. Again, to avoid the charge of forcing the application of the pas- 
sage, the comments of opposers and friends will be both given. Barnes 
(Com. loct) says: ‘‘ It refers to that great revolution, that restoration of 
order in the Universe, that universal new birth when the dead shall rise,”’ 
etc., and reads the passage: ‘‘ Ye which have followed me, shall, as a 
reward in the great day of the resurrection of the dead and of forming the 
new and eternal order of things—the day of gudgment, the regeneration—be 
signally honored and blessed.”” We unites the regeneration with the Sec. 
Advent. Bloomfield (Com. loci) remarks: ‘‘I cannot hesitate to adopt, 
in preference to all others, the sense assigned to the passage by the ancient 
expositors in general (and of the modern ones by Kuinoel and Fritzsche), 
confirmed by the Syriac,’ Persic, Arabic, Aithiopic, and Italic versions ; 
understanding ‘ regeneration’ of the resurrection to judgment and a new 
state of existence.’’ He gives this, as required by the context, viz., the 
revelation of Christ on the throne of His glory (comp. Matt. 25 : 31), and 
affirms that the strongest proof of its relationship to the future is found in 
the fact that those who differ in its application ‘‘ are compelled to engraft 
this,’’ and adds : ‘‘ Nay, even Campbell grants that ‘ the principal completion 
of the promise will be at the general resurrection.’ ’’ Dr. Wordsworth (Gr. 
Test. loc’) gives: ‘‘ In the new birth of the saints at the resurrection, in the 
New Jerusalem. See 2 Pet. 3: 13; Rey. 3: 12 and 21: 2, 5,” ete. 


AT4 | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 145. — 


Olshausen (Com. loc’) makes this equivalent to ‘‘ the coming forth of the — 
Kingdom from its concealed and purely spiritual into an external form,’’ 
etc., calling it ‘‘ a restoration’? advancing from the individual *‘ fo the final — 
glorifying of the body’’ and ‘‘ the outward visible world as a whole.” It 
thus comprehends the resurrection and the final glorifying, as they stand 
related to the Kingdom. Lange (Com. loci) says: ‘‘'[he Lord here pri- 
marily referred to the final completion of the Kingdom of heaven,” and 
regards it very much in the light Olshausen does, calling it a stronger 
expression than ‘‘ restitution’? (Acts 3 : 21, with which he says it coin- 
cides), since it points to a higher state of existence of man, etc., in the 
future when restitution is realized. It is scarcely necessary to repeat the 
interpretation and application of the passage by other commentators and 
theologians, seeing that it would be, substantially, a repetition of what has 
preceded. ‘The reader can easily, if desirable, extend such references (with 
the note appended).’ 


1 Murdock’s Syr. N. T. gives the following : ‘‘ Jesus said unto them, Verily I say to 
you, that, as for you who have followed me, when the Son of man shall sit on the throne 
of His glory inthe New World, ye shall also sit on twelve seats and shall judge the twelve 
tribes of Israel.’’ 

2 Bloomfield pronounces the opinion of those who believe that this regeneration refers 
to a moral regeneration consequent upon the first preaching, etc., ‘‘ harsh and forced ;” — 
he declares that Whitby’s view (which makes it future, but) that the regeneration is ‘‘ not 
a resurrection of their persons but a revival of their spirit,” etc., is “ utterly untenable ;” 
he remarks that the interpretation of Lightfoot, Hammond, etc., making the whole to 
refer to the introduction of ‘‘a renovation or new state of things,’’ or ‘‘ regeneration 
affected by the Gospel” (in the mediatorial Kingdom, where the apostles rule through 
ministerial authority)—‘‘ will no more bear examination than the foregoing.’’ Such 
theories, he informs us, cannot be received “ without great violence’ to the passage. ‘This 
reminds us of recent writers (as e.g. Rev. Fowle, Contemp. Review, May, 1872, p. 728) who, 
adopting this reference to the past, etc., call this regeneration “ the Coming new birth 
of humanity,” introduced by the life and labors of the Apostles. This, to say the very 
least, was in view of their trials, sufferings, etc., hardly ‘‘ the compensation” or 
‘* reward ’’ which underlies and suggested the promise. Dr. Clarke (Com. loci) refers the 
** regeneration” to the future Advent of Jesus, and says that he follows the punctuation 
of ‘‘ the most eminent critics ;’’ and adverting to the views (just stated as opposed by 
Bloomfield) against its primarily respecting the future, adds: ‘‘ I confess I do not see 
the propriety of this application of the terms.” Calovius (Jones’s Noles, p. 216) says that 
the view of Grotius (referring it to this dispensation) ‘‘ is against the common consent of 
almost all interpreters.’’ Scott, Henry, Wesley, Jacobus, Hall, Burnet, and many 
others, agree in locating it in the future, connected with the Advent and the condition of 
the saints and world. Hardoin, Townsend, Goadby, with those already mentioned, and 
a few others, who (although some also include the future) apply “ regeneration” to the 
past and present, do violence to both the passage and the almost universal application of 
it. Itis only necessary to add that the efforts of Owen and a few others to reject “ in 
the regeneration’’ as an interpolation, is a complete failure, the testimony of Mss., Ver- 
sions, and critics being utterly against it. Knapp (Christ. T'heol., s. 145, II. 2) notices 
that ‘‘ regeneration’’ was used by Philo (De Vita Mosis) to denote a new, renewed, or 
second creation—a renovation—as also by the Greeks for the same and restoration (comp. 
Clarke’s Com., Hammond, Jones, Burnet, and others, who refer to Heraclitus, Cicero, 
Seneca, Josephus, Pythagoreans, Stoics, ete.). Jones (Notes on Scripture, loci) gives valu- 
able references to numerous authorities, sustaining the ideas of ‘‘ the second generation 
or creation’ (Triglot, N. T.), “ renovation’ (Dr. Campbell), ‘‘ the new order of things at 
the end of time” (Kenrick, NV. T.), “‘ the new world ” (Murdock), ‘‘ seeculo novo’’ (Fabri- 
cius, V. T.), “ iterata generatio’’ (Kuinoel), “ renovata vita’’ (Castalio), “ in illa restaura- 
tione, resurrectione, quando Messias splendidum suum tribunal occupaverit’’ (Naebe), 
“‘bey der Wiederherstellung der Dinge’’ (De Wette), ‘‘in jenes neuem Verfassung’ 
(Stoltz and Van Kss), ‘‘ Wiedereizeugung, Wiedergeburt, Wiederaufleben, Erneuerung” 
(Schneider’s Lex.). The reader is referred to his extracts taken from Illyricus, Simon, 
Beza, Pfaffius, Olearius, Deylingius, Munster (Crit. Sac.), Le Clere and Hammond, Coc- 


ceius, Jansenius, Diodati, Launy, Piscator, Cornelius a Lapide, and Chemnitz, all of a 


Prop. 145. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. _ 475 


which explain it as relating to the future Advent, embracing the notion of renewal, and 
nearly all specially mention the resurrection as being included. One of the editors of the 
Proph. Times for Oct., 1867, refers to Burnet, Murdock, Wordsworth, Alford, Robison, 
Campbell, Lange, De Wette, Meyer, Stier, Kuinoel, Wesley, Clarke, Doddridge, Scott, 
Hall, Barnes, Olshausen, and Trench, giving liberal extracts indicative of the same posi- 
tion. In the art. on ‘‘ Regeneration” in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., itis said : “* Our 
Lord in one instance (Matt. 19 : 28) uses the term ‘ regeneration’ for the resurrection state.’’ 
Dr. Imbrie, in his Essay, ‘‘ The Regeneration’ (Pre- Mill. Essays, p. 108, etc.), makes it 
equivalent to “‘ the Restitution of all things.” Ebrard (Gospel His., p. 361) says that Strauss 
himself in one place admits, ‘* This palingenesia is neither a political revolution nora 
moral regeneration, but the resurrection of the dead.’’ Schmid (Bib. Theol., N. Test., p. 269) 
remarks : ‘‘ The Regeneration is also brought about, which coincides with the commence- 
ment of ‘ the Age to Come.’ This relates to the whole world, and is, therefore, a regenera- 
tion of the whole world in general, and consequently a renovation of nature in the sense of 
Rom. 8 : 18-23. For the faithful, in particular, it is also the ‘Resurrection of Life’ (Luke 
14 : 14), the shining forth of the righteous (Matt. 13 : 43), and this is a glorification of the 
body and not of the spirit only’’ (Matt. 22 : 23-33). Barrow (Works, vol. 2., p. 565) 
says : ‘* Sometimes also it (resurrection of the body) is called the regeneration, or iterated 
nativity, and being born from the dead.” ‘* And as to be born at first doth signify the 
production and union of the parts essential to a man, so to be born again implies the 
restitution and reunion of the same ; a man therefore becoming entirely the same person 
that he was before.” 


Obs, 2. Without denying that ‘‘ the regeneration’? when once experi- 
enced will include much, or even all, that the writers, just quoted, have 
attributed to it, yet evidently in the comments of many of them there is @ 
wide departure from the early simplicity attached to the phrase. This is 
true of later Millenarian authors, who (as e.g. Jones, Notes on Scripture) 
make it a renovation of all things, a universal recreation, ‘*‘ Paradise 
restored or brought back again,” etc. Freely admitting that when this 
‘*regeneration’’ is experienced, that then, also, the new heavens and new 
earth appear, that Paradise is restored, that the Kingdom of heaven is out- 
wardly manifested in glory, etc., it does not follow by any means that 
‘*regeneration’’ denotes al] these things. Logically, it cannot. Let the 
reader glance over the various commentators and writers who attempt to 
explain this phrase, and he will notice one distinguishing peculiarity attend- 
ing nearly all, viz., that in some way it does, and must, include the resurrec- 
tion of the body. 'The primary meaning of a second creation, renewal, 
restoration, necessarily, when considered in its relation to the future, 
embraces the idea of the resurrection. Letus give afew more illustrations, 
showing how persons, whatever their views, are impelled by the signification 
of the word itself to allow its reference to the resurrection. Augustine 
(Treat. on Forgiveness, B. 2, ch. 9) quotes Matt. 19 : 28, and refers the 
regeneration to the bodily resurrection.* Doddridge (Com. loci) calls 
‘‘yegeneration,’’ “‘ the renovation of all things, when all the children of 
God shall, as it were, de born anew from their graves,’’ etc. Bengel 
(Gnomen, loci) remarks: ‘‘ There will be a new creation, over which the 
Second Adam will preside, when the whole microcosm of human nature, 
by means of the resurrection, and also the microscosm of the universe will 
be born again (genesim iteram habebit).’?’ Jones (Votes), including the 
renovation of the earth, the restoration of the twelve tribes, the re-estab- 
lishment of the Theocracy, etc., says: ‘‘ J¢ includes the resurrection, exal- 


* Augustine in his City of God, b. 20, ch. 5. refers to it again, and says : ‘‘ By the words 
‘in the regeneration,’ He certainly meant the resurrection of the dead to be understood ; for 
our flesh shall be regenerated by incorruption, so as our soul is regenerated by faith.”’ 


$ 


476 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 145, 


tation, and glorification of the Church of the firstborn or elect.’’ Stier 
(Words of Jesus) on the passage, calling it ‘‘ the renewal of the world,”’ 
also makes it contain ‘‘ the resurrection of the dead’’ and subsequent glori- 
fication. Simon, the Romanist, translated by Webster (and quoted by 
Jones), remarks: ‘‘ By the regeneration most of the ancient commentators 
understood the resurrection.’’ Beza (margin of the Old Eng. Bible, ed. 
1598) refers it to the day of resurrection ; so also Olearius (Obs. Sac.) says 
that part of the regeneration is the restoring of the dead by the resurrection, 
which itself is called regeneration, illustrative of Hpiph. Ad. Heres. 36 : 
1; Deylingius (Ods. Sac.), the same ; while Munster (Crit. Sac.) says posi- 
tively : ‘‘ This second generation is the resurrection of the dead,’’ etc. ; Le 
Clerc and Hammond make regeneration equivalent to resurrection, so 
Jansenius (Harm. Ch., c. p. 717), Cornelius a Lapide, Chemnitz (Harm., 
ch. 132), and the reader will find these quoted at length by Judge Jones 
(Notes on Scripture, pp. 214-216). This isso evident that Trench (Syn. 
of N. T., p. 97), after admitting that ‘‘ the day of resurrection will be the 
day of ‘ regeneration,’ ’’ adds : ‘‘ So that those fathers had a certain, though 
only partial, right, when they interpreted the word at Matt. 19 : 28, as 
though it had been only equivalent to anastasis (resurrection), and, as a 
consequence, continually used it as a synonym for the resurrection.” 
Trench himself, as well as many of the authors already alluded to, certainly 
are illogical when they tell us that the scope of the passage relates to the 
future, and then drag in that which pertains to the past. Admitting the 
necessity of moral regeneration before this promised regeneration is experi- 
enced, yet the former is no¢ the subject of the promise ; admitting also the 
renewal of the earth, etc., it does not seem appropriate to crowd into this 
one word quite a number of events which are clearly set forth in other 
places. ‘The simplicity of the early meaning is to be retained, viz., its 
reference to the resurrection for the following reasons: 1. ‘The Res. is a 
‘*regeneration,’’ admitted by all,and believed in at the time Jesus spoke. 
The Jews held to the resurrection of the pious dead at the Advent of the 
Messiah (see Prop. on Res. etc.), and from the prophets believed that 
this would be followed by a renovation of nature resulting from the 
exalted nature, power, and glory of the Messiah’s Kingdom. But from 
Isa. 66: 8-10 ; Ezek. 37 : 1-14, and other predictions, the resurrection was 
regarded as a new birth or second creation through the special power of 
God. So that let the word be applicable to both (and thus employed), yet 
the meaning that Jesus attached to it must be sought in the general com- 
plexion of the passage. Hence, correct at least in retaining the idea of 
resurrection (without which all the rest could not be attained), let us ask 
whether the other idea was directly included or only implied. 2. This is 
answered by noticing : (A) That Jesus speaks of the reward or compensa- 
tion being received (the reward itself being the resultant) in or through 
this regeneration, which remarkably accords with other sayings of His, as, 
e.g., “* Thow shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just,’’ Luke 
14:14. (B) It is observable that the reign of Christ on the throne of His 
glory, as well as that of the apostles subordinately, being placed after the 
Sec. Advent is uniformly introduced in promise as preceded by a resurrec- 
tion of the righteous, and with this the words of Christ correspond. (C) 
‘* The manifestation of the sons of God,’’ Rom. 8 : 19, precedes the deliver- 
ance of creation—the latter being a result of the former having received 
** the redemption of the body.”? Jesus—the question of the deliverance of 


Prop. 145. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. AT7 


the creature not being suggested but only that of rewarding the sons of 
God—would hardly introduce the latter when the reigning with Him is 
invariably—when explained—predicated of this very period of manifesta- 
tion. (D) The parallel passage in Luke 22 : 28 aids in enforcing our posi- 
tion. Here we have the same promise given to the apostles, by which we 
learn that by this “‘ regeneration’’ (omitted by Luke), the apostles receive 
“a kingdom,’’ and that, what Matt. declares Christ does, is ‘in my King- 
dom.’’ When search is made to ascertain how and when this ‘‘ Kingdom,” 
in which this reign of Jesus and the apostles is to be witnessed, is obtained, 
then the interpretation of ‘‘ regeneration’’ as ‘‘ resurrection’’ stands forth 
in such a passage as this: ‘‘ /lesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of 
God,’’ but, as the connection shows, the power of the resurrection of the 
just with its glorifying accompaniments must be experienced (1 Cor. 15 : 
50). Whatever secondary meaning may inferentially or by implication be 
attached to the word, evidently the primary meaning is the one thus sug- 
gested and so long held to by ancient expositors. 


Obs. 3. The Kingdom itself, the reign of the saints, the deliverance of 
creation, in brief, all the blessings, so vividly described by Jones, Seiss, 
and many others, are introduced by this very ‘‘regeneration.’’ Jesus is 
the first begotten of the dead, and His brethren must first experience the 
same birth before these promises can be verified. Hence it is very doubtful 
whether it is a word as far-reaching as the phrase ‘‘ the restitution cf all 
things ;’ for the latter embraces the resurrection, restoration of Kingdom, 
Paradise, etc.—the bringing back of all things to their original condition 
or intention—while the latter, at most, can only refer to man and nature, 
taking the broadest definitions given to it. But with Lange and others, 
if must be said to be more precious, since it more directly refers to the 
individual, not simply restored to a forfeited position, but brought into a 
life most exalted and glorious through resurrection and transforming power, 
thus fashioning the saint after the pattern presented by Jesus. ‘The phrase 
‘‘in the regeneration’ does not simply allude to the time when the resur- 
rection is experienced, but to the fact that it is an ever-continuing reality— 
un unchangeable state from the period of its happy realization. Itis during 
this wonderful regenerated life that the Kingdom of God is manifested ; or, 
as Robison (Gr. N. Test.), ‘‘ the complete external manifestation of the 
Messiah’s Kingdom, when all things are to be delivered from their present 
corruption, and restored to spiritual purity and splendor’’ shall be seen ; 
or, as Van Oosterzee (Zheol. N. T., p. 123), it shall embrace after the per- 
sonal Sec. Advent, ‘‘ the entire renewal of the natural and spiritual 
creature.’ As the regeneration of the Lord Jesus (Col. 1:18; Rev. 1:5; 
1 Cor. 15 : 20) is separate from, precedes, and yet is connected, with the 
ultimate renewal of creation itself, so the regeneration of the believers, 
accounted worthy to obtain this Kingdom, is separate from, precedes, and 
yet stands related to, the mighty changes which shall transform nature 
into the Edenic state so rapturously delineated by the prophets. 


See Barrow’s Works, Ser. X., on Apostles’ Creed, where he says: ‘‘ The resurrec- 
tion of good Christians, after death, to a better state of life, their entering into immortal 
bliss and glory, is worthily styled ‘ regeneration,’ a being generated or born again ; 
whereby they received from God another more excellent life and state of being, more 
like and conformable to God, for,’’ etc., quoting 1 John 3:2; 1 Cor. 15 : 49 ; 2 Cor. 
3:18; Phil. 3 : 21, etc., as confirmatory. Here it may be proper to say, that ‘‘ the wash- 


478 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 145, 


ing of regeneration,” Tit. 3:5, the subject of so much controversy, cannot be properly 
comprehended, unless (whatever its application may be to the present) the baptism o1 
the renewed state of man here is made emblematical or significant of that regeneration 
which embraces the whole person, body, soul, and spirit, at the resurrection. It is a 
washing leading to, and productive of, regeneration under certain qualifications. Ite 
tainly is significant that Dr. Brown in his Com. on Matt. 19 : 28, refuses to comment 0 
this ‘‘ regeneration,” sending us from one Gospel to another without any result. W 

this subject of so little importance as to be unworthy of notice in a professed comm 
_ tary, or was he afraid of its application, being unable to fit it into his system ? His 
“laborer, Dr. Fausset, would, undoubtedly, have given us an able comment, forin the s 
Com. (Dan. 7 : 44) he remarks : “ There must be a ‘ regeneration ’ of the world, as of a 
individual, a death previous to a resurrection, a destruction of the world-kingdoms b b e- 
fore they arise anew as the kingdoms of Christ”? (Matt. 19 : 18); and in Rev. 20: 6, 
speaks of ‘‘ the regeneration of nations,’ which we make a resultant of, or associate ed 
event with, this ‘‘ regeneration.” ue 


Prop. 146.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. AT9 


Proposition 146.—This Kingdom ts associated with the deliver- 
ance of creation. 


A Theocracy, perfect and extending over the earth, which brings 
God—the Creator—into the relationship of an earthly Ruler, and 
exerting His dominion over all, must, in order to exhibit the 
dignity and value of Hisrule, and to promote the welfare and 
happiness of His willing subjects, remove the evils under which 
man and the creation have been groaning. The Kingdom itself 

being Zana! in its intent and work, brings deliverance from 
the curse, however widespread, restores forfeited gifts, and even 
bestows riches never before conferred upon man or the earth. The 
Divine-human relationship of the King, who declares that He (Rev. 
21:5) ‘‘ will make all things new,” insures all this; while the 
Divine Purpose, foreshadowed in covenant, prophecy, provisionary 
dispensations and acts, and, above all, in the bestowal of the King, 
and qualifying Him (as the promised David’s Son) for the position 
of Theocratic King, evidences how reasonable and just are the 
anticipations of such a renewal. The honor and glory of the King 
and Kingdom, the ability and representations of God to save, are 
involved in restoring the earth to its Edenic state, The Plan of 
Redemption, of which this Kingdom forms the culminating agency 
of affecting and completing, contemplates a return to the condition 
existing before the fall, and even to that which man would have 
attained to had he not sinned. Of course, it must then include the 
renewal of creation. 


This suggests an interpretation of Eph. 1 : 14, “until the redemption of the purchased 
possession,” which the context unmistakably locates in the future, seeing that believers 
now have the assurance in the bestowment of “the earnest of our inheritance.” The in- 
heritance, with which this ‘‘ purchased possession’’ is linked, consists, as we have shown 
(e.g. Props. 49, 142, etc.), of this earth, which, as numerous promises testify, is to be 
redeemed or delivered from the eurse in ‘‘the day of redemption”’ The reasoning of 
the Apostle in Rom. 8, linking this same earnest with the deliverance of creation and the 
redemption of the body, confirms this view. The idea of Barnes (Com. loci) that 
*‘heaven’’ is denoted, cannot be admitted, simply because heaven is not the promised 
inheritance, and because heaven needs no redemption or deliverance (or, if stress is laid 
on the notion of ‘‘ obtaining or acquiring,’’ then it must be shown that heaven is the 
covenanted inheritance). Many commentators make this ‘* purchased possession’’ to be 
God’s people, the saints that are to be gathered out, which (Lange, etc.) gives a good 
and consistent meaning. So MacKnight (Com. loci) makes ‘‘ purchased people’’ 
redeemed from the grave. It evidently refers either to the saints or to the earth, or to 
both, for these are promised deliverance, and both are the inheritance of the Christ. 
Fausset (Com. loci) refers this to the saints, and that it includes what is said in Rom. 
8 : 21-23 ; 2 Pet. 3:13. Impressed with the connection that it sustains with “ our in- 
heritance,” we are strongly inclined to apply it exclusively to the earth, which we inherit. 
Fairbairn (Typology) fully indorses our view, saying: ‘‘ What can (Eph. 1:14) the 
redemption of the inheritance be but the rescuing of this earth from the manifold ills 


480 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 146. 


which, through the instrumentality of Satan, have come to lodge in its bobsom—purging 
its elements of all mischief and disorder—changing it from being the vale of tears and the 
charnel house of death into a paradise of life and blessing—restoring to man, himself 
then redeemed, and fitted for the honor, the sceptre of a real dominion over all its fulness 
—in a word, rendering it in character and design what it was on creation’s morn, when 
the sons of God shouted for joy, and God Himself looked with satisfaction on the good- 
ness and order and beauty which pervaded this portion of His universe.” 


Obs. 1. One of the striking peculiarities attached to Millennial prophecies 
describing the establishment of this Kingdom, is, that the land, the earth 
is represented as participating in the favors of the King ; and the joy and 
happiness of the nations 1s immeasurably enhanced by their lberal 
bestowal. This is so clearly and explicitly stated, was so universally 
received by the early Church, and has been so generally entertained by 
eminent divines of all denominations, that it needs no special pleading. 
Even our opponents, who are the most disposed to depart from the gram- 
matical meaning and engraft a spiritual sense, admit that, if those predic- 
tions are fulfilled as recorded, they must bring back a Paradise regained. 
No system of Theology is completed, without, in one form or another, 
advocating a final restoration of nature. Without detaining ourselves with 
a feature that is so commonly received, let our attention be directed to 
several disputed points. 

It may be sufficient to cite e.g. one who is well known as an opponent, Dr. Brown. 
In his more recent Com., Rom. 8, he makes ‘‘ the creature” (of vs. 19, 20, and 21) to be 
‘* the creation,’’ and says: ‘‘ the creation itself shall, in a glorious sense, be delivered into 
that freedom from debility and decay in which the children of God, when raised up in 
glory, shall expatiate ; into this freedom from corruptibility the creation itself shall, in a 
glorious sense, be delivered. (So Calvin, Beza, Bengel, Tholuck, Olshausen, De Wette, 
Meyer, Philippi, Hodge, Alford, etc.) If for man’s sake alone the earth was cursed, it 
cannot surprise us that it should share in his recovery. And if so, to represent it as 
sympathizing with man’s miseries, and as looking forward to his complete redemption 
as the period of its own emancipation from its present sin-blighted condition, is a beau- 
tiful thought, and in harmony with the general teaching of the Scripture on the sub- 
ject.” Pressense (The Early Days of Chris., p. 286) thus refers to Paul’s teaching: “ He 
associates nalure herself with the grand consummations of Redemption ; he represents her 
as groaning and travailing in pain for the deliverance of the sons of God (Rom. 8 : 22), 
and he leads us to anticipate a sort of resurrection of the material world as the abode of 
glorified humanity.’’ Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 314) makes Rom. 8 to represent “‘ a 
redeemed and glorified earth,’’ with which many agree ; his remarks are forcible and 
worthy of perusal, as illustrated in the previous note. Lange’s Com., Rom. 8, has, under 
the Doc. and Ethical portion, some striking remarks on the groaning and deliverance of 
creation. 


Obs. 2. Rom. 8 : 19-23 deserves particular consideration, seeing that 
some (as Barnes, Com. loci) are disposed to make “ the creature’’ refer only 
to believers (renewed), and not to inanimate and animate creation. Admit- 
ting that the word translated ‘‘ creature’? does not distinctively specify 
creation (although Barnes says it means “‘ creation, the act of creating, 
Rom. 1 : 20; the creature, that which is created or formed, the universe, 
Mark 10:6; 2 Pet. 3:4; Mark 13:19; Rom.1: 25 and8 : 39” gee 
renewed man (not unless the word ‘‘ new’’ is added), it is evident that its 
meaning in this place ought to be decisively made out by what the Word 
in other places teaches shail occur at the manifestation of the sons of God, 
i.e., at or after the resurrection.' Now, Barnes himself so freely admits (as 
e.g. Notes on 2 Pet, 3; Rey. 21, etc.) a renewed creation after the resur- 
rection, that it seems both strange and inconsistent to deny it in this pas- 


a 


Prop. 146. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 481 


sage. Bloomfield indorses the view that it means ‘“‘ the whole visible 
creation’’ (mentioning ‘‘ ancient and many eminent modern interpreters, 
especially Luther, Grotius, Cassell, Danhauer, Doddr.,? Michael, Knappe, 
Rosenm., and Carpzov,”’ as holding to it), showing that the word is used 
in this sense ; he opposes the opinion of Hammond, Le Clerc, etc., that 
it denotes a ‘‘ moral creation,’’ 1.e., ‘‘ the Christian Church,’’ which ‘ is 
Hable to insuperable objections, which are well stated by Ammon ;’’ he 
also objects to the interpretation of Whitby and Ammon, which would 
limit it to ‘‘ all intelligent and sentient creatures,’’ i.e., ‘* the human race,”’ 
and presents an important argument when observing that this deliverance 
must include ‘‘ such a renovation as the Jews especially supposed would 
take place in the age of the Messiah.’’ In addition, we would say, that 
Paul, knowing not only the views of the Jews respecting a restoration of 
nature, but that of the Romans even concerning the same, if nature was not 
to be included in this description, he certainly made choice of very imper- 
_ fect (i.e. by not defining) language. His phraseology, however, is vindi- 
cated doth by its meaning being in accord with the views thus entertained, 
and by the fact that the ancients thus interpreted it. The sublimity of the 
passage, which troubles some so much that they desire to tone it down, is 
amply sustained by what Paul knew of the events pertaining to the resurrec- 
tion. Dr. Neander (fis. Plant. Ch. Church, vol. 1, p. 523) says that this 
is connected with the resurrection of the body, and denotes a restoration of 
nature, adding in a foot-note: ‘* The later distinguished commentators on 
this epistle have acknowledged this to be the only tenable exposition ; and 
even Usteri, who had before brought forward the strongest objections 
against it, has been induced, for the same reasons that appear to me con- 
vincing, to accede to it.”? (See his reasons for rejecting the opposite view.) 
It is surprising that, to make out a theory (wresting the passage from us), 
men of ability, as those mentioned and others, will restrict the groaning 
creature to the Gentile world or to the heathen, not seeing that by so doing 
they represent such (against fact) as earnestly desiring to become Christian 
—having this feeling constantly—and of being subjected to bondage with- 
out blame, etc. Schmid (Bid. Theol. N. T., p. 511) on this part forcibly 
says : ‘‘ That ‘ creature ’ here refers to the inanimate creation 72 distinction 
from men, is clear, if we consider two points ; on the one hand, that a con- 
trast to Christians is thus established ; and on the other, the ‘ creature’ is 
not described as a subject burdened by sin, but only as liable to perishable- 
ness. Linguistic usage, the predicates, and the connection of the section, 
areallin favor of this explanation.’? Probably Schmid’s restriction to 
inanimate nature, thus excluding animals, etc., is limiting its meaning foo 
much ; but he is correct in asserting its distinction from man. ‘The 
‘ creature’’ certainly is something distinct from ‘‘ the sons of God ;”’ and it 
cannot be ‘* the heathen world,’’ for it has not waited for the manifestation 
as here represented.* Van Oosterzee (Theol. of N. 7.) fully indorses our 
position, and declares that nature looks for redemption. Even Knapp (Chr. 
Theol., 8. 155 II. 2) remarks, ‘‘ the passage, Rom. 8 : 19, seq., also treats of 
this renovation and beautifying of the world.’? Dr. Hitchcock (Fut. Cond. 
and Destiny of the Earth), quoting this passage in Romans, remarks : 
“That Tholuck, the distinguished German theologian, considers this a 
description of the present bound and fettered condition of all nature, and 
that the deliverance refers to the future renovation of the earth. Such an 
exposition chimes in perfectly with the views on this subject, which have 


482 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 146, 


long and extensively prevailed in Germany. And it certainly does give a 
consistent meaning to a passage Which has been to commentators a perfect 
labyrinth of difficulties. If this be not its meaning, then I may sately say 
that its meaning has not yet been found out.’? Kurtz (Sac. His., 8. 199, 
4), expressly applies this Scripture to the removal of the curse entailed 
upon nature and to the renovation of the earth. ‘These allusions to authori- 
ties who find in the passage a direct reference to the renewal of nature __ 
could be abundantly multiplied, but these are sufficient to indicate that we 

do not seek to force such an interpretation upon the text. Writers of the 
most diverse views and hostile to Millenarianism freely concede this; and 
they append that it shall only be witnessed at the Advent of Jesus Christ, 
and after the resurrection of the saints. This, of course, leads us back to 
examine when this Advent and resurrection take place. Having proven 
(Props. 121, 125, 119, ete.) that both are Pre-Millennial, there arises at once 
a beautiful symmetry between a harmonious blending of the Millennial 
predictions and Paul’s declaration, which no other view can give.* o 


99 


1 Lange’s Com. loci, both in the text and notes, gives it “ creation,’’ and says: ‘‘ Leai- 
cally, the word may mean the act of creation as well as what is created, the creation ; but 
actually, the question here can only be the creation in the broader or more limited sense,” 
(Riddle in a note well remarks that a limitation of meaning, if intended, must always be 
derived from the context.) So decisive is the notion of ‘‘ the creation,” that in the New 3 
Revision the English version ‘‘ creature’’ is stricken out and creation substituted. 

2 Hardly correct as to Doddridge, who rather represents it as ‘‘ the whole unevangelized a 
world.” Doddridge and others, who favor such an exposition, do not see how fatal even 4 
such an interpretation is to their Post-Mill. Advent. For, taking their definition for 
granted, it would then—if logically carried out—prove that this unevangelized world will : 
not be converted until after the manifestation of the Sons of God, i.e. the resurrection. 
While we believe the latter, we do not derive it from adding such an adjunct to ‘‘creat- 
ure.”’ ; 

3 See the strong reasoning against Olshausen’s too extended application of ‘‘ the creat- 
ure” by Kendrick, p. 54, Kendrick’s Olshausen Com. on Rom., Sheldon & Co.’s edition. 
Olshausen justly affirms that even the inanimate creation is meant (as also Steir, Riickert, 
Reiche, Schneckenburger, Kollner, and others), but includes with it ‘‘ unregenerate . 
men,’’ etc—‘‘ the whole creation’’—excluding the regenerated portion which he holds 
contrasted with the rest. He beautifully and forcibly explains the representation of 
creation longing, etc., for deliverance, and produces convincing arguments why the 
word ‘‘ creature’ should not be restricted to ‘‘ angels,’’ ‘‘ animals,’’ ‘‘ the dead,” ** Chris- 
tians,’’ “‘ people of Israel,’’ ‘‘ heathen magistracy,’’ and ‘‘ heathen world.’’ The only 
fault with Olshausen, and which Kendrick notices, is, that he extends the meaning too 
far ; and yet we frankly acknowledge that if he is correct, if the passage truly allowed its 
extension, it would find a counterpart in the fact that, after the resurrection, when this 
Kingdom is established, the nations of the earth that are spared will find deliverance, 
etc., through this manifestation. But this, for the present, we find distinctly taught else- 
where. 

4 Dr. West (Cin. Gazette, Feb. 21st, 1879) makes the creature delivered to be this ‘‘ planet,” 
including ‘‘ the material earth, the atmospheric heavens, the vegetable kingdom, and the 
animal kingdom,” and says that this was the interpretation of ‘*‘ Irenaeus, Justin, Tertul- 
lian, Lactantius, Chrysostom, all the Greek Fathers of the Church and most of the Latin, al 
and all the best expositors of the Scripture to-day.” ‘‘ It is the interpretation of the 
ablest expositors—men like Jiuther, Calvin, Melanchthon, Erasmus, Beza; men like 
Bengel, Tholuck, Olshausen, De Wette, Philippi, Ewald, Neander, Delitzsch, Meyer, 
Lechler, Lange, Kurtz, Ellicott, and multitudes whose names alone fill pages.’’ Sirr’s 
First Res., in Appendix, has a good criticism on the word ‘‘ creature” and its usage— __ 
with which compare the extended notice in Lange’s Com. loci. The critical student will 
observe the shades of difference that are expressed by expositors, as e.g. Lange, who 
makes the ‘‘ creature’’ to be ‘‘ creation,”’ “ the whole creation, rational as well as irrational, 
not yet redeemed, but needing and capable of redemption ;” Calvin, Beza, ete., the 
“inanimate creation ;’ Koppe, Rosenmiiller, etc., “ the universe ;’ Augustine, ete., the 


“animate creation ;” Tholuck, etc., ‘* the material worid surrounding man ;’’ Meyer, De 
wi 


-_ 


. 


Prop. 146. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 483 


Wette, Hodge, Alford, etc., ‘‘ inanimate and animate nature in contradistinction from 
humanity’’ (which last, we give a decided preference). Still all admit the cardinal, funda- 
mental idea, viz., that creation is intended, and a deliverance of the sume promised. Lord 
(Theol. and Lit. Journal, April, 1860) holds that the perpetual desolation of Idumea (Isa. 
34) is an impressive exception to this deliverance and renewal of the whole earth, and 
that this exception is made to impart a forcible reminder of God’s vengeance as stated in 
Isa. 66 : 24, and he thinks this visible burning is alluded to in Rev. 14: 9-11 and 
19 : 19, 20, etc. Others, however, think that the perpetuity is limited to the generations 
preceding the Millennium, because the usage of “forever,’’ and similar phrases, allows 
a limitation in certain cases. 


Obs. 3. This leads us to consider whether Paul’s declaration and the Mill. 
prophecies, etc., include the deliverance of the animal kingdom. This, as 
is well known, was the position of the early Church, as is evidenced by 
their writings, especially Tertullian, Lactantius, and the earlier Fathers— 
Papias, Barnabas, and Justin. And, in point of fact, it is impossible for a 
man to be a consistent Millenarian (hence, with scarcely an exception, the 
long line of eminent men hold to it) without adopting it. The ablest 
Millenarian writers wnhesitatingly give it their support, and the reason is 
self-evident. Coming to the Bible, resolving to accept of the sense given 
by the plain grammatical interpretation, they find involved with the 
description of this re-established Kingdom at the Sec. Advent and with 
the blessedness and glory of the saints and the living nations such direct 
and explicit assertions concerning the change of disposition, etc., in the 
lower creation, that to reject these predictions (or engraft upon them 
another sense) would be doing violence to their principles of interpretation 
and to the Book. As this feature of the renovation has caused some to 
recoil from the entire subject, as if it were dishonorable to the future state 
and derogatory to Christ, it may be well to notice upon what it is 
grounded. Some are influenced by the hasty conclusion arrived at by 
Doddridge, when commenting upon Rom. 8:19; he says: ‘‘ To explain it, 
as chiefly referring to the brutal or inanimate creation, is insufferable ; 
since the day of the redemption of our bodies will be attended with the 
conflagration, which will put anend tothem.’’ 'Thisallusion to Peter’s con- 
fiagration is to be found in every writer adverting to this point, and is the 
main proof relied on against it. As the conflagration theory comes up in 
a following proposition (Props. 149 and 150) to remove another objection, 
with which this stands associated, we may, for the present, pass it by with 
the single remark that such a conclusion by no means follows, provided God 
has declared that it shall be done and that the animals shall share in the 
deliverance. It is not for us to limit either God’s purpose, or wisdom, or 
ability to perform. Without laying stress on the admitted fact that the 
curse has fallen upon the animal creation through man, and that perfected 
Redemption reasonably claims Divine interference in its behalf, which 
idea Olshausen, Lord, and others have ably advanced, without insisting 
that the objection is really based upon a spiritualistic conception of the 
future abode of the saints out of which the materialistic element has been 
(Gnosiic-like) eliminated, it 1s amply sufficient to rely upon its being prom- 
ised in the Word. Following our usual plan to allow those who have no 
special sympathy for our doctrine to speak their sentiments, it will answer 
to give first the views of others, to show that in their estimation this doc- 
trine is taught. Thus e.g. Dr. Clarke, in his comments (Com. loci) on Ps. 
104 : 29, 30, extends the renewal not only to the earth, but includes a resur- 


484 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 146. 


rection of animals, arguing that the mention of their death preceding, and 
then- the addition of ‘‘ Thow sendest forth Thy Spirit, they are created 
again,’’ clearly teaches this, and refers to Rom. 8 : 19-23. ‘This probably 
is going farther than Millenarians, who generally are satisfied with simply 
saying that the animal condition (with that of the earth) will be changed 
for the better, leaving the resurrection as a matter open to conjecture. 
Calvin, on Isa. 11 : 6-8, says that the prophet ‘‘ asserts here the change of 
the nature of wild beasts and the restitution of creation as at first,’’ and he 
substantially repeats this, when in Jns?i., vol. 3, ch. 25, he says, ‘‘ I expect 
with Paul a reparation of all the evils caused by sin, for which he represents — 
the creatures as groaning and travailing.’?* John Wesley, in his Ser. on 
Rey. 21:5, decidedly takes this ground, delineates at length the happiness 
resulting from such deliverance, quotes Paul and the prophets, under- 
stands the prophetic delineations literally, having on the new earth all 
the animals, etc., so changed that ‘‘no creature, no beast, bird, or fish 
will have any inclination to hurt any other ; for cruelty will be far away, 
and savageness and fierceness be forgotten,’’ etc., and emphatically de- 
clares: ‘* He that sitteth upon the throne will soon change the face of all 
things, and give ademonstrative proof'to all His creatures, ‘ that His mercy 
is over all His works.’ ’’ It is difficult to understand Fairbairn’s language 
(Typology, p. 461) otherwise, when (after making the restitution, Acts 3 : 
19-21, at Christ’s Sec. Advent ‘‘ everything restored to its pristine con- 
dition ’’) he writes: ‘‘ It is precisely on the same object, a redeemed and 
glorified earth, that the Apostle Paul, in the 8th of Romans, fixes the 
minds of believers as the terminating point of their hopes of glory. An 
incomparable glory is to be revealed in them, and in connection with that, 
the deliverance of a suffering creation from the bondage of corruption into 
the glorious liberty of the sons of God.’’ So also a large class of writers, 
who expressly aflirm that creation is to be brought back to its former 
‘* paradisiacal state,’ cannot be comprehended, unless violence is done to 
their own statements of what redemption is to accomplish, ‘without re- 
ceiving such a deliverance of the animals. Luther gave no uncertain 
sound, when (quoted by Taylor, Voice of the Church, p. 143) he said: “* It 
is written, God will create a new heaven and a new earth wherein righteous- 
ness shall dwell. It will be no arid waste, but a beautiful new earth, 
wherein all the just will dwell together. ‘There will be no carnivorous 
beasts, or venomous creatures, for all such, like ourselves, will be relieved 
rom the curse of sin, and will be to us as friendly as they were to Adam 
in Paradise.’? The frequent assertions of this Reformer’? and others of 
the restoration of the earth to the Edenic state, certainly imply such a 
restitution. Dr. Kurtz (His. of the Old Cov., vol. 1, p. 81) advocates a 
return to Paradise, saying: ‘‘ The heavenly Jerusalem in the transformed — 
earth is Paradise renewed, enlarged, transformed and perfected,”’ etc., and 
(Pref. p. 118) this includes the deliverance of the groaning creation which, 
he holds, embraces the animal Kingdom, while Isa. 11 : 6-9 he thinks has 
reference, at least, to the original state of the animal kingdom, or the state 
it would have been brought to under Adam. How else can we understand 
the pious Bradford (Letéers, 83) saying : ‘‘ I therefore take the apostle to 
mean by ‘ every creature’ simply, even the whole shape and creatures of | 
the world.”’ ‘‘ As everything and all things were made for man, so, by — 
the man Christ, all and everything, both earthly and heavenly, shall be 
restored.’’ ‘‘ In our resurrection, all things shall be repaired for eternity, 


Prop. 146.] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 485 


as, from our sin, they were made subject to corruption.”? ‘‘ Now every 
ereature travaileth and groaneth with us; but we being restored, they also 
shall be restored : there shall be new heavens, new earth, and all things 
new.’’ Such language is too comprehensive to exclude the lower creation. 
Dr. Charnock (Aétributes of God) forcibly remarks: ‘‘ As the world, for 
the sin of man, lost its first dignity and was cursed after the fall, and the 
beauty bestowed on it by creation defaced, so shall it recover that ancient 
glory, when he shall be fully restored, by the resurrection, to that dignity 
he lost by his first sin. A man shall be freed from his corruptibility, to 
receive that glory which is prepared for him, so shall the creatures be freed 
from that imperfection or corruptibility, those stains and spots upon the 
face of them, to receive a new glory suited to their nature, and answerable 
to the design of God, when the‘ glorious liberty’ of the saints shall be 
accomplished.’’ ‘* The earth hath borne thorns, and thistles, and venom- 
ous beasts; the air hath had its tempest and infectious qualities ; the 
water hath caused its flood and deluges; the creature hath been abased 
to luxury and intemperance, and been tyranized over in man, contrary to 
the end of creation. J¢ is convenient that some time should be allotted for the 
creature attaining its trueend, and that it may partake of the peace of man, 
as it hath done of the fruits of his sin, which prevailed more than grace,’’ 
ete. Henry (Com. on Rom. 8 : 19-23) has ‘‘ the whole frame of nature,”’’ 
‘‘ the whole creation, the compasses of inanimate and sensible creatures ”’ 
delivered, and adds: ‘‘ There shall be a glory conferred wpon all the creat- 
ures, Which shall be (in the proportion of their natures) as suitable, and 
as great an advancement, as the glory of the children of God shall be to 
them,” etc. ‘Tyndale, on Rom. 8 : 21 affirming that ‘‘ all creatures descry 
that day as the time of their rest and perpetual Sabbath ;’’ Gill (Divinity, 
p. 427, 8) contending that ‘‘ every degree of that curse should be removed,”’ 
so that ‘‘ the new earth will be an earth refined, and renewed, and restored 
to its paradisiacal estate, as it was before the fall ;’’ Toplady (Ser. B. 3, p. 
470) affirming ‘‘ that a day will dawn when a period shall be put to every 
disorder under which nature at present labors,’’ etc.; these utterances, and 
a multitude of a similar nature that could be quoted, can only be recon- 
ciled with the deliverance of the animal world. It is to be noticed that 
many, aside from Millenarians, express themselves not only indirectly but 
directly in favor of such a restoration, virtually indorsing the interpreta- 
tion put upon various passages by us. They substantially agree with 
Delitzsch (Ser. on Rom. 8 : 18-23 in Ap. to Sys. of Bib. Psychol.) in ad- 
vocation of a restitution of the earth—a recreation of nature—a redemp- 
tion and glorification extending even to the unintelligent creation, so that 
‘* then nature, as all the prophets foretell, shall put on her blissful festal 
attire ; and as it has been compelled to share in the sorrows of men, it 
shall a/so be a participator in its glory.’’ It is inconceivable how so many 
with such views of redemption, extending from man down to inanimate 
nature, should be fearful in plainly stating—what they leave to be inferred— 
that this necessarily must include the important links existing between 
man and inanimate nature. As Delitzsch says, the prophets all foretell 
this, and in a manner that cannot be explained away. Let the reader turn 
to what Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 281) says of the restoration of the 
lost ‘‘ lordship or dominion” over the earth, or, better still, let him refer to 
Ps, 8, where dominion over the lower creation is expressly stated as ore of 
the prerogatives of man, and then let him see how this is applied to the 


486 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 146. 


Second Adam (Heb. 2.), who restores this forfeited dominion, and 7 is 
impossible to exclude the lower order of creatures. Let the question be 
decided in reference to the Pre-Millennial Advent of Jesus and the resur- 
rection of the saints as the Early Church regarded it and as here advocated, 
and then let Hos. 2:18 be considered in the light of parallel passages ; let 
Isa. 11 : 6-9; Ezek 34 : 25; Isa. 65 : 25; Zech. 14 : 20; Isa. 32 : 20, and 
other allusions be contemplated as occurring 7 ‘‘ the new heavens and the 
new earth’’ (so Isa. 65) after the Coming of the Lord with all His saints (so 
Zech. 14), after the smiting of the earth and the slaying of the wicked one 
(so Isa. 11), and in connection with the restoration of the Jewish nation (so 
all the prophets); and any other view, with such facts, cannot be enter- 
tained. It is true, that a large number, to avoid such a conclusion, make 
such language figurative, and hence expressive of alleged changes in the 
nature of man; but such a theory is forced and inconsistent with the laws 
of figurative language. It is forced; because (1) against their own asser- 
tions of the completeness of redemption, etc., they leave the animals out ; — 
(2) to confine this period to the Gospel (as Barnes), and then ask ‘* how the 
Grospel has any tendency to change the nature of the lion, the bear and the 
serpent,’’ is to ignore the fact that Jesus Christ is the Restorer, the One 
who renews things; (3) to deny this because it involves a physical change 
(so Barnes, Com., Isa. 11), and yet affirm, as in other places, physical 
changes in man and inanimate nature at the consummation, involves lack 
of faith in God’s ability to perform what He has promised; (4) it trans- 
poses the predictions, making a past and present fulfilment, as e.g. the new 
heavens and new earth of Isa. 65 (under which this is to take place), con- 
tinuously existing from the First Advent ; (5) it is forced by the inability 
to show (against the facts of history) a consistent fulfilment of their own 
figurative sense (in its relation to the predictions as a whole), to shield 
itself under the expectation of a still future spiritual fulfilment, ample 
enough to cover the application made, without informing us how this is 
possible to be reconciled with the delineation of this dispensation down to 
the very Advent of Christ ; (6) the theory does not regard the predictions 
as clearly distinguishing Jefween man and the lower orders, for they are 
represented as separate, and distinct, and, owing to the change wrought in 
the latter, the former attain security, etc. (7) But it is also opposed to the 
laws of figurative language when strictly applied, for instead of there being 
a metaphor used, as supposed, it is literal language, seeing that nothing is 
attributed to this lower creation but what is natwrally applicable to them. 
The only exception is that of the lion eating ‘‘ straw, like the ox,’’? which 
evidently is an expressed simile or comparison (not a metaphor which 
implies it in thought), and teaches that at this period so great will be the 
power of restoration, that the lion will live according to the change of 
nature ¢hen introduced.* To discredit this on the ground of impossibility, 
is to limit the Almighty energy of the Restorer ; to receive it only as 
metaphorical language, is to overlook the simple comparison instituted ; to 
accept of the whole as figurative, is to forget that the actions, etc., ascribed 
to the animals, are such as are strictly accordant with their nature as it once 
must have been exhibited in the Edenic state, and that a restoration 
affected by God must, in the nature of the case, present just such char- 
acteristics, and that, therefore, the things predicated of these creatures, in- 
stead of conveying an absurdity, correspond with the comprehensiveness of 
the Plan of Redemption. Indeed, admitting this, we find it throwing 


Prop. 146. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 487 


increased light upon otherwise imperfectly understood passages of Scripture, 
as e.g. Christ’s triumphal entry into Jerusalem when He rode upon an 
animal ‘* whereon never man sat’’ (the words of Jesus and recorded by two 
evangelists, Mark and Luke). Surely, this has a deeper significance than 
to prove Christ’s power over animals ; for taking the analogy of faith, 
seeing what dominion is predicted of Him, regarding this entry as typical 
of the one to come, it points us back to the dominion ascribed to Him in 
Ps. 8 and the prophets—of which the subjection of an wntrained animal is 
a feeble enblem—and then forward to the glorious future when all creatures 
shall experience the wonderful Will and Pleasure of the same King. 
Besides this, before the reader comes to a conclusion upon this particular 
point, let him first pass over the argument respecting the Kingdom ; for if 
the Kingdom of the Messiah is that which we derive from Covenant and 
Prophecy, from His own words and that of His commissioned preachers, 
if it contains the restored Jewish nation and the spared Gentile nations, 
then, indeed, it would be both inconsistent and absurd to have such a 
Kingdom existing without the presence of the lower creation.* 


1 Hence, do not see why Lange quotes him (Com. loci) as sustaining the notion only of 
** the inanimate creation.’’ So also Beza used language which cannot be thus confined. 

® Luther’s expressions are so terse, Luther-like, that we append another illustration 
(Muerer’s Life of Luther, p. 572): As his little dog was begging for food, some one asked 
whether irrational animals would be in the world to come, and he replied: ‘‘ Assuredly, 
for the new heaven and earth will not be desolate and waste, but filled with beautiful 
creatures.” 

8 For a discussion of the laws relating to figurative language, see various writings on 
the subject, as e.g. in Lord’s Lit. and Theol. Journal, Lord’s work On the Laws of Figurative 
Language, Winthrop’s Premium Essay on Proph. Symbols, Sirr’s First Resurrection, Brookes's 
Hi. of Proph. Interp., Bickersteth’s Pract. Guide to the Proph., etc. As it is not part of our 
purpose to discuss those laws, we may only say, that these writers clearly show that a 
metaphor strictly taken ascribes something to a creature which it has not the power of 
performing, and to inanimate objects, acts which only living agents can do, as e.g. the 
man flies, the clouds fly, the sky frowns, the tempest howls, ‘‘ he is the pillar of state,”’ 
the ship flies, etc. The fact, too, is to be noticed that the persons and things to which 
the metaphor is applied are not to be treated as part of the metaphor itself. Other forms 
may exist, but to prove their metaphorical character it must be shown that the metaphor 
—if correct—does not include the whole sentence, but part of it only, and the part which 
is metaphorical ought to be clearly distinguished from the remainder. But in the 
prophecies under consideration, our opponents make no such distinctions, but freely 
appropriate the whole as metaphorical, making creatures, and that which is said of them, 
figures of speech. We only contend that the very naturalness of the predictions pre- 
sented, is so much in our favor for understanding them literally, conveying thus the idea 
of a peaceful, blessed change. 

4 The critical student is reminded (comp. art. ‘‘ Sabbath and Jubilee Year,”’ in Herzog’s 
Cyclop.) that two ideas in connection with the typical nature of the Sabbath and jubilee 
(prop. 143) enforce this doctrine of the deliverance of creation : (1) the land itself and the 
creature upon it was to participate in this Sabbath rest ; if so in the type, how much more 
in the antitype ; (2) the type was based on the Divine ownership and Theocratic relation- 
ship ; if so, how much more largely will this be exhibited in the antitype where this feat- 
ure is more fully manifested. If the Ark is to be taken as a type of Christ (which many 
theologians allow and assert), then as the animals were taken in it and preserved (as well 
as man), so likewise, in reference to perpetuity, will animals find deliverance through 
Christ, for otherwise the typical nature is not carried to its related extent in the anti- 
type. So strong are the reasons favoring such a deliverance, that commentators the most 
largely addicted to spiritualize the prophecies and promises still concede it, as we have 
shown by our quotations. Even Scott (Com., Rom. 8) advocates the deliverance of “ the 
whole visible creation,” and while rejecting the idea of “ an individual resurrection of all 
or any of the animals,’ he still contends that their suffering is ‘‘ transient,’’ since the 
passage teaches that at the period of man’s resurrection they also shall be delivered from 
their ‘“‘ bondage.’’ When considering such passages as 2 Kings 6 :17 and 2: 11, it only 


488 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 146. 


serves to confirm the idea that the animal creation will be allied with the renewed earth, 
Fausset (Com., Isa. 11: 6) remarks: ‘‘ These may be figures of men of corresponding 
animal-like character. Still a literal change in the relations of animals to man and each 
other, restoring the state of Eden, is a more likely interpretation. Cf. Gen. 2 : 19, 20 with 
Ps. 8 : 6-8, which describes the restoration to man, in the person of ‘ the Son of man,’ of 
the lost dominion over the animal kingdom of which he has been designed to be the 
merciful vicegerent under God, for the good of His animal subjects, Rom. 8 : 19-22.” 
Dr. Seiss (The Last Times, p. 226) says : ‘* When God made man, He said to him, ‘ Have 
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and 
over all the earth.’ This dominion Adam lost. The rebellion of the soul against God 
brought with it the rebellion of the flesh against the spirit, and of nature against the 
entire man. Discords, antipathies, and a thousand evils ensued. Christ is the Second 
Adam, and by subverting the empire of Satan He regains the dominion which Adam lost 
and carries His redemption as far as the consequences of the fall have reached.’ Bicker- 
steth (Pract. Guide, p. 218): ‘‘ The blessedness of the Kingdom of God terminates not 
merely in the glorified saints being happy in their own glory and the vision of the Lord ; 
the whole earth, after those purifying judgments which shall come upon it, has the deep- 
est interest init. It is sublimely represented as now waiting forit with earnest longing, 
Rom. 8 : 19-23. In this passage there is a clear distinction between a blessedness to be 
given in the manifestation of the sons of God, and another blessing in the deliverance of 
the creation at large from the bondage of corruption.’’ Brookes (Maranutha, p. 214) ex- 
hibits a cardinal doctrine of Millenarianism as follows: “ All the departments of nature, 
involved in the consequences of the first man’s shameful defeat, must exhibit the fruits of 
the second man’s magnificent victory.” Graff (Graybeard’s Lay Sermons, No. 35), refer- 
ring to the reign of Christ, adds: ‘‘ Even the natural ferocity of the brute creation will be 
subdued into gentleness during that age of abounding plenty and restrained evil.” 
Numerous quotations of a similar nature might be given, but we conclude by saying: It 
is not necessary in adopting this view of an ultimate deliverance of creation to indorse 
the idea of a resurrection (Clarke, Wesley, etc.) or of continued existence after death, 
owing to immateriality and immortality (comp. Agassiz’s Essay on Classification, pp. 
97-99 ; Fiske’s Myths and Mythmakers, p. 231 ; Pallister’s Thoughts upon the Immaterial 
Spirit of the Brute Ureation » Wood’s Man and Beast, Here and Hereafter ; Cook’s Lectures on 
Biology, Lect. 9; Bh. Butler’s Analogy, etc.), the view that at the Sec. Advent the crea- 
tion, as then existing, is delivered, being amply sufficient to cover the promises. It is 
interesting to observe Huxley’s (Are Animals Automatons ? Pop. Sci. Monthly, Oct., 1874) 
references to Augustine, Calvin, Edwards, Leibnitz, Malebranche, Hartley, Bonnet, 
Locke, etc., as well as the remarks of Tyndall, Hazard, Lindsay, etc., in this direction. 


Obs. 4. As the curse is to be repealed, it is necessary to go back to the 
record in Genesis to ascertain its extent, and from this deduce what the 
deliverance will affect. Our opponents, admitting the literalness of the 
curse (as witnessed to-day) in nearly all its aspects, admit, in consequence, 
nearly all that is requisite to form the restitution or removal of the curse, 
as e.g. that relating to the earth and man. But two parts of the curse are 
set aside and for which no reparation is looked for or deemed necessary, vViz., 
the perpetuation of the race in a fallen instead of an unfallen condition, 
(and the suffering attendant to it), and the enmity existing between the 
seed of the woman and the seed of the serpent. ‘lhe former will be con- 
sidered in a following proposition (Prop. 152); the latter may as well be 
contemplated under our present one. This becomes the more important, 
since writers of ability (as Fairbairn, On Proph., p. 85-88) attempt to in- 
validate our fundamental grammatical interpretation by appealing to this 
curse, and asserting that a construction of it, in accordance with the 
usual laws of language, would invalidate our entire interpretation of proph- 
ecy, etc.’ It is a fact that too many, overlooking that history proper (i.e. 
in its more detailed statements) begins with Abraham, make too much of 
the introductory to history, and must needs find the Redemptive process 
fully contained in the curse itself. That is scarcely the place to find it; 


Prop. 146. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 489 


and, what is remarkable, finding it in a very obscure allusion and nowhere 
else, they themselves admit that, as the sacrifices indicate and the piety of 
those ancients show, etc., they must have received communications not 
recorded. Precisely so; and the simple fact follows, that the briefest of 
epitomes is given—just sufficient—in order to understand the relationship 
that Abraham sustains to those gone before and to those coming after. 
But to return to the record : the very writers who bring in the objection 
that Gen. 3:15 (“ And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and 
beween thy seed and her seed ; tt shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise 
his heel’’) can only be understood spiritually, viz., of Christ—the seed— 
bruising or destroying Satan—themselves admit a literal Eden, a literal 
fall, that Eve spoke of a literal serpent (v. 13, whatever the influence upon 
the serpent may have been), a literal curse upon the serpent, a literal curse 
upon the woman and man, and a literal curse upon the earth. The only 
exception to be found in the narrative is the enmity ; nothing else is 
spiritualized, neither the grovelling position of the serpent, nor the sorrow- 
ful parturition of the woman, nor the toil and corruption of man, nor the 
thorns and. thistles of earth. The enmity, however, is part of the curse and © 
cannot, without violence, be separated from it. The serpent as a bodied 
being (not merely as an external agent) is cursed ; and it is said to him 
that such enmity should continue to exist between him and the woman, 
and his seed, and the woman’s seed, and that he should constantly feel and 
experience man’s superiority in the injury mutually inflicted. The degrada- 
tion and enmity followed—it has been realized thousands of years—and 
as every other portion of the curse is repealed, it is not surprising to find 
that, in the prophecies just noticed (Obs. 3), this very enmity is predicted 
to come to an end, so that the most unprotected of that woman’s seed (even 
‘‘the sucking child’’ and ‘‘ the weaned child’’) shall be perfectly safe in 
the company of the serpent. The curse thus understood finds 7¢s mate 
(and hence the proof of the correctness of our position) in the removal of 
the same. Whatever agency (Comp. Martensen’s Dog.) may have been in 
the background, one thing is certain, that the woman did not refer to it, 
and there is no just reason for believing that God has such reference in the 
curse. And, as Dr. Lord (Theol. and Lit. Journal for Jan., 1857) aptly 
remarks in his reply to Fairbairn : ‘‘ The punishment of the seed of the 
serpent is a wholly dissimilar thing from the redemption of the seed of the 
woman. They present a contrast, not a similitude. The one has no suit- 
ableness to indicate the other, nor is one necessarily or naturally involved 
in and a consequence of the other.”’ It would be difficult, indeed, to show 
in what ¢he adaptation to represent redemption consists, and this difficulty 
must have been greater to Adam than tous. A writer (H. A. R. Proph. 
Times, Aug., 1869) has well expressed this: ‘‘ Must not the words have 
been to him a densely dark enigma? An enigma, in its obscurity and 
mystery, calculated to increase, rather than relieve, his perplexity. Read 
the words—placing yourself as much as possible in Adam’s position when 
they were delivered—and find from them alone, if you can, any consola- 
tion for the smitten hearts of the disconsolate pair !’’ Before such an 
application of the passage is made by Fairbairn and others, it must first be 
proven : (1) that Satan is the one that is cursed in the serpent in verse 14 ; 
(2) that the pronouns in verse 15, being connected by the copulative 
“ and’? with the preceding, do not relate to the same serpent doomed to go 
upon his belly ; (3) that the seed of the same serpent cursed are ‘* wicked 


490 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Propr. 146. 


men’? and that the seed of the woman are only “‘ righteous persons ;’’ (4) 
or, that if the seed of the woman is limited ¢o one person, the seed of the 
serpent, expressed in the same way, is not also to be thus determined ; (5) 
that when the curse was pronounced upon the serpent’s seed, it was vir- 
tually a curse proclaimed wpon a portion of the woman’s seed ; (6) that if 
the wicked are called ‘‘ children of the devil,’’ etc., in view of this passage 
(and not because of their adopting, etc., his spirit), then the righteous 
should be called ‘‘ the children of the woman,’’ because of the enmity 
between the two seeds ; (7) that if the grammatical sense is not allowable in 
the 15th verse, why it should be tolerated in the preceding and following 
verses ; (8) that the literal fulfilment of the curse in the woman, man, 
earth, and serpent should have no influence in deciding the literalness of 
a fact, viz., the enmity existing between the serpent tribe and man, also 
evidenced dy actual fulfilment. The truth is, that, without denying that 
the serpent may have been controlled by external agency (for that forms 
another and different subject), the more we depart from the plain gram- 
matical sense, the greater the difficulties pertaining to the passage, while 
the nearer we keep to its literal meaning, the easier we make it of solution. 
We find it as a curse ; as a curse we actually see it entailed ; and as a curse 
we find that it shall ultimately be removed ; and God’s Word and honor is 
more completely vindicated in observing this connection, which the words 
do bear, than to seek for an inferential, symbolic, or spiritual meaning 
which, perforce, they must contain.? 

! Viz., by holding up the absurdity of what he is pleased to call ‘‘a bald and naked 
literalism,’’ which would be ‘‘ at variance with the character of God,’’ so that *‘ the - 
simply literal for prophecy will not do at the very outset’ (although he afterward makes 
this a plea in behalf of the First Advent of Christ), and that we who hold to such conelu- 
sions ‘‘ are not to be reasoned with, but must be held naturally or morally incompetent 
to deal with matters of such a kind.’’ The reader feels at once that Genesis is ap- 
proached by Fairbairn with a preconceived opinion ; that it is prejudged before examined, 
and precisely on the same principle adopted by unbelievers, viz., upon what he may 
regard proper and right for God to say and do in the matter ; and then gives the sense 
which best suits his ideas of God’s character and doings. He may, indeed, have been 
unaware of the spirit thus openly manifested—for he is a writer that we esteem—but it 
nevertheless exhibits itself, as various criticisms from different sources have agreed in 
pointing out, and as the few sentences just repeated abundantly evidence. 

® See the allegorical, mythical and literal interpretations contrasted, Knapp’s Christ. 
T heol., s. 75, and notice how even those who are disposed to find chiefly a moral teach- 
ing, etc., from the narrative, yet admit much that is literal, as e.g. Knapp’s own view, 
same section II. (3) (a). Knapp, in view of what has been written, is not far from the — 
truth, when he tells us that the very ‘‘ simplicity of the narrative” is a difficulty to “‘the © 
learned interpreter,’’ who must find ‘* something of higher import and more philosophical 
than is contained in the simple words.” While interpreting, as we do, we can also use the 
prediction as referring to Christ and His ultimately crushing Satan ‘‘ that old serpent,” 
because the Scriptures, in their allusions to the curse and contest, employ the serpent as ~ 
a type of Satan and his end i.e. we have both a historical and symbolic meaning. 


Obs. 5. Without pressing this subject into details (which are not given), 
we ought to be content with the general statements made concerning the 
deliverance of creation, which are sufficiently extended in their nature to- 
indicate a completeness of Redemption, reaching to a restoration of all the 
forfeited blessings.’ To extend this deliverance to the whole universe, as~ 
Origen and some moderns, is to extend it beyond the bounds of the prevail-— 
ing curse; to confine it to ‘‘ inanimate creation,’ as Theophylact and 
others, is to leave the curse unrepealed upon an important member of 
creation ; to limit it to *‘ humanity,’’ as Augustine, or, to ‘‘ Gentiles,”’ as 


Prop. 146.] THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 491 


Locke, or, to ‘‘ the Jewish people,’’ as Cramer, or, to ‘* Gentile Christians,”’ 
as Clericus, or, to ‘‘ Jewish Christians,’’ as Gockel, or, to ‘“‘ renewed be- 
lievers,’’ as Barnes, etc., is both to circumscribe the promise of restitution 
and the actual removal of the curse, leaving out that element of univer- 
sality commensurate with the extent of the fall. Only two opinions can 
be held—consistent with the Plan of Redemption and promise—on this 
subject. One, to which we have given our adhesion, so far as Rom. 8 : 19- 
23 alone is concerned, is that ‘‘ inanimate and animate nature in contra- 
distinction from humanity’’ (so Lange states, as held by Ireneus, Grotius, 
Calovius, Neander, Meyer, De Wette, Hodge, Alford, etc., on Rom. 
8 : 19-23) is denoted. But if confined to this alone, it would do injustice 
to our real doctrine and to the sentiments of some of those quoted, who, 
with us, hold that this only expresses the meaning of Paul in Rom. 8, 
where the deliverance of believers is said to be connected with that of 
creation (as explained), while in other places the deliverance of the race— 
humanity as such—is also specifically taught. Hence, it has been intimated 
(foot-note under Obs. 2) that we can cordially accept of the opinion ad- 
vocated by Lange (Com., Rom. 8), that in this rescue of ‘‘ the creature’’ is 
denoted, ‘‘ the whole creation, rational as well as irrational, not yet re- 
deemed, but needing and capable of redemption ;’’ incorporating Riddle’s 
remark: ‘‘ The limitation to creation, as capable of redemption, implies 
that only so much of creation as is linked with the fall of man, and subject 
to the curse, should be included.’’ Now, the curse has fallen upon the 
race, and all nations experience its sad consequences, but our doctrine of 
the Kingdom explicitly teaches that after the manifestation or the resur- 
rection of the sons of God, the race, the nations, both Jewish and Gentile, 
shall be delivered from the heavy pressure of the curse (Prop. 152). » 
Therefore, it is that this view not only harmonizes with our .doctrine, but 
the latter serves to explain how and when it is most fully realized. If it 
should be thought essential not to exclude humanity and yet preserve the 
distinction between present renewed humanity and creation (Rom. 8), our 
doctrine of the Kingdom unmistakably does this, showing that humanity, 
as ib now exists, cannot possibly hope for the deliverance—predicted by the 
prophets—until the firstfruits of believers receive the redemption of the 
body. Our doctrine thus even fortifies the opinion of Lange and others, 
and most forcibly confirms the rendering: ‘‘ Into the freedom of the 
glory’’ (instead of ‘‘ glorious liberty’ of E. V.) ‘‘ of the children of God,”’ 
seeing that when the sons of God are manifested in the glory of their ruler- 
ship, etc., the nations themselves are represented as sharing in the blessings 
resulting from the same.’ 


1 Lange (Com., Rom. 8, doct. remarks on v. 18-27, 5.) (2) makes some judicious remarks, 
suggesting ‘‘a return of nature to collective fundamental types,’’ ‘‘ the preponderance of 
constant existence over an excited growth,’’ the revival of pure forms, ‘‘ the negation of 
parasites,’’ ‘the reflexive formation of the morbid form of death in original, ideal 
forms,” and ‘** the absolute connection of the creature thus idealized with man, and its 
appropriation by man.” So little has been given respecting the changes then intro- 
duced, that we can only conjecture concerning them. The reader will see from our posi- 
tion that we are not prepared to go as far as Clarke, Wesley and others suggestive of a 
resurrection of animals (neither denying nor affirming concerning it), for as the deliverance 
of inanimate creation does not demand a restitution of all vegetable life, etc., and as the 
deliverance of the race (as we shall show hereafter) does not require that all of the past 
race (excepting believers) should participate in it, so the removal of the curse from animal 
_ life does not positively require the resurrection of the dead. Comp. Alford, Bengel, etc., 
on this passage. 


492. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 146, 


2 The student is cautioned not to limit this deliverance to the Sec. Advent and resur- 
rection of the saints, or even to the Mill. age. It is true that then an astounding deliver. 
ance, a mighty and glorious change is witnessed, so that that period is pre-eminently set 
before us as the beginning of restitution, a work (as shown before) which runs thro 
the Millennium and finds its ultimate completion in the ages following—for after the 
thousand years and little season has expired, we find the earth giving up its remaining 
dead, and ‘‘ death and hell (Hades, Rev. 20 : 14) were cast into the lake of fire’’ i.e. are 
removed from the earth, utterly destroyed ; thus introducing a new order of things, an 
advancement or progress in which these no longer exist. This whole subject shows how ~ 
unjustly those (as e.g. Fiske in The Christ of Dogma, p. 111, in The Unseen World ) judge 
Paul, who make him to teach “‘ the end of the world,’’ a doctrine—however a favorite © 
with some moderns—the most remote from his expressed views. It may be added that 
the line of Paul’s reasoning, the mention of the creature subjected to vanity and the 
bondage of corruption, the promise of deliverance from the same, leads us at once to 
consider the fall and its results as detailed by the Scriptures and experienced by man, 
and then the Plan of recovery through the Saviour provided, a recovery which promises 
a complete restitution. If this is done, it inevitably brings us to the conclusions drawn 
by Paul as a logical sequence, fortified as it is by the early Church belief, a faith evi- 
dently drawn from apostolic teaching. Barbour ( Worlds, p. 45), to favor his theory of 
restitution, makes ‘‘ the creature’ of Rom. 8 to be the same as that of Mark 16 :15ie. — 
men in the flesh. But eminent critics include the material creation in Mark, as e.g. Sirr 
(First Res., Ap. p. 151) renders it : ‘‘ Going into the whole world announce the glad tidings 
for the whole creation’’ (and e.g. Col. 1 : 23 in or ‘‘ through the whole creation under 
heaven,” as it was not preached to every individual). So Nast (Com. loci) “ to the whole 
creation,’ and points out that Steir makes ‘“ creation becoming an actual partaker of 
redemption, having been through man’s fall subjected (Rom. 8 : 19-23) to vanity and 
corruption ;’ that Bengel makes it applicable as wide as the curse extended to men, the 
brute creation, and all nature, in brief, ‘‘ all that needs restoration ;’ that the Berleng- — 
burg Bible sums it up : ‘‘ The entire Gospel refers to the relation of the creature to God; _ 
helping it to find its Creator again and its eternal good.” Lange comments: ‘* The 
renewal or restoration of the world through the Gospel is a promise that pervades the — 
whole Scriptures (comp. Deut. 28 ; Isa. 11 and 65:17; Rom. 8; Rev. 21), and in Our — 
text this promise receives the confirmation and sanction of Christ.’’ ‘‘ The idea of a 
universal palingenesia we find clearly intimated by the Apostle Peter (Acts 2 : 20 and — 
3:20, 21; 2 Pet. 1:4, and 3:13).” In view, therefore, of the Gospel containing the glad 
tidings of deliverance, not only to man, but to the burdened creation, we certainly should 
be guarded lest we limit its meaning in our interpretations. The personification of even — 
inanimate creation can certainly form no objection to the intelligent reader, after the 
numerous examples recorded of the same in Scripture, as e.g. in the land, corn, wine, oil 
and beasts in Joel 1 : 10-20 ; comp. Jer. 12 : 4; Isa. 24: 4-7; 13:13; 33:9; 34: 4, ete, 
Dr. Cumming (The Great Tribulation, p. 29), taking this scriptural view of restitution, — 
eloquently says: “ All that God has made, from the star in the sky to the flower upon 
the field, from the ephemeral insect in the sunbeam to the archangel that worships by — 
the throne, all shall be retained ; what has gone wrong shall be made right, what Satan 
has usurped shall be taken from his grasp ; and this weary world of ours, that has wept, — 
and groaned, and suffered so long, shall be emancipated from its thraldom, reinstated in 
more than its pristine magnificence and beauty, and the world close with a Paradise 
vastly more magnificent and beautiful than that with which it began.’’ Dr. Nigelsbach 
(Lange’s Com. Isa. p. 695), in delineating the new heavens and new earth, adds : *‘ There 
will be a renovation even of the animal world. It will be in harmony with the spirit of 
peace and love, which will prevail in the entire new creation.” 


Obs. 6. In view of the Supernatural being wonderfully exerted in this 
deliverance, two remarks may be appended : First, in the study of this” 
subject the reader ought to keep in view a fact already evidenced in crea- 
tion, preservation, Incarnation, etc., viz., that the Supernatural har- 
monizes itself with the natural. This will curb that extravagance of 
expression respecting the future Supernatural (i.e. making all such), and 
will restrain the undue depreciation of the natural (i.e. removing it as if 1b 
were, as Gnosticism taught, sinful, etc.). Second, that this deliverance, 
running like a golden thread through the whole Word, and interwoven as 


Prop. 146. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 493 


it is with Millennial descriptions, portraying an Edenic state in which the 
nations of the earth shall immeasurably rejoice, confirms the position that 
we have taken concerning the church. Fighting, struggling, suffering, 
witnessing, etc., the Church, instead of experiencing the promised deliver- 
ance, looks forward to the day when her believing and faithful sons and 
daughters shall be manifested, and then her groanings and desires, now 
constantly arising—pressed out by the curse—shall give place to joy and 
realization. Any other view is an undue exalting of the Church in its 
present state, over against existing facts, at the expense of the precious 
and oath-covered promises of God. 


If the reader desires to see how Rom. 8 : 20-22 can be spiritualized and its fulfilment 
be attributed to causes now at work (as e.g. the union of Science and Religion, education, 
etc.), he will find it in Beecher’s sermon on this text, entitled ‘‘ The whole world in pain” 
(Ch. Union, Jan. 30th, 1878). He remarks of our view : “ The Second Adventists—honor- 
able, noble men, than whom there are no better—hold that until the personal reign of 
Jesus Christ is ushered in, it makes but little difference what they do. They hold that 
all that can be done is to crutch. up this world until the Saviour comes, when, by His 
influence and power He will put an end to all wickedness, and introduce righteousness 
everywhere.” Beecher’s view is eloquently expressed, but is contradicted by the plain 
grammatical sense which entails a curse, a bondage which man, with all the resources of 
nature, religion, etc., is utterly unable to remove, and which awaits (e.g. Acts 3 : 20, 21, 
comp. Prop. 144) the return of Jesus, who alone can (Rey. 21 : 5) ‘* make all things new.” 
He fails to inform us how the expedients proposed by him can lift the entailed curse from 
the creation, when even the most pious and devoted servants of God experience, with 
tears and sorrow, its continued and prevailing force. We may repeat Dr. Dorner’s (Per- 
son of Christ, vol. 1, p. 412) pregnant declaration : ‘‘ Complete victory Christianity never 
can be, until nature has become an organ of its service, a willing instrument of the perfect 
man, that is, of the righteous who are raised from the dead.” (Comp. Prop. 120.) Itis 
a matter of regret that liberal Jews, accepting of the unbelief of the destructive schools, 
deny—over against the testimony of their own prophets—this deliverance. Thus e.g. 
The Amer. Israelite (May 30th, 1879, Dr. Wise, editor) declares : ‘‘ The Old Test. states 
nowhere that this physical world will ever undergo a radical change. There is wonder- 
ful stability in the laws of nature without the least indication that this planet is to 
undergo a serious revolution in the next million of years.” Alas! what faith this ex- 
presses in the promises of God given to Jewish forefathers! Such writers fall under the 
scriptural category of being ‘‘ willingly ignorant.”’ 


494 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 147, 


Proposition 147. This Kingdom is preceded by a wonderful 


shaking of the heavens and earth. 


The student who has followed our argument will at once antici- | 


pate such a result, for the Kingdom, in its Theocratic aspect, with 
its design and connections (e.g. restored Jewish nation), cannot 
possibly be erected here on earth without a fearful commotion, 


the most terrible convulsions among the nations, in which nature 


itself is represented as partaking. The Millennial descriptions are 
introduced by this preparatory shaking, and every prophet, more 
or less, has portrayed its dreadful nature. It is sufficient to direct 
attention to two passages, which clearly announce it. Hag. 2: 6, 
7, “ Thus saith the Lord of Hosts ; Yet once, it ts a little while, 
and Iwill shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the 
dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the desire of all 
nations shall come: and I will fill this house with glory,’ ete. 
Heb. 12: 26, 27, 28, ‘* Whose (Gods) voice then (at Mt. Sinai) 
shook the earth: but now He hath promised, saying, Yet once 
more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven. And this word, 
Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are 
shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which 
cannot be shaken may remain. Wherefore we receiving a King- 
dom which cannot be moved, let us,’ etc. Two facts locate the 
fulfilment of these passages in the future, viz., (1) that before and 
at the First Advent there was no such shaking, for universal peace 
(Kurtz’s Sac. His., p. 278) existed when Jesus came, and (2) that 


Paul in Hebrew speaks of this shaking, not as past, but as future. — 


Obs. 1. Unfortunately with the rejection of the doctrine of the Kingdom, 
many writers, not knowing what else to do with the passages quoted, appl 
them to the First Advent, thus forsaking the Early Church view whic 
understood them to refer to the future Advent.’ Notwithstanding this 
application, others who have but little sympathy with our doctrine, still 
regard them as related to the future. Thus, e.g. Storr (Diss. on Kingdom 
of Heaven) affirms that this shaking of the heavens and earth is yet to be 
fulfilled, and suggests that the apostle, in Heb. 12 : 25, does not quote from 
Haggai but from some saying of Christ’s uttered respecting the Kingdom 
of God (probably based on the prophet), and not recorded. Gildas (A. D. 
546) renders Haggai as follows: ‘‘ Thus, saith our Lord, I will once move 


the heaven, and earth, and sea, and dry land, and I will drive away the 


thrones of kings, and root out the power of the kings of the Gentiles, and 
I will chase away the chariots of those who mount upon them.’’ The 
reader will see that Gildas properly identifies Hag. 2 : 22 as explanatory of 


> 9a ee Ce eee 


i 


Prop. 147. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 495 


the other passage, and incorporates it, and thus, instead of applying the 
prophet’s language to an overthrow of the Jewish polity, etc. (as now so 
current, although the civil polity was overthrown at First Advent), assigns 
it to a complete downfall of Gentile domination, thus making it accord with 
numerous predictions. Augustine (City of God, B. 18, Ch. 35) says that 
Hag. 2: 6 is partly fulfilled, but will only be fully accomplished ‘‘ at His 
last Coming.’’ (Gilfillan, in Christianity and our Era, adopts this double 
fulfilment.)’ Numerous opinions of this kind might be quoted, but these 
are sufficient to indicate how, in the light of prophecies which all admit 
are still future and pertain to the period of the Sec. Coming, it is impossi- 
ble for some of those, who adopt the Church-Kingdom view, to confine 
these passages to the First Advent. Indeed, let any one dispassionately 
consider what really occurred at the First Advent, then what is here pre- 
dicted, and finally what a shaking of the heavens and earth, of nations, 
etc., is still described as future, as e.g. under the last vial, Rev. 16 : 18-21 ; 
at the conflagration, 2 Pet. 3; at the time of the confederation, Rev. 19 ; 
Joel, 3, etc., and it seems strange that believers in the Word should be so 
reluctant to acknowledge this shaking to be still future, when they freely 
locate the predictions mentioned, which include just such a shaking, at a 
time which is yet to come, 'The reason is apparent: the theory adopted 
respecting the Judgment and Judgment Day makes such an interpretation 
antagonistic to their expressed views, for they cannot reconcile with their 
theory the Coming of the Desire of all nations, the filling of the house 
with glory and making the glory of this latter house greater than that of 
the former, bestowing peace, etc. All these things are opposed to their _ 
notions of the ending of time, the winding up of sublunary things, etce., 
and hence, whether it fits or not, all these things must be engrafted in some 
way upon the First Advent. Our doctrine is not thus trammelled. The 
re-established Theocracy under David’s Son introduces the Desire of all 
nations, destows peace and prosperity, brings a glory to the Davyidic and 
Lord’s house transcendently greater than the world has ever yet witnessed.* 
But this can never be realized without the most extraordinary revolutions, 
the most unprecedented changes and convulsions, which are characterized 
as ‘“a shaking of the heavens and earth.” Jesus (Matt. 24: 29; Mark 
13:25; Luke 21 : 26), in accord with the general tenor of prophecy, pre- 
dicts that, ‘* the powers of the heavens shall be shaken,’’ which is linked with 
* distress of nations,’’ ‘* mourning of the tribes of the earth,”’ ‘* men’s hearts 
failing them for fear, and for looking after those things which are coming 
on the earth,’ and ‘* the Cominy of the Son of man in the clouds of 
heaven.’’ ‘The reader will notice that Barnes (Com. loci) and many others, 
who, against a comparison of these predictions, apply this shaking to the 
Roman army destroying Jerusalem, etc., fully admit that it also refers to the 
period of the Second Advent. This shaking, too, as the connection shows, 
is for purposes of overthrow, utter destruction, and radical change ; 7¢ ts 
preliminary to the setting up of a Kingdom that cannot be moved, 2.¢. 
everlasting, ever-enduring. It is a shaking of Gentile domination 
(Hag. 2 : 21, 22) to its complete removal, making place for the incoming 
Kingdom of Jesus. It is a shaking similar to the shaking of the Babylon- 
lan heavens and earth mentioned by Isaiah (13 : 13). It 1s that shaking of 
_ the heavens and earth (Joel 3 : 16) preceding the dwelling again of God in 
Jerusalem and the Millennial glory. It is that terrible shaking of the 
earth described by the prophet (Isa. 2: 19, 21), when the glory of the 


496 THE TILEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 147. 


Lord’s Majesty shall appear. It includes that ‘* great shaking in the land 
of Israel,’’? when God shall destroy the enemies and restore the Jewish 
nation to their own land, thus magnifying Himself in the eyes of many 
nations. 


1 Thus e.g. the Exp. of Macknight (On the Hpis. loci) is very defective (being evidently 
forced to seek a meaning to suit his theory of the future), and the peroration of v. 28 
seems to us a mere parody of Scripture, thus paraphrased : ‘‘ Wherefore we, the disciples 
of God’s Son, having in the Gospel dispensation received the Kingdom foretold by Daniel 
to be given to the saints, and which is never to be shaken, let us,” ete. How an inter. 
preter can possibly locate Daniel’s Kingdom here (at First Advent), when the prophecy 
expressly limits it after the destruction of the hostile powers, etc. ; and how, under the 
terrible persecution, trials, etc., of the Church, he can profess this to be a fulfilment of 
Daniel, is beyond our comprehension. ‘The same remarks are applicable to Barnes and 
nearly all the spiritualistic commentaries. On the other hand, valuable commentaries 
and writers return to the early Church view, as the only one consistent with Scripture. 
Thus e.g. Lange’s Com. loci correctly refers this shaking to the closing period of this age 
(Mic. 7:15; Hab. 3; Hag. 2), and adds: “ The shaking refers not to any convulsions 
accompanying the entrance of Christianity into the world (Coccei., a Lapid., Bohm, Klee, 
etc.), but to the final consummation’’ (Theodoret Theoph., Erasmus, Bez., Bleek, Thol., 
etc.). In favor of the latter, Bengel, Hofmann, Delitzsch, Van Oosterzee, Alford, ete. 
Some, as Fausset (Com. Hag. 2), make a double or continued fulfilment: ‘‘ The shaking 
began introductory to the First Advent ; it will be finished at the Second. Concerning 
the former, Cf. Matt. 3:17; 27:51; 28:2; Acts 2:2; 4:31; concerning the latter, 
Matt; 24 7s Rev. 162205018 < 20 2201 142 

2 Luther (Michelet’s Life, Tischreden, etc.) evidently referred this shaking to the future, 
when in the general consternation produced by the Turkish invasion he said, ‘‘ they (the 
Turks) must needs come and give us the promised shaking.” For his view of the Voice 
of Jesus causing this shaking at Sec. Advent, see Meurer’s Life of Luther, p. 573-74, ete. 

’ The student need not be reminded that the expression of Haggai ‘“‘ and the desire of 
ali nations shall come’ 1s variously interpreted. It is admitted to be a difficult passage. 
The original, many critics inform us, cannot well be applied to a person. Hence, other 
translations are offered as ‘‘ desirable things’’ denoting either presents brought by the 
nations, or the things desired by the nations. The Vulgate has it, ‘‘ and that which is 
desired shall come to all nations,’’ or as others ‘‘ the desired One shall come to all 
nations,’ or as others, ‘‘ the desired things shall come to all nations.” Dr. Clarke, Com. 
loci, advocates ‘‘ desirable things,’’ that the nations will bring them, viz., the silver and 
gold mentioned in the next verse, and this would then accord with several Mill. predic- 
tions, where the kings and nations bring presents, etc. Dr. Clarke pointedly says: “I 
cannot see how the words can apply to Jesus Christ.” If this is so, it would materially 
strengthen its non-application fo the First Advent. As to the glory of the latter house, 
this can be readily applied to the Messianic Kingdom in which ‘‘ the desolate house” 
shall be rebuilt with a magnificence (see Isa. 60, etc.) superior to the former. It must 
be borne in mind that in the Spirit’s estimation the temple is associated with the Theo- 
cratic arrangement, it being erected before the Theocracy was overthrown, and it being 
the chosen place where God Himself dwelt as the nation’s Ruler, associated with the 
Davidic Kingdom, and that it will be again rebuilt and form a latter house. Many who 
do not entertain our doctrine make the phraseology apply to ‘‘ the Kingdom of Christ.” 
Comp. Isa. 2 ; Micah 4, as given e.g. under Prop. 170. 


Obs. 2. One of the best dissertations on this subject is that given by Dr. 
Owen inasermon. After refuting the interpretation of Rollocus, Pisca- 
tor, etc. (who make earth the inhabitants and heaven the angels, which 
men and angels were shaken with amazement, etc., at events of First 
Advent and preaching of the Gospel), by showing that the shaking was not 
yet accomplished when the apostle spoke, that it mwst exceed all former 
shakings, and that the things shaken are removed ; after rebutting the 


opinion of Junius and many Commentators (viz., that heaven and earth 
denote the material parts of the world, etc., and the shaking comprised the 


signs, prodigies, darkness, earthquake, opening of graves, etc., attending 


Prop. 147. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 497 


Christ’s birth and death) by similar objections, he then refers to the view 
of Pareeus, Grotius, etc., that this has reference to the dissolution of the 
heavens and earth at the last day, but argues that the things shaken are to 
be removed that the Kingdom of Jesus may be established, and pertinently 
inquires, taking such a sense as the ending of all sublunary things, what 
hindrance the material earth and heaven are to such an establishment, and 
concludes that the Kingdom will not be brought in until after the Sec. 
Advent or the judgment.’ He then enters into an interesting discussion, 
appealing to Hag. 2: 6, 7, saying that ‘‘ I will shake the heavens and the 
earth’’ and ‘* Z will shake all nations’’ is a pleonasm for ‘‘ J will shake the 
heavens and the earth of all nations—making the ‘‘ heavens of the nations’”’ 
the political heights and glory, forms of government, etc., while the nations’ 
earth is the multitude of their people, their strength and power, whereby 
the heayens are supported.* Owen’s argument is materially confirmed ; if 
we turn tothe latter part of the chapter in Haggai, and notice how the 
prophet explains by the parallelism how ‘‘ the throne of Kingdoms’’ will be 
‘ overthrown’? and ‘* the strength of the Kingdoms of the heathen’’ will be 
** destroyed,’’ which finds an accurate correspondence in many prophecies 
ase.g. Ps. 2; Dan. 2:44; Rev. 11 : 13-18, etc., that describe the erection 
of the Messiah’s Kingdom to follow the fearful downfall of the Kings and 
Kingdoms of the earth, who are represented (as e.g. Rev. 19, etc.) as con- 
federated against the truth. In perfect agreement with the tenor of the 
old prophets, who describe the Gentile domination to come to an end 
(Prop. 164) and to give place to that covenanted Theocratic order which is 
everlasting, Paul most delicately (to avoid exciting unduly the hostility of 
the Roman Empire, under which the believers then lived) and yet effective- 
ly declares the result of this shaking, just as Daniel and all the prophets 
portray it, viz., ‘*‘ the removing of those things that are (marg. may be) 
shaken’ (i.e. those Kingdoms), ‘‘ as of things that are made’ (i.e. tem- 
porarily allowed, or created), *‘ that those things which cannot be shaken 
may remain’ (i.e, the covenanted and oath-bound promises respecting the 
Kingdom now to be realized in the restored Theocratic arrangement under 
David’s Son), *‘ wherefore, we receiving a Kingdom’’ (the same that is thus 
covenanted and which saints inherit), ‘‘ which cannot be moved’? (i.e. will 
never be thus shaken and destroyed like the others), ‘‘ le¢ us,’’ etc. It is 
hard to say which excites our greatest surprise and admiration, the remark- 
able nicety of Paul’s language, thus avoiding the prejudice (cruel and 
persecuting) of Gentile rulers, without in the least sacrificing truth ; or ¢he 
exceeding harmony, even in the minutest particulars, between him and 
men who spoke many centuries before him.*® 


1 Dr. Owen says “‘ after the day of judgment,’’ while we, taking a different view of the 
day of judgment (see Prop. 133), make them contemporaneous, etc, 

* Heavens is thus used, Isa. 13 : 10-13; Jer. 4 : 23-25 ; Ezek. 32 :7; Isa. 34:4, 5; 
Joel 2: 10; Isa. 14 : 12-15, etc. So earth is employed, Rev. 12 :16; Gen. 6 : 11, ete. ; 
popular commotion is designated, Rev. 11 : 13, etc. ; civil revolution is denoted by a 
shaking of the earth, earthquakes, etc., as Joel 2:10; heaven and earth combined form- 
ing ‘fa political universe’ (see e.g. Horne’s Index to Symb. Language, vol. 2, word 
heavens”), Isa. 51:16. The reader is referred to Faber’s Diss. on the Prophecies, ch. 2, 
On the Symb. Language of Prophecy, for some interesting remarks on the symbolic 
or figurative meaning of heaven and earth. A vast number of writers admit the figura- 
tive use of heaven and earth and the shaking here meant. We have room only for a 


| few. Archbishop Newcome says on Hag. 2: 6, etc., that ‘‘the political or religious 


revolutions which were to be effected in the world, or both, are here referred to,” etc. 
(He also affirms that ‘‘ Messiah’s Kingdom” is denoted in the prophecy.) Although mis- 


498 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 147. 


’ 


applying it, he makes a good remark on the word “ once,” viz., that it denotes one 
peculiar, distinctive, great final revolution. Dr. I. Smith, in his Summary View, etc., 
says: ‘‘ Great earthquakes and the shaking of heaven and earth denote the commotion 
and overthrow of kingdoms.” Sir I. Newton (0b. Proph., I. ch. 2): ‘* Great earthquakes 
and the shaking of heaven and earth are put for the shaking of kingdoms, so as to dis- 
tract and overthrow them.’’ Bishop Newton (On the Proph.) remarks, p. 362: ‘‘ In the 
prophetic language great commotions and revolutions upon earth are often represented 
by commotions and changes in the heavens.” So also Bh. Warburton (Divine Legation, 
vol. 2, b. 4, s. 4) ‘‘ asin the hieroglyphic writing, the sun, moon, stars, were used to 
represent states and empires, kings, queens, and nobility ; their eclipse and extinction, 
temporary disasters or entire overthrow, etc., so in like manner the holy prophets call 
kings and empires by the names of the heavenly luminaries ; their misfortunes and 
overthrow are represented by eclipses and extinction,’ etc. So Horne’s IJntrod., vol. 1, 
p. 389 ; Barnes’s Com. on Matt. 24 : 29; Heb. 13 : 26, etc. ; Bloomfield, Nast, Whitby, 
Doddridge, etc., on same passages. Stuart on Heb. and Apocalypse, and nearly all, if not 
all, writers on prophecy. Elliott, Bickersteth, Brookes, Cox, Sirr, and many others refer 
to this usage, agreeing with Bh. Warburton (Julian, p. 21) when he says: ‘‘ In the old pro- 
phetic language the change and fall of principalities and powers, whether spiritual or civil, __ 
are signified by the shaking of heaven and earth, the darkening of sun and moon,”’ etc. : 

8 Dr. Cumming (The Great Tribulation) has a lecture (3d) on this shaking, and he shows 
(1) that instead of a shaking of nations at the First Advent, there was such a peace that 
the temple of Janus was shut ; (2) that Paul quotes this prophecy as unfulfilled sixty- 
four years after the birth of Jesus ; (3) that this shaking is future, corresponding e.g: 
with the shaking of the last vial. He also makes Christ the desire of heathen nations, as | 
the response of that sense of want and yearning for light and deliverance deeply pre- 
vailing in the heart of humanity. Barbour (Three Worlds, p. 18) seems to think that the 
shaking is the result of the huge cannon manufactured for future use (!), but afterward 
correctly attributes it to an overthrow of governments. To appreciate this subject prop- 
erly, other Props., must be regarded, as e.g. 161, 162, 163, 164, 165, 174, etc. 


SS we pe a> 


Obs. 3. But while fully indorsing this view, that the great, important 
meaning of such phraseology is the subversion, overturning, and destruc- 
tion of Kingdoms, etc., yet this does not forbid our entertaining the firm 
belief that these things will be accompanied by physical marvels, earth- 
quakes, etc., which shall cause ‘* men’s hearts failing them for fear,’’ ete. 
Analogy, pointing to the plagues preluding the deliverance from Egypt, to 
the events connected with the birth and crucifixion of Jesus, should cause 
us to hold that when the most solemn crisis for the world comes, God will 
cause His Almighty energy to be displayed in an unusual manner 77 the 
material nature which is to be @ participant in the glory following. God 
has hitherto thus condescended to warn and speak, and there is every 
reason to believe, that as the end of the age draws nigh and the stupendous 
issues dependent upon it approach, God will again plead with man in a 
startling, strange, supernatural manner. While it may be difficult, and — 
even impossible (owing to this figurative use of language just designated), 
to tell in each individual case whether the fulfilment embraces a literal, — 
physical, or moral, or civil, or political sign, yet such is the variety of 
expression, the attitude of man himself, the actual participation of the — 
material heavens and earth (as will be shown in following propositions) in ~ 
the changes then introduced, that the wisest and most profound students 
of the Word have unhesitatingly given their adhesion (see Prop. 174) to — 
such a belief. Indeed, when the writer considers that this period is to be 
specially characterized by the denial of the supernatural by the worldly-wise, 
it seems eminently fitting and proper that such an exertion of power should 
be manifested, not only for the believing and prudent, not only for the 
admonition of the unthinking, but for the confounding of the crafty, who 
rely so much on nature. 


: 


Prop. 148. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. A99 


Proposition 148. This Kingdom embraces the new heavens 
and new earth. 


This is so distinctly taught by Isaiah (chs. 65 and 66), by the 
pious Jews and Early Church, by a long line of eminent divines, 
including even our opponents who locate the Kingdom of God in 
it, and by the magnificent closing (Rev. 21) of Revelation, that it 
demands no special proof. 


Obs. 1. The question, however, arises what are we to understand by this 
new heavens and new earth? Fully admitting (as e.g. the Prop. preceding 
146) that the material atmosphere and earth shall undergo a transforma- 
tion for the removal of evils, etc., yet, keeping in view what heavens and 
earth are shaken and removed (viz., the Gentile Kingdoms and their 


upholders), it is but reasonable to believe that the Spirit to keep up the 


consistency of the figure thus used, means by ‘‘ the new heavens and the 


new earth” taking the place of the former ones, the Renewed Kingdom (i.e. 


Theocracy) of God and the renewed willing adherents, attached and devoted 
to it. This accords with the predicted fact that when the Gentile domina- 
tion is overthrown, then the Kingdom of heaven (Dan. 2 and 7) occupies the 
supreme authority over all the earth ; then (Rev. 11:15, Prof. Stuart, Com. 
loci).‘‘ The Kingdom of this world has become the Kingdom of our Lord 
and His Christ,” or (as Lord, Apoc. loct) ‘‘ The Sovereignty of the world 
has become our Lord’s and His Messiah’s.’’ 'This prophetical usage of 
language is purposely and most wisely chosen to delineate the restoration of 
the Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom, which supersedes all other Kingdoms. 
The word ‘‘ new,’’ as has often been noticed, even by opposers, does not 
necessarily mean something entirely new, but denotes ‘‘ a renewal or restora- 
tion’? of something previously existing. It properly, then, denotes the 
renewal or restoration, with increased glory, of that ‘‘ heaven and earth’’ 
which once existed in its initiatory form ; and the entire phrase—as the 
ancient believers logically held—includes the Messianic Kingdom. How 
deeply this ancient belief was still held, even down to the Council of Nice, is 
seen in Gelasius (Hist. Acts Council), when he refers as proof to Dan. 
fees ts. 27:13; Matt 5:5 and Isa. 26:6 for the expression of 
faith : ‘‘ We expect new heavens and a new earth, according to the Holy 
ae at the appearing of the Great God and our Saviour Jesus 
rist.”” 


Thus e.g. Robinson, NV. T. Lexicon, makes “ the new” in 2 Pet. 3:13; Rev. 21:1; 
Isa. 65:17 ; Isa. 66 : 22, ‘‘ renewed, made new, hence, better, superior, more splendid. So 
the corresponding word of the Old Test. means as a verb, to make new, renew, repair, re- 
Peorowas int Sam, 11:14; Job10:17; Ps. 60:12; Isa.61:4; Ps.103 :5.; 2 Chron. 15:8; 
and 24:4. Whence are derived the words new, i.e. renewed as in new moon, new heart, 
new creature,’’ etc. Knapp (Christian Theology, p. 544), after showing how “‘ the destruc- 
tion of the heavens and of the earth, the growing pale and darkening of the sun and 
moon, are often used figuratively to denote great changes in the world, the calamity and 


. 500 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


downfall of particular states and countries,” adds: ‘‘ On the contrary, the phrases, new 
heavens, new earth, the clear shining sun, etc., are used to denote the welfare and 
returning prosperity of states—e.g. Isa. 65 : 17 ; 66 : 22; 13:10.’ He appends a remark 
worthy of consideration : ‘* But these very figurative expressions presuppose the literal 
idea.” Comp. art ‘‘ Heaven,” M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., which says : “Heaven 
signifies symbolically the ruling power or government ; that is, the whole assembly of 
the ruling powers, which, in respect to the subjects on earth, are a political heaven, being 
over and ruling the subjects, as the natural heaven stands over and rules the earth.” All 
symbol. dictionaries, all critics, whether Pre- Post-.or Anti-Millenarian, fully indorse 
this usage, making heaven a figurative representation of the rnling power, and earth of 
its subjects. We see no reason for departing from the same, especially when both cove- 
nant and prophecy point us to this period of time when the Theocracy shall be most glori- 
ously renewed. ‘ 


Obs. 2. The creation of ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth,” in Isa. 
65:17 and 66 :22, are intimately connected with, and indeed explained by, 
the unexampled prosperity and joyfulness of Jerusalem, and in the remoyal 
of the curse entailing weeping, etc. These are a result of the creation of 
the former, and, therefore, it is that Peter (2 Pet. 3:13), while directing 
attention to the wrath of God bursting forth in vengeance upon the world, 
and which will affect the earth materially, yet relying upon these promises 
given by Isaiah, looks for this very Kingdom to be established, which cncludes 
the material changes and blessedness described by the prophet. The King- 
dom is designed as an instrumentality to restore man and the earth to the 
forfeited position, and must, if successful, embrace doth in its redemptive 
purpose, just as the Jews held. Hence it is wrong, as some do, to regard 
this phraseology as exclusively applicable to a material change, and it is 
likewise erroneous, as others hold, to confine it entirely to spiritual things 
or rulership or the Kingdom. Admitting it to be, as Lord (Apoc., Ch. 
21:1) maintains, a symbol of ‘‘ rulers of a new order’’ and “‘ subjects of 
a new character,’’ yet, as these rulers ¢mclude a resurrection state and these 
subjects deliverance from physical evil, the phrase itself is not to be thus 
exclusively limited, as Peter evinces when he claims the promises of Isaiah, 
in connection with the conflagration. Insisting, therefore, that the figu- 
rative meaning, which applies this to the Kingdom itself, is the primary 
one, we, at the same time, do not discard the notion that in this new 
heavens and new earth are embraced material, radical changes which 
brings the earth back to its Edenic state. The contrast that Peter evi- 
dently refers to, must be observed and included. On account of this 
peculiar usage, it may be difficult at all times to explain the language 
attached to it, and some latitude of opinion on minor points or details is 
to be anticipated. 


Thus e.g. Rev. 21 : 1, ‘‘and there was no more sea.’’ The interpretation of this 


phrase depends upon that given to “ the new heavens and new earth.” If the view of 
an exclusive materialistic renewal is taken, then it follows that there will be no literal 
sea. If, however, the idea of a renewed powerful Kingdom is entertained, then the 
- symbolic notion attached to the word ‘“‘ sea’’ (viz., people, multitudes, nations in agita- 
tion, revolution, war, etc) in other portions of the Word is to be retained, and the mean- 


ing is, that the nations will no longer be swayed by the storms, the commotions of pop- — 


ular tumults, rebellions, seditions, etc. Dr. Kurtz (Bible and Astronomy, s. 6, p. 28) takes 
this view, saying : ‘‘ The raging waters are a representation of the raging of the heathen ; 


thence also arise tne beasts or hostile powers which Daniel and the Book of Revelation — 


describe ; from the face of the renewed earth the sea shall disappear.” Various writers 
indorse this interpretation. Accepting of it, yet it does not forbid us entertaining the 
belief that great changes may also occur in the material sea, on the principle that the 
greater blessing contains the lesser. Whatever view is received, whether referring to the 


Prop. 148. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 501 


material sea or the symbolical sea, the argument of Sirr (First Res., p. 102) is still most 
forcible, viz., that the expression ‘‘no more,” implying that ‘‘ it had been before,’’ shows 
that the new heavens and new earth sustains a relationship (firr says, ‘‘ were identical” ) 
‘with the orb we inhabit.” ‘They necessarily include the material earth, for that is posi- - 
tively covenanted. A concordance or symbol. dic. will fully illustrate the scriptural 
usage of ‘‘ sea.”” As an indication of the abuse or perversion of the term, we refer to 
Pisgah’s Views, by Dr. Winslow, who makes ‘‘ the sea” a symbol of God’s power, God’s 
love, and of the Atonement! A book reviewer in the Brit. Quarterly, Ap., 1874, 
remarks : ‘‘ It is terrible to think what the Bible and evangelical truth have to endure” 
-_to which may be added—at the hands of its earnest friends. 


Obs. 3. One of the most eminent spiritualizers of the Word (Barnes) 
tells us: “‘ There shall be, as it were, new heavens and a new earth, in a 
spiritual sense, at the end of the world. Thus it is represented, Rev. 
21:1.’’ But the reader will notice that such indefinite interpretation is 
inconsistent with the Scriptures and with the outward reality of the things 
described by ‘‘ heavens and earth.’? Allow the figurative use of the phrase, 
yet realities, observable, are denoted, viz., Kingdoms and their supporters. 
Some writers who, after the figurative sense is ascertained, append a 
spiritual sense to it, explain the new heavens and new earth to be an 
extension of the Gospel dispensation, and find the complete fulfilment in 
the third heaven. (See Edward’s Hist. of Redemption, p. 266-7, for a 
specimen.) This is a gross violation of prophecy, and a most arbitrary 
application of promises to the present Church. Isa. 65 : 17,18 and 66 : 22 
are quoted as now realized, which is positively forbidden by the tenor of 
the predictions (still unrealized) and by Peter, an apostle, expressly locat- 
ing (2 Pet. 3) their fulfilment in the future. This is abundantly sustained 
by numerous other: passages. The most absurd position, however, is that 
of endeavoring ¢o transfer such promises ¢o the third heaven (with which 
compare the singular vacillating and contradictory exposition of Barnes’ 
Com. on 2 Pet. 3 : 13), when the least comparison of the passages and the 
application of them by inspired men, show that they sustain a relationship 
to this earth. It required centuries of spiritualizing before such ‘phrase- 
ology could be transferred from this earth to the third heaven, and it is 
the resultant of a total ignoring of the Theocratic-Davidic covenant. So 
far has this spiritualizing of the phrases gone, that we have large bodies of 
mystics, etc., who claim that they are already in such a spiritual new 
heaven and new earth, and one body of them, to carry out their misconcep- 
tion of Scripture, to manifest their realization of it, live in a sort of Com- 
munism, neither marrying nor giving in marriage. A number of painful 
facts, illustrative of this perversion of promise, might be adduced, but 
these are sufficient. It is in accord with such theories—at least, it fosters 
them—that Frazer (A’ey to Proph.) informs us that ‘‘ the renovation of man- 
kind is so great and extensive that it is called ‘ new heavens and new earth.’ ”’ 
Newcome (Rev. 21) says : ‘‘ The new heaven and earth and the new Jerusa- 
lem are emblematical of the glory and happiness which will be the reward and 
happiness of good men forever’’ (compare Scott, Com.). Now, if such inter- 
pretations are to be received, what becomes of the reality and inspired ap- 
plication of these passages to the future here on earth after the conflagration, 
after the Advent of Jesus, after the shaking and overthrow of earthly King- 
doms, ete., if they do not include the Theocratic rulership, thus preserving 
the unity of Scripture. Many of these writers are correct when they attribute 
to the new heavens and earth ‘“‘ renovation,”’ ‘‘ glory and happiness,”’ etc., 


— 


502 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


for al] these blessings are included in and flow from it, but they greatly 
mistake when they attribute one of these things to be specifically meant or __ 
typified by it, and overlook the primary, leading idea that it signifies the 
renewed outward Theocratic Rule of God manifested in David’s Son acting 
as the Judge or King and the hosts of subjects made willing in the day of 
His power. If the figurative usage is allowed, then the one that the Spirit 
Himself has given, referring it primarily to the Kingdom and subjects, is 
to be retained in preference to all others, seeing that in the weak state of 
Christianity under the power of Gentile dominancy arrogant and persecut- 
ing on the smallest provocations, 7¢ was wise and prudent to retain the old 
prophetical usage,’ easy of comprehension to believers in the covenanted 
promises, as evidenced by the faith of the primitive Church. If the ex- 
clusively literal idea of a material change is only entertained, then even 
there is consistency in Schlegel (Phil. of His. Lec., 10), observing : ‘‘ The 
last glorious transformation of nature, when creation sball be consum- 
mated, and a new heaven and a new earth shall spring into existence, are 
to be strictly regarded as real and historical.’’ To the writer, however, it 
appears that the latter can be entertained (being more clearly taught by 
another class of passages) without discarding the former ; yea more, that 
the former is most accordant with prophetical speech and really, as a 
resultant, includes the latter. 


Thus any concordance will give one of the meanings of ‘‘ heaven’’ to be ‘‘ a state of 
great dignity,’’ illustrated by e.g. Isa. 14:12; Lam. 2:1, etc. Any index of symbolical 
language will give (as e.g. Horne’s Jntrod., vol. 2, p. 465) to ‘‘ heaven and earth’’ the 
meaning of ‘a political universe.” See this explained by Faber, Diss. on Proph., and 
others. 


Obs. 4. In order to make our doctrine discordant, if possible, several 
criticisms are offered which it is necessary to answer. A class of writers 
inform us that the promises of the new heavens and new earth in Isa. 
65:17 and 66 : 22 relate to one period of time, viz., to this dispensation, — 
while those of 2 Pet. 3 : 13 and Rev. 21 : 1 refer to another, viz., after the __ 
Millennial age, etc. Aside from the direct argumentation following (Props. 

149, 150, and 151), it is now sufficient simply to quote an opponent. 
Barnes (Com., 2 Pet. 3 : 13) says: ‘‘ The allusion here seems to be, beyond _ 
a doubt, to two passages in Isaiah,” etc., quoting the ones mentioned by 
us. Now if Peter referred in his ‘‘ according to promise’ to these predic- 
tions of Isaiah (and this is admitted, for no others of a like tenor canbe _ 
found), then it follows that he locates those Millennial descriptions of ] 
Isaiah with the heavens and earth that succeed the conflagration, and the _ 
objection falls. But Rev. 20 : 11 is urged against us, because we are there __ 
informed that ‘‘ from whose (the Judge’s) face the earth and the heayen _ 
fled away and there was found no place for them,’’ indicates that the new 7 
heaven and earth is only after the thousand years, etc., and cannot include 
Isaiah’s prediction. Various writers, however, have pointed out that this 
phrase here is parenthetical (as like e.g. the riding on an ass, Zech. 9 : 9, 
10, etc.), alluding to what was done before, thus identifying the Judge and 
ascribing power to Him. The phraseology is so accordant with that 
employed by Daniel and the prophets when describing the consuming of — 
the Kingdoms and their power ‘‘ so that no place was found for them”’ 
(Dan. 2 : 35), which is attributed to Jesus Christ, that the reference can- 
not be doubted. Overlooking the past tense used, and endeavoring to 


- Prop. 148.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 503 


confine it to the then present time, they see not that the objection—taking 
their notion of the heavens and earth—is fatal to their own theory, seeing 
that the earth is represented as continuing, the sea giving up its dead, ete. 
Hyen Augustine, commenting on the passage (City of God, B. 20, Ch. 14), 
does not confine this fleeing away to the actual time specified in context, 
but locates it ‘‘ not before the living and dead are judged,” ‘‘ but after- 
ward,’’ making the declaration equivalent to that He would perform this. 
Now, if such liberty can be taken with the verb rendered ‘‘ had fled’’ as to 
refer it to the future in support of a theory, surely no one ought to find 
fault with us when our explanation is directly sustained by the tense of 
the verb and the facts preceding the period thus predicted. In this con- 
nection may be mentioned the view entertained by Lactantius (Div. Jnsii., 
B. 7, Chs. 24 and 26, and Epit. of same, Ch. 71), who has two renewals of 
the earth, one at the commencement of the one thousand years, and 
another at its close ; also by Barnabas (pis. Ch. 15), who makes a renewal 
at the beginning of the seventh Milliad, and another at the beginning of 
the eighth day. A number of modern writers follow these suggestions, 
and press them to unwarranted conclusions. Now, whatever truth (and 
there is some) there is in ‘the gradual restoration of all things to the 
condition before the fall, and which is only fully reached after the Millen- 
~ mal age is closed, when all wickedness is forever more rooted out, yet it is 
a mistake to ascribe this to a renewal of ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth.”’ 
This is seen by the simple fact that this phraseology includes the everlast- 
ing (Prop. 159) Kingdom of Jesus Christ which is never to be destroyed ; 
that otherwise the Word is made contradictory, for the new heavens and 
new earth of Isaiah (however it may extend) is represented as ‘‘ remain- 
ing’ before the Lord, i.e. is permanent, while that described by Peter 
(2 Pet. 3 : 13) is implied by the tenor and spirit of the prediction and its 
righteousness ¢o be ever enduring. ‘These follow the Advent of Jesus, and, 
characterized as they are, they, in the very nature of the case, do not give 
place to another general transformation. The Kingdom when once estab- 
lished under David’s Sqn ever exists—His heavens rule and His earth or 
people are obedient—whatever changes may be introduced after the ending 
of the Millennial period. Unless this feature is clearly apprehended, 
confusion and antagonism follow. The Kingdom (presented by Isavah 
under this impressive figure) is so great, so vast a dominion, so exalted 
over the earth in its grandeur, that ‘‘ the former shall not be remembered 
nor come into mind,” i.e., shall not be worthy of comparison, etc., with it. 
And yet this ‘‘ heaven and earth’’ so grandly erected, in which His people 
shall ‘‘ rejoice forever’’ and which is said to be as enduring as ‘‘ the end 
and name’’ of His people, is, we are gravely told, ‘‘ to pass away.’’ No! 
never ; and any theory which involves such a@ contradiction, such a ruinous 
process, evidences at once an unscriptural foundation. This confusion of 
ideas is caused, in a great measure, by not observing the meaning of the 
figure, by neglecting a faithful comparison of Scripture (and accepting of 
_ the result), and by confounding things that differ.‘ When the Spirit so 
directly, as in Isa. 65 : 17, 18 (Comp. Alexander’s Version), and 66 : 22, 
asserts the perpetuity of the new heaven and earth ¢hen created, we grate- 
fully and joyfully accept of the same, not being hampered by the Popish | 
theory of Judgment Day, etc., which forbids the reception of the blessed 
Millennial predictions associated with, and to be experienced in, this 
‘‘ heaven and earth.’’? 


504 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 148. 


1 It is scarcely worth while to notice that class of writers who make this phraseology 
mere poetic figures, a fine stroke of rhetoric, etc. Such are reminded that the shaking 
and overthrow of heavens and earth is a stern reality seen in fulfilment, when kingdoms 
and their multitude of adherents are utterly removed. The same reality, glorious and 
world-redeeming, will be witnessed when “the heaven and earth’’ of God is created in 
the promised Theocratic reign. Such writers do not even allow the Bible to be the 
exponent of its own language. 

2 The close student is referred to Dr. Goodwin’s observation, quoted by Cox (in A Mil- 
lenarian’s Answer, etc., p. 18, foot-note), that Paul’s allusions to the new heavens and earth, 
suggested by Peter (2 Pet. 3), relates to Heb. 2, thus making Heb. 2 and 2 Pet. 3 parallel. 
If this is to be received, it would materially confirm our view, seeing that the dominion 
of Christ is the main topic. We are glad to see that the most able writers are more and 
more returning to the early Church view on this point. As an illustration: Dr, Kurtz 
(Sac, His. sec. 199, 4) has correctly the new heavens and earth of 2 Pet. 3 : 10-13 ; Isa. 
65:17; Rey. 21:1 to be erected at the same time. But‘he does not inform us how he 
can possibly reconcile this (see Isa. 65 : 17) with his notion of the Millennial age. It is 
irreconcilable. For another, see the admission of Dr. Clarke (Com., Matt. 19 : 28) that 
the new heavens and earth are connected with the Mill. age—which he confirms, in some 
places, and then again in others seems to contradict, etc. 


Obs. 5. It would be interesting to trace how the early Church linked the 
new heavens and new earth with the one thousand years, quoting Isa. 
65:17, etc., ase.g. Justin (Dial. with Typho.; see Ch. 3, Brookes £1. of 
Proph. Interp., and writings of Taylor, Mede, Seiss, etc., for references to 
various of the Fathers), and how it advocated the Kingdom of Jesus Christ 
as witnessed in; and through, that period, and as being embraced in the 
heaven and earth. The numerous quotations already presented will suffice 
to give the reader a just idea of the general opinion on the subject. So 
also, whatever explanation may be applied to the phrase ‘‘ new heavens 
and new earth” itself, yet many theologians insist upon it, that at this 
future time and as part of the heavens and earth the Kingdom of the 
Messiah is, as the primitive Church held, set up and manifested. This, 
whatever views are given respecting details, is corroborative of our posi- 
tion. Thus e.g. in Proph. Times (Sep., 1867), is a translation of an 
article from Dr. Gess (of Reutlingen) in which the grand outlines of the 
early Millenarian doctrine are presented and accepted, and in confirmation 
of the Kingdom then established, quotations, evincing the same belief, are 
given from Herder, Steudal, Olshausen, J. G. Hess, Lavater, Bengel, and 
T,. F. Meyer. The leading idea presented is, as Meyer expresses it: 
‘‘ With the Lord’s Advent begins the real reign of God upon earth, a King- 
dom of righteousness, holiness, and peace, consisting of mortals, but wit 
exemption from the Evil One and his enticements, and under a mighty 
influence of celestial power,’’ etc.; or as Hess terms it: ‘‘ It has been given 
to be a Kingdom of God upon earth.’’ Dr. Tholuck has been noticed by 
Taylor, Seiss, etc., as saying :.‘‘ The idea that the perfected Kingdom of 
Christ is to be transferred to heaven is a modern notion. According to 
Paul, and the Rev. of John, the Kingdom of God is placed upon the earth, 


in so far as the earth has part in the universal transformation. This— 


exposition has been adopted and defended by most of the oldest commen- 
tators : e.g. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Augustine, Luther, Knox, and others.”’ 
Persons of the most diverse views, hostile even to the Early Church doc: 
trine, still are forced to admit, that the new heavens and earth relate fo 
this globe of ours, end include the Kingdom of God in a most glorious 
form. Thus from a variety of sources, even convergent, testimony in 


reference to the teaching of the Word can be multiplied confirmatory of © 


— 


Prop. 148. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. _ D095 


our doctrinal position, seeing that all such make the Kingdom the main, 
leading idea which includes all the rest. 


As we have all along shown, many of our opponents, impelled by the force of Script- 
ure promise, maintain (as e.g. Dr. Urwick, etc.) that this earth renewed, and under the 
special government of God, shall be the eternal home of the saints (comp. e.g. Prop. 142, 
etc.). But multitudes follow the Popish doctrine, or the doctrine of Mohammed (Stan- 
ley’s Sinai and Palestine, p. 402): ‘‘ Man can have but one Paradise—and my Paradise is 
fixed above.”’ How persons with the deliverance of creation, the inheriting of the earth, 
the renewed heavens and earth, the coming down out of heaven of the New Jerusalem 
upon earth, etc., can say (as e.g. Heaven our Home, Pref. p. 9 and 27), ‘‘ We have a home 
for eternity, and that home is (the third) heaven,” is something remarkable, especially 
when such writers are very profuse in professing allegiance to Church doctrine, and 
totally ignore the universal belief of the Church in the first centuries, based on covenant, 
prophecy, and promise, and assume the later faith introduced to be the correct one. 
The arbitrary way by which this is done, has been designated, viz., by making Canaan a 
type of the third heaven without a particle of proof, and against the express covenant promises 
of God, and then by quoting promise after promise, without reference to time and order 
of fulfilment, intermingling the same with beautiful and attractive ideas eloquently ex- 
pressed. Such writings cannot stand before a scriptural examination, and are mislead- 
- ing multitudes, causing them to put their faith and hope in man’s promises instead of 
God’s oath-bound declarations of inheritance. And yet the sad fact is that such writ- 
ings, filled with perversions and leading the Church into unbelief, are extremely popular. 


<i 


506 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 149. 


Proposition 149. This Kingdom is preceded by the conflagra- 
tion of 2 Pet. 3 : 10-138. 


This 7s self-evident, since this Kingdom is identified with the 
establishment of ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth’’ of Isa. 65 : 17, 
and 66:22. Peter expressly alludes to these two passages in 
Isaiah and appropriates them as descriptive of ‘‘ the new heavens 
and new earth’? presented by himself, in the specific phraseology, 
‘‘ according to promise.” The Millennial new heavens and new 
earth thus claimed by the Apostle, and which are associated with 
the Kingdom itself, are necessarily preceded by the fire described. 
As this forms the leading objection to our doctrine, and as some 
have wrongfully (against the most explicit language of Peter) 
endeavored to locate this fire after the thousand years, it is proper 
to thus definitely state the facts and assume their weight. 

Simply to indicate the perplexity of commentators (fettered by a pre-conceived idea 
of the extent of Peter’s conflagration), and the unwarranted liberties taken with the pre- 
diction, we refer e.g. to Dr. Moore (Amer. Translation) in Lange’s Com., Isa., p. 113. ; 
Acknowledging (1) that Peter refers to those promises in Isa. ; (2) that he evidently 
regards the fulfilment to follow the conflagration ; (3) that the condition described is only 
compatible with a continuation of mortal men, etc., he then produces the following asa — 
reconciliation: the new heavens and new earth follow the conflagration, while the 
remainder of the same prediction (e.g. vs. 20-25) is to precede the fire! Thus he most 
arbitrarily divides the predictions (Isa. 65 : 17-25 ; 66: 22-24) that God has joined to- 
gether, and makes that to precede which is to occur in the new heavens and earth. All 
such interpretations indicate a serious eschatological defect. 


Obs. 1. It has been noticed by various Commentators, ete., that the 
Jews, before and at the time Peter wrote, expected that the Millennial era, 
i.e. the times of Messiah’s reign, would be introduced by great convulsions 
and a terrible fire. Knapp, if using the word ‘‘ perishing’’ as many do, 
goes too far when he says (Christ. Theol., s. 155, I. 2).: ‘‘ This doctrine 
of the perishing of the world by fire was unquestionably prevalent among 
the Jews at the time of Christ and the apostles, although Philo does not 
accede to it.”’ That the Jews believed in a mighty change, in a renova- 
tion, purification, regeneration (see Knapp, same place, quoting Philo), 
etc., of the earth, and that in some way fire (as the prophets predicted) 
should be employed as an agency, seems certain from various testimony, 
but that they believed in so widespread and extensive a conflagration as 
moderns have fastened upon Peter, is not only wnproven but hostile to the 
expectations they had concerning the Messiah’s Kingdom. A little reflec- 
tion should suggest, that a people who looked for the restoration of the 
Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom over the nation in the flesh, which Kingdom ~ } 
was ultimately to embrace the Gentile nations, could not, and did not, 
believe in that which would utterly demolish all hope. But, as stated, they 
did believe that this Kingdom would be preceded by the awful judgments 


ok ar 


Prop. 149. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. , 507 


of God, and that fire would be used in connection with them. Now the 
language of Peter accords with the belief that defore the Millennial period 
could be introduced, such a Pre-Millennial judgment by fire must be 
inflicted ; and his undoubted reference to the only promises relating to the 
new heavens and new earth in Isaiah would immediately and inevitably— 
with the prevailing belief—direct the Jewish mind ¢o the Millennial proph- 
ecies. If the latter are to be understood, as so many now teach, to be 
fulfilled prior to this conflagration, then Peter took the very means and 
language to confirm his readers in the opposite view. We hold that there 
is 20 antagonism between Peter and the Jewish belief on the subject. 


Houbigant (Pref. to the Prophets), referring to 2 Pet. 3, makes ‘‘ the scoffers’’ to be 
Jews, who reject Jesus as the Messiah, because no change, such as the prophets describe, 
was realized at His Advent ; and profess that it is not to be realized, and that Peter 
acknowledges that such a change is to be expected (that changes have already transpired 
in the past) at the Second Advent of this same Jesus, thus fulfilling the prophets. 
Judge Jones, who refers to Houbigant (Theol. and Lit. Journal, Jan., 1856), justly doubts 
whether these ‘‘ scoffers” are Jews only, saying: ‘‘ There ismore reason to suppose that, 
for the most part, they will be from among the Gentiles.’’ Jews, like the ‘‘ Reformed” 
or ‘‘ Liberal,” are rapidly drifting into this scoffing position, imitating the larger pro- 
portion of unbelieving Gentiles. . 


Obs. 2. If we refer to the promises acknowledged by Peter and given by 
Isaiah, we find this view strengthened by the context. Thus e.g. Isa. 
66 : 22 is preceded by ‘‘ the Lord will come with fire and with His chariots 
like a whirlwind, to render His anger with fury and His rebuke with flames 
and fire. For by fire and by His sword will the Lord plead with all flesh,”’ 
etc. While Isa. 65 : 17 only mentions the sword as preceding, yet, if we 
take the prediction and turn to its strictly parallel mates, we find that fire 
also is connected with its ushering in, as evidenced by the same things 
being delineated as then taking place. Thus e.g. take Isa. 51, and at the 
very time that God will ‘‘ plant the heavens and lay the foundations of the 
earth,’’ that the redeemed return with singing and everlasting joy, the 
judgments of the Lord shall be poured upon the wicked and ‘‘ the heavens 
shall vanish like smoke,’’ etc. At least one thing is apparent, that in the 
context of Millennial predictions (as Ps. 97:3; Joel 2:30; Mal. 4:1, 
etc.) there are sufficient intimations to warrant the Jewish belief that 
there would be, before Messiah’s Kingdom is established, an extraordinary 
manifestation of fire in some form, and that Peter in his prediction adopts 
this very belief by linking his prophecy with Isaiah’s. 

Attention is called to the fact that Peter’s agreement with Isa. 66 and 65 is so appar- 
ent, and consequently its Millenarian bias, that it may account for the opposition to the 
canonical authority of 2 Peter. For, it is a singular fact that the first persons who 
expressed a doubt concerning the reception of 2 Peter, are the men who were the most 
instrumental in opposing Millenarianism, viz., Origen, Jerome, and Eusebius (comp. 
Lardner’s Works, vol. 6, p. 255, and the prefaces to 2 Pet. in coms. generally). This, too, 
may have largely influenced later opposers (as e.g. Davidson, Introd. New Test.). 


Obs. 3. The reader will observe that Peter, instead of giving the least 
intimation that the Millennial period antecedes, in his account knows 
nothing of the Millennial era preceding, and gives statements utterly 
opposed to the notion that it will be witnessed previous to the conflagra- 
tion, Without pressing into service his well-known views respecting the 
nearness of, and looking for, the Advent of Jesus Christ (which is antago- 


508 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 149. 


nistic to such an idea), itis sufficient to notice that he speaks of the wicked 
existing continuously and boldly down to this very period, and of believers 


being subjected to their scoffing, etc., down to the same time. Deliver- — 


ance is anticipated only when this era preceded by the conflagration 
arrives ; and hence that Millennial glory, etc., which some describe as 
anteceding this conflagration is something that Peter fails to portray or 
intimate. More than this: the apostle links this era with the Millennial 
predictions by designating it “‘ the day of the Lord,’’ and ‘‘ the day of 
God,’’ which all at that time understood as referring to the day (e.g. Prop. 
138, etc.) when these Mill. prophecies would be fulfilled. It was the dis- 
tinguished time when God should remarkably manifest His power in behalf 
of His people. ‘The apostle only recognizes the one day future associated 
with this conflagration. This is in agreement with the general analogy. 
To illustrate : Mal. 4 describes the day of the Lord ‘‘ that shall burn as 
an oven,’’ utterly consuming the outrageous wicked and only leaving the 
righteous, and previous to this announced day there is xo Millennial rest 
and blessedness for God’s children. So Joel 2 and 3, the day of the Lord 
comes when He shall ‘‘ show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth 
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke,’ and then follow the Millennial 
blessings. Peter, imbibing the same spirit of prophecy, introduces no 
discordant element. 


The language of Peter only suits a Pre-Millennial period ; for the language expressive 
of warning, expectedness and denial of Advent, perdition of the wicked, merciful delay, 
only agrees with a time such as ours, in view of its connection with well-known previous 
statements of ‘‘ the holy prophets” and ‘‘ the apostles of the Lord,” which are of primary 
importance (v. 3) as a practical inducement to holiness and watchfulness. If this related 
only to that which occurs after the Mill. age (of which we have the most meagre state- 
ment in Rey. 20), then the Apostle would not have linked it with persons living in the 
present dispensation, as something in which they were personally interested and which 
they should behold. The very setting of the predictions favors our position, and the 
earnestiiess with which (vy. 12) it should be desired by them, is confirmatory of our view. 


Obs. 4. It is admitted, generally, that the scenes described by Peter 
follow the Second Advent. When Christ comes, He comes “ in flaming 
fire taking vengeance,’’ etc. (2 Thess. 1:8), with ‘‘ fiery indignation” 
(Heb, 10 : 27) that shall consume His enemies. It is at this Advent that 


believers are also delivered and exalted. The language of Peter, the entire 


tenor and scope of his description, evinces that he places the Advent—the 
object of terror to the wicked and of joy to the righteous—at this very 
period of time. This, therefore, is utterly irreconcilable with the theory 
(Shimeall and others), that this conflagration follows a thousand years 


after a personal Pre-Mill. Advent of Christ. The ‘‘ appearing and the ~ 
Kingdom’”’ are united, and consequently the appearing, the glorification — 


of believers, the fiery vengeance upon living unbelievers, and the Kingdom 
are also linked together. 


Let the reader e.g. turn to Joel 2 : 31 and kindred prophecies, and if it is admitted 
that ‘‘ the great and terrible day of the Lord’’ is introduced by the Second Advent of 
Jesus (as general analogy teaches), then it follows that such a fearful time (coinciding 
with Peter’s description) is succeeded by a Mill. period, as the connection shows. The 
same is true of Zeph. 2:3; Isa. 24; Deut. 32 : 22; Mal. 4, and numerous other predic- 
tions, all descriptive of a fiery vengeance that shall consume the earth (which we know 
from the most positive declarations is imposed at the personal Coming of the Son of 
Man), followed by a glorious Millennial period, in which the Jewish nation is pre-eminently 


blessed, and in which the Gentile nations joyfully participate. Now, when the Spirit 


a 


-— 


Bai 
_ 


Prop. 149. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 509 


lays down this order, and does this repeatedly, we certainly should be guarded lest we 
reverse it. 


Obs. 5. The reader will notice that the Kingdom (as our entire line of 
argument shows) is introduced at the Pre-Mill. Advent of Jesus, and that 
Christ then receives His inheritance as David’s Son. These two facts 
alone set aside the views of those (as e.g. Shimeall in J Will Come Again, 
and Lincoln in Lects. on fev., and Burgh, Tyso, and Ogilvy), who make 
the conflagration Post-Millennial, introductory to an eternal state of 
things. Now on the other hand the Scriptures make the glorious The- 
ocracy established at Jesus’ return one that is perpetual, ever-enduring 
(Comp. Prop. 159, where this is considered in detail), and consequently it 
does not run the risk of ever being removed or destroyed by the uni- 
versality of the conflagration. The promises of God forbid it, and there- 
fore, as e.g. in Dan. 7 (where the fire of vengeance, v. 10, 11, precedes or 
is connected with the establishment of the Kingdom) the Kingdom set up 
at the Coming of Jesus is declared to be one which shall not pass away or 
be destroyed. Again—to advocate such an opinion is virtually to say that 
Christ’s inheritance, promised under oath in perpetuity to Him, shall be 
swept away by a conflagration—an inheritance too for which He suffered 
and died, which is to be to Him a desire and joy and glory, and which He 
has already (Isa. 65 and 66) retouched with His creative energy. Surely 
the brethren who hold to the above opinion do not see that, in the attempt 
to avoid difficulties connected with Peter’s account of the conflagration, 
they plunge themselves into far greater by the adoption of such a Post- 
Millennial view. ‘The fire of Peter must, of necessity, be so interpreted as 
to preserve the unity of divine teaching, and how this is to be done will be 
the subject of the next Proposition. ! 

For the same reasons we must reject the opinion of Fausset (Com., 2 Pet. 3, and Rev. 
21:1) that the fire of Peter is in part Pre-Millennial and in part Post-Millennial, the 
latter the most extended and destructive. Now, aside from Peter describing only one fire 
and the introduction of only one ‘‘ new heavens and new earth,’’ which exists forever be- 
cause righteousness dwells in it— which this view arbitrarily makes to be two—it is suffi- 
cient to say that the Kingdom and inheritance of Christ forbids the entertaining of such 
an opinion, because derogative to both. So Elliott (Hor. Apoc.) makes a Pre-Millennial 
restricted fire, limiting it to the Roman earth, but does not exclude ‘‘ the idea of some 
other and more universal conflagration at the general judgment.’”’ We cannot, consistent 
with the reasons assigned accept of such interpretations, which sweep away an eternally 


constructed Theocratic Kingdom, and an eternally bestowed inheritance of David's Son 
and of His brethren. 


510 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Pror. 150. 


Proposition 150. Zhe establishment of this Kingdom is not 
affected by the extent of Peter's conflagration. 


It is important to notice this in detail (and the reader will please 
observe that the following Propositions are part of the discussion) 
since two classes make the conflagration of Peter an insuperable 
objection to the reception of the doctrine of the Kingdom. Those 
opposed to Millenarianism, as Brown, Steele, Barnes, Waldegrave, 
and many others, inform us that owing to the wniversality of the 
fire it is impossible to conceive how nations in the flesh, Jewish and 
Gentile, can survive it to form the subjects of the Kingdom. Every 
work written against us produces the stereotyped difficulty, as if — 
irremovable. Recently some Millenarians, as Shimeall and others 
(through an amiable weakness which impelled them to remove 
what they call ‘‘ the great stumbling-block in the way of an ac- 
ceptance of the truth’), have repeated this objection, locating the 
fire of Peter after the Millennial age.* It hence deserves special 
consideration. 


1 Shimeall (J Will Come Again) writes many excellent things worthy of attention, but 
he certainly, with the amount of proof given in support of his own position on this — 
point, goes too far when he charges distinguished Millenarians (Dr. Cumming by name, 
Pref., p. 19) with holding to ‘‘ astupendous theological misnomer,’’ of ‘‘ greatly damaging - 
that system of revealed truth,’’ of forming ‘‘ the great stumbling-block in the way of in- 
quirers after the truth,’’ and of ‘*‘ a Judaizing and carnalizing the future state and condi- 
tion of Christ and His saints.”” Charity should influence us always to remember that in 
the details of prophetic fulfilment, however cordial our agreement in the great leading 
outlines, yet, owing to the vastness of the subjects, the difficulties connected with them, © 
the necessity of close comparison, and our own limited capacities, we ought reasonably — 
to expect some diversity of opinion. Let us add that with the light before us we fail to 
see how Shimeall’s modern addition adds any weight to the doctrine of the early Church (it 
virtually degrades it as carnal, ete.), or how it aids to make Millenarianism one iota more 
credible and respectable for the sake of a ‘‘ distinguished Post-Millenarian clergyman.” 
Millenarianism depends on immensely more than our comprehension of Peter’s conflagra- 
tion, viz., on the covenants and the promises of God, ete. If the latter do not urge the 
student to a Millenarian bias, certainly an accommodating interpretation of Peter’s fire 
will not cause it. 


Obs. 1. As stated in preceding Proposition, the language of Peter was in 
accordance with the views of the Jews, 'They evidently did not consider 
the fire so disastrous in its effects that no nations would survive and that 
the Kingdom could not be set wp over the nations as Daniel predicted. The 
proof is, that all the Jewish converts and churches, as far as we know, 
never supposed that this passage controverted such an opinion. Instead of 
being a stumbling-block in the way, this passage was thought to be con 
jirmatory of their belief of the dreadful fire which should devour the 
adversaries (Dan. 7 : 10, 11, ‘‘ fiery stream,’’ ‘‘ the burning flame’’), when 


Prop. 150. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 511 


the Messiah would come. Jewish believers held that Peter only transferred 
that which they had believed would occur at the First Advent, to the 
Second Advent. Hence the apostle’s statement strengthened them (by his 
appeal to Isa. and using the phrase ‘‘ day of the Lord,”’ etc.) in the faith, 
expressed by the Babylonian Zargum (on Gen. 49:10), ‘‘ Christ shall 
come, whose is the Kingdom, and Him shall the nations serve,’’ or as the 
Jerusalem Targum has it: ‘*‘ The King Christ shall come, whose is the 
Kingdom, and all nations shall be subject unto Him.’’ Peter’s descrip- 
tion, therefore, raised no controversy between the Jewish believers and 
others. 

The critical student will please ponder the weight to be attached to this reasoning. 
1) We have the entire Primitive Church universally Millenarian in sentiment ; (2) now, 
if the language of Peter, as moderns (Brown, Waldegrave, etc.) assert, forbids the Pre- 
Millenarian view, then an antagonism would have sprung up in reference to the meaning 
of his prediction ; (3) but instead of such a controversy arising, it was accepted as in 
complete accord with prevailing views ; (4) this could only have resulted from its being 
explained as so limited in its effects as not to interfere with the restoration of the Davidic 
throne and Kingdom and with the perpetuity of the race, as e.g. in the restored Jewish 
nation and the spared Gentile nations. The first converts were all Jews, who clung with 
faith to the covenants and prophecies insuring such a fulfilment, and they believed in 
Jesus as the Messiah, who at His Second Advent would perform this work. Now, if they 
had supposed that Peter’s language raised up an irreconcilable difficulty, we certainly 
would have transmitted to us the impressions of such an antagonism. On the other 
hand, they were conversant with the usage of Scripture language, which expressed itself 
with a degree of universality, when limitations were intended, so that for the sake of 
vividness and impressiveness universality was expressed to denote extensiveness, great- 
ness, vastness, etc. Thus e.g. take the expressions, Gen. 6:7: ‘* And the Lord said, I 
will destroy man, whom [I have created, from the face of the earth ; both man, and beast, 
and the creeping thing, and the fowls of the air; for it repenteth me that I have made 
them ;’’ or v.13: ‘‘ The end of all flesh is come before me,’’ “ behold I will destroy them 
with the earth ;’ or v. 17: “‘ to destroy all flesh, wherein is the breath of life, from under 
heaven ; and everything that is in the earth shall die,” and yet, notwithstanding this 
alleged universality, God found means to save the life and the flesh of those in whom 
His divine purpose would be carried out. So the early Christians confidently rested in 
the promises of God that, notwithstanding this terrible judgment of fire, those would be 
saved—in the flesh also—in whom the Divine Purpose would be strikingly manifested. 


Obs. 2. The early Church, receiving its teaching direct from inspired 
teachers (and appealing to them, as Papias, Justin, Ireneus), found no 
such limitation as was afterward engrafted upon Peter’s language. That 
Church which claimed (as Semisch, Herzog’s Cyclop. speaking of Justin’s, 
Dial. with Trypho, doctrinal position) its ‘* belief as the Keystone of ortho- 
doxy,’’ which in the person of Papias (as stated by Jerome’), directly 
named Peter’s instruction, received the epistle without regarding it as 
presenting the slightest objection to their doctrine of the Second Coming of 
Jesus, the fearful overthrow (fire as an agency) of His enemies, the exalta- 
tion of the resurrected saints, the re-establishment of the Davidic throne 
and Kingdom over the restored Jewish nation and the spared Gentile 
nations. One and all held to the fulfilment of the covenant and the 
prophecies based upon it as succeeding this conflagration : This is clearly 
announced in their writings. It may be justly claimed, that men who 
were so near to apostolic teaching, and acquainted with the language then 
spoken, were qualified to judge how far Peter’s statement of the fire was 
to be pressed. 


See Brookes, El. Proph. Inter., p. 37, etc., where the extracts, with remarks, are given 
from Eusebius and Jerome. So Shimeall (Eschatol., p. 64), who quotes: ‘‘ He did not 


512 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 150. 


follow various opinions, but had the apostles for his authors ; and that he considered 
what Andrew, what Peter said, what Philip, what Thomas, and other disciples of the 
Lord ; as also what Aristian and John the Senior, disciples of the Lord, what they 
spoke,’’ ete. Another passage refers to his having ‘‘ learned from the elders,”’ etc., but — 
does not mention Peter by name. 


of the doubts cast upon the canonical authority of the Second Epistle. 
This has been done by our opponents and not by us. That epistle was 
never urged in the first centuries as antagonistic to Chiliasm, for the 
leading objection to it was that derived from its being too favorable to our 
doctrine, owing to its ‘* Jewish conceptions.’’ If we were to accept of its 
rejection—as suggested by opposers—that would at once end the discus- 
sion, seeing that the only passage relied upon to prove that the perpetuity 
of the Jewish nation and the race is irreconcilable with the universality 
of the fire at the end of the age, is to be found in this Epistle. But we are 
not forced to dispute its genuineness or authority, being willing to receive 
it, on the testimony alleged in its favor, as canonical.’ The opposition to 
the Epistle, if so fatal to our doctrine as assumed by many, ought to have 
come from Millenarians and not from its opponents. 

1 Origen, Jerome, and Eusebius cast doubts upon it. If we could accept of the rea- 
sons assigned by Dr. Neander (His. Plant. Ch. Church, vol. 1, p. 376), to prove the spuri- 
ous character of the 2d Epistle, then all difficulty would vanish. Pressense (Early Years 
of Christianity, note 1, attached to p. 213) declares it impossible to admit with any cer- 
tainty the authenticity of the second epistle. He refers to others who doubted it, and 
includes Calvin as expressing a doubt. This is mentioned to indicate to the reader that 
in such a discussion, if disposed, some weight might be attached to the grounds given for 
its rejection upheld by such men, etc. But we have no desire to place ourselves behind 
the shield thus provided for us, still believing that the objections presented against its 
authenticity, etc., are too slight—when compared with the evidence in favor—to set aside 
this portion of the authorized canon. (Comp. Alford’s Prolegomena, vol. 4, p. 1.) 


Obs. 3. It is noticeable that no Millenarian author has taken advantage 
: 
: 


Obs. 4. If there is a passage which should be examined and explained 
according to ‘‘ the analogy of faith,’’ it certainly ought to be this one of — 
Peter’s. The reason is apparent ; it is the only passage of Scripture which 
our opponents allege as conveying an irreconcilable difficulty in the way _ 
of accepting what (as we have shown) is taught in the naked grammatical 
sense in Covenant and Prophecy, and what was unmistakably believed in 
by the primitive Church. ‘To make a single passage overthrow the Jewish — 
faith, the early Church faith, and, above all, that constant harmony of — 
Scripturai statement down to that point, and to make it the necessity for 
introducing a spiritualistic interpretation of preceding Scripture, is im- 
posing too much upon one text and is violating the proportion due to the — 
doctrines of the Bible. The rules given by Horne (Jntrod., vol. 1, p. 842, — 
etc.), are worthy of attention, and if applied will inevitably relieve our — 
doctrine of the Kingdom from any alleged incubus said to be imposed by 
Peter. Surely when our doctrine of the Kingdom is founded in the oath- — 
bound covenant given to David, is reiterated by prophets, is preached, etc., 
as Proposition after Proposition has proven, then 7¢ ought not to be set — 
aside, or weakened, or condemned by one passage; then the passage 
assumed to be contradictory ought to be explained in the light of that vast — 
amount of testimony preceding it ; then the lesser ought to be interpreted — 
by the greater, the more brief by the more extended, the doubtful by the ~ 
plainly revealed. i 


ct 
“4 q 
‘ 


Prop. 150. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 513 


If we only had Peter’s description of the conflagration, it might be supposed to be as 
destructive as many tell us it will be; but unless—having numerous other passages 
referring to the same— we find this corroborated by other parallel passages, we may easily 
make a mistake. The apparent unlimited phraseology is no infallible criterion ; for as 
all concede, it is the custom of Scripture to employ the most general language when a 
limitation in point of fact exists. Thus e.g. ‘‘it is appointed unto all men to die,’’ but 
some we have through Paul will not die, but be changed—so “ all Judea” went up, etc., 
teaching us both that we should ascertain whether all passages sustain the universality 
supposed to exist, and that the current usage of such language ought also to be consid- 
ered. Take e.g. the apparently unlimited expressions of Deut. 32 : 22; Isa. 24 : 19, 20, 
etc., which certainly cannot be exceeded by Peter’s language, and we find even in the 
following context that they are to be so limited as not to destroy the land, the Jewish 
and Gentile nations. If we were to take such prophecies isolated, and insist that the 
language must be literally fulfilled just as they read, without any regard to the context 
or other passages, and without considering that the vengeance of God is thus represented 
to indicate its intensity, severity, and certainty of extended searching range, we could 
readily rear up a host of alleged antagonisms. 


Obs. 5. Peter’s representation of the Kingdom, as given in his own 
writings, would be vitiated, if we accept of the extravagant estimates made 
concerning the extent of this fire. Omitting the allusion to Isa. 65 : 17 
and 66 : 22 and to ‘“‘ the day of the Lord’ as used by the prophets and 
Jews, sufficient remains to show that he looked for a Kingdom ¢o appear 
on earth after this fire, and in the form advocated by us. In this same 
Epistle, Ch. 1, he knows no other Kingdom than the future everlasting 


Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,’’ for which he urges the 


brethren to strive, faith in which was confirmed by the Transfiguration 
(see Prop. 153), and which he represents (as Pet. 4 : 7) as not very distant, 
thus connecting it with this same Advent and conflagration., Now in the 
First Epistle, in harmony with the Second, he makes the inheritance and 
salvation, ‘‘ ready to be revealed in the Jast time,’’ dependent (1 Pet. 1: 7, 
13 ; comp. with 2 Pet. 3 : 13, 14) upon “‘ the appearing of Jesus Christ ;”’ 
and ‘‘ the grace that is to be brought unto you at the revelation of Jesus 
Christ’? corresponds with ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth.’’ In both 
Epistles believers are ‘‘ pilgrims and strangers,”’ suffering, etc., and urged 
to hope for deliverance, etc., at the Second Advent. ‘The entire spirit 
expressed is, a deferring of the Kingdom—promised by the prophets 1 Pet. 
1:11, 18—until this period. This ignoring of a present Kingdom, and 
looking for one future, at the Advent, to fulfil the prophets—who locate 
Messiah’s Kingdom on earth as we advocate—is evidence, if we will but 
accept of it, that he himself had no idea of the prediction, such as multi- 
tudes fasten upon it, seeing that the ‘‘ everlasting Kingdom’’ once estab- 
lished, is ever more perpetuated, and hence is not to be destroyed by fire 
at the end of the thousand years. 


The reader is urged to observe the following facts additional, established under pre- 
vious propositions. The times of refreshing and restitution (Prop. 144), the Regenera- 
tion (Prop. 145), the deliverance of creation (Prop. 146), the Rest (Prop. 143), ete., all 
begin with this Second Advent and the manifestation of the sons of God, and a glorious 
period of deliverance and salvation is experienced, which is invariably described as 
unending. Now, after such restitution and such blessedness, after a marvellous restoration 
to forfeited blessings and an exhibition of Christ’s dominion, can a single reason (unless 
it be derived—as is done—from 2 Pet. 3) be assigned for a universal and total conflagra- 
tion? Is it reasonable that the work. of Christ, exemplified by a thousand years of prac- 
tical reigning and results, should suddenly be blotted out of existence by a devouring 
conflagration? It seems to us derogatory to Christ’s honor and glory, as well as to the 


_ saints, who are co-heirs with Him, to thus summarily dispose of the glorious Millennial 


514 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 150. 


earth, described by the prophets in the most glowing terms. A renewal (for e.g. Prof. 
Robinson makes in N. T. Lexicon ‘‘ kainos” ‘‘ new,” to be *‘ renewed,” ‘*‘ made new,’’ as 
used in 2 Cor. 5 :17; Gal. 6 : 15) is predicated both of the earth (restored to Edenic con- 
dition) and of the Kingdom (Davidic tabernacle rebuilt), and this is associated by the 
Scriptures, Jews, and early Christians with a Pre-Millennial Coming of the Messiah. 
This renewal, whatever additions successive ages may add in their progress, is always 
represented as perpetual, never ending. ‘* The world to come” is the Millennial world, as 
we have sufficiently proven (Prop. 137), and its perpetuity is invariably asserted, for with — 
the obtaining of the same is linked the ever-enduring blessedness of the saints. When 
Jesus said ‘*‘ My Kingdom is not of this world,” He used the word ‘‘ cosmos” and not | 
‘‘ aion’’ (as some erroneously suppose, building an argument on the error), the same 
word used, John 15 : 19, ‘‘ Ye are not of the world,’’ importing the renewal of the disci- — 
ples, and hence this ‘‘ cosmos’’ or ‘‘ this world” experiences a change or renewal before 
** the everlasting Kingdom’’ is introduced in it, becoming ‘‘ the world to come.’’ 


Obs. 6. It must be observed, that while the Second Advent of Jesus is 
spoken of as a coming in ‘‘ flaming fire,” etc., to destroy His enemies, 
etc., it is at the same time represented as a coming ¢o bless the earth, so 
that the earth is called upon to rejoice in His Advent, as e.g. Ps. 96 : 11- 
13; Ps. 98 : 4-9, etc. Creation, as we have seen Props. 145 and 146, is 
fo exult in this Coming for deliverance, so that it is declared to follow as a 
result from the antecedent humiliation, death, and exaltation of Christ, the 
resurrection of His saints, etc., as e.g. Ps. 69 : 34 (noticing how the — 
previous portion of the Ps. is applied to Jesus in his death, etc. See — 
Prop. 126). Now such deliverance of creation, such a rejoicing of the 
earth in the removal of the curse, is not witnessed down to the Advent, 
and if fulfilled, as written and promised, necessitates, in the very nature of — 
the case, a very material limitation to the destructiveness of this fire. Any 
indorsement of the sweeping assertions made respecting its universality 
and totality introduces at once an antagonism (unnecessary) between one — 
passage and a host of others relating to the same time. ‘This is the reason 
why so many (Prop. 146) employ language respecting the deliverance of 
creation, insist upon complete restoration, etc., and yet are afraid to 
mention the animal kingdom or animate nature, fearful that Peters 
conflagration would prove an objection to its utterance. Surely there 
must be something wrong in an interpretation, which builds up from this — 
passage ¢rreconcilable featwres to other portions of the Word. % 


In order to show how our opponents raise up an antagonism, and involve themselves 
in the gravest contradictions, the following illustration (out of a multitude) is appended : 
MacKnight (On the Epistles), while advocating an utter destruction of the world by fire (in 
support of his Popish view of the judgment day, etc.), gives us this paraphrastic inter- 
pretation of 2 Pet. 3:18, which contains the most ample refutation of his own theory: 
** Nevertheless, according to God’s promise to Abraham, as explained, Isa. 65 : 17, we 
who believe firmly expect the creation of new heavens and of a new earth, wherein right- 
eous men shall dwell forever.”” Now, let the reader turn to Isa. 65 and see how utterly 
irreconcilable the description of the new heavens and earth is to his complete and utter 
destruction of the world by fire ; for mortal men in the flesh, engaged in worldly oceu- 
pations, living to a great age—according to his own reference—still exist, notwithstanding 
his utter destruction of all things, and survive in this renewal. And then his reference 
to Abraham —to whom this earth, and not another, was promised—likewise invalidates his 
wholesale deductions from Peter’s language. To indicate how opponents, after employ- 
ing 2 Pet. 3 against us, and positively affirming its meaning to be opposed to our view, 
refuse to give an exposition of the chapter, we refer to Dr. Brown. In a Review of “ 
Brown’s Life and Works,’’ in the North Brit. Review, Aug., 1860, it is stated that he pub: 
lished comments on various parts of the New Test., including the First Epis. of Pete 
and the first ch. of the Sec. Epistle, and it is significantly added : ‘‘ He would not, how 
ever, venture to expound the remaining chapters till ‘ better informed and more full 

sy 


<< 


‘ 


Prop. 150. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 515 


assured,’ for many difficulties occurred in them ; a token that he was now feeling one of 
the symptoms of age, in being ‘ afraid of that which is high.’’’ While we may admire 
the modesty of the man, which recognized the difficulties (as e.g. the connection with Isa. 
65 : 17, etc.) of reconciling this chapter with his system of belief, yet it certainly finds no 
expression when employing the same against Millenarianism. 


Obs. 7. As just intimated, any view of Peter’s statement which makes an 
imperfect Redemption, in not restoring the earth, the animate creation, and 
the race of man to their forfeited position, ought at once to be rejected as 
inconsistent with the Divine Purpose respecting Redemption as given in 
covenant and promise, and with the perfection, honor, and glory of the 
Redeemer (Prop. 140, Obs. 7). To make this earth, animated creation, 
and the race of man, as such, all to be destroyed, rooted out of existence, 
or (as a climax) to have it all one mass of fire, perpetuated in this state to 
constitute (so Pres. Edwards’ His. Redemp., p. 421) an eternal hell (!) for 
sinners and devils—this is to make Redemption incomplete, to keep this 
earth forever under the curse, to restore only a few of the forfeited bless- 
ings, and to diminish, with fearful rigor, some of the most comprehen- 
sively precious promises that the Bible contains.) Strange indeed that men 
should allow one passage to crush the hope engendered in a groaning crea- 
tion, in a sin-cursed earth, in the longings of nations, and fo limit the rich 
and full restitution of all things and the expressed ability and willingness 
of the Mighty King to perform it. The early Church could not be so 
illogical. 

Hence it is that a vast multitude of writers, whatever view they take of the extent of 
the conflagration, coincide with the statement of the Hncy. Brit., art. ‘‘ Conflagration,”’ 
viz., “ it is more consistent with the narrative itself, as well as with physical science, to 


consider it as introductory to a new and better state of things—a new heavens and new 
earth.” The difficulty of otherwise reconciling Peter’s language with that of the prophets 


has evidently led to the view expressed by this writer, ‘‘ some learned and able exposi- 


tors, among them Lightfoot and Owen,’’ make it figurative, and ‘‘ have referred it alto- 
gether to the destruction of Jerusalem and of the Jewish polity.’”? This last opinion we 
cannot, however, indorse for the reasons (1) that a future fire in connection with the 
perdition of the ungodly and the renewal of the earth is associated with the Sec. Advent ; 
(2) that the same is expressed in the context of Mill. predictions as something introduc. 
tory ; (3) that the contrast which Peter presents to previous changes forbids an exclusive 
figurative application ; and (4) that in the overthrow of Jerusalem, etc., no such fulfil- 
ment of ‘a new heaven and new earth’’ was realized (as described by the promise in Isa. 
65 and 66), and hence the application is erroneous. 


Obs. 8. Having clearly shown from the covenant made with David, etc., 
that the land and the earth is Christ’s, that the Jewish nation as such 
(associated with the Theocracy), and other nations through it, belong to 
Christ, that both form ‘‘ the inheritance’ of David’s Son, tt is presuming 
to fasten such an interpretation upon 2 Pet. 3 as will at once and forever- 
more destroy the very inheritance which is promised to Him. ‘“* Feeble 
and weak’’ as the apostolic and primitive Fathers were, in some respects, 


‘when compared with the profound (?) learning of modern theologians, yet » 


none of them has been guilty of so great a violation of propriety as to 


Introduce a doctrine which sweeps away the inheritance of Jesus and that 


of His saints; which makes it utterly impossible for either to inherit 
promises most solemnly attested to by the oath of the Eternal One. It was 


_ reserved for men of real intellectual strength and mental ability to do this ; 


for those ancient worthies, relying upon the simplicity of the Scriptures, 


and that every word of God is equally true, could find no such doctrine in 


516 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 150. 


Peter. Explaining (as justice and reason both suggest) Peter by the two 
promises of Isaiah, they found, as we also find to-day, ample evidence that 
Christ’s promised inheritance is not affected by the extent of the conflagra- 
tion. Turn again to those two passages and see how associated with the 
new heavens and new earth is the restoration and perpetuity of the Jewish 
race, of Gentile nations, and even the continued existence and change of 
animals, and it will be seen how impossible it was for a faith which clung 
both to the covenant given to David and to Peter’s undoubted linking of 
Isaiah’s predictions with his own portrayal of what should take place in 
connection with this fire, to adopt an interpretation which virtually denies 
to David’s Son His own covenanted throne, Kingdom, people, land, etc. Itis 
true, that those who do this strive to give to Him something which they 
esteem far better, and thus suppose that they honor Him the more; but 
this also is done at the expense of ignoring the covenant and going beyond 
the record. 

If this fire is, as multitudes declare, a total destruction of this globe (and some even 
include the planets, etc.), or if it is as destructive and terrible as the Seventh-Day Ad- 
ventists and others make it during the thousand years, how is it possible to verify the 
precise language given to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob (Prop. 49) that the identical land and 
countries through which they passed, upon which they reclined, and which they beheld, 
should be their personal inheritance? Whatever changes the fire may introduce, however 
terrific in its sweep of vengeance, the promises of inheritance convey the idea that 
geographically (for the rivers Nile and Euphrates are still boundaries) the land will retain 
its accustomed place —it will not be destroyed. And this is most fully corroborated by 
the general tenor and analogy of the Mill. descriptions, which portray this very earth— 
not destroyed—but blessed with glorious additions, a renewal designed to remove evil 
and extend happiness. Palestine, changed by the creative power and made beautiful, is 
geographically the same Palestine, with a restored Jewish nation and Theocratic-Davidie 
Kingdom under the sway of Christ and His saints, the centre of an earth-dominion. Any 
other view makes the promises of God of none effect, no matter what substitutions are 
presented under the specious plea of honoring Christ. We only rightly honor Jesus when 
we accept of the promises relating to Him as found recorded in the Scriptures. 


Obs. 9. The time of this fire is the time when ‘‘ the harvest of the earth’’ 
is gathered and the tares (Matt. 13 : 30, 39, 40) shall be ‘‘ darned in the 


Jire” (as “ the ungodly men’’ mentioned by Peter), but this harvest (Rey. 


14 : 14-20) occurs under the seventh trumpet preceding the Millennial age. 


When this conflagration takes place it is associated with the resurrection 


of the saints, for Peter encourages believers to expect a glorious deliver- 
ance at that period ; this accurately corresponds with the resurrection (Rey. 
11 : 15-18) and rewarding of the saints under the last trumpet when *‘ the 
sovereignty of this world’’ shall be wielded by Christ. » The mention of 
‘the Day of Judgment’ (comp. Props. 133 and 134) with a knowledge of 


the Jewish and Scriptural method of speaking of that day, viz., to be 


followed by Messiah’s Kingdom here on earth as the Millennial prophecies 
declare ; these are additional reasons why we should not force upon Peter 
an interpretation which must result in introducing an element of discord, 
thus preventing a harmonious adjustment between the Old and New Tes- 
taments. 

Compare preceding and following propositions. Hence we cannot receive the ex- 


pressed views of able writers, as e.g. that given by Brookes (The Truth, vol. 2, No. 12, p. 
357), who lays down the following procedure at the close of the thousand years: “ Then 


will follow the burning of the earth and the works that are therein, the new heaveys and 
the earth wherein dwelleth righteousness,” etc., and we find plenty of concessions 


respecting the inheritance of the Patriarchs and of the Son of David, the Millennial new 


Prop. 150. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. D17 


heavens and new earth of Isa. 65 and 66, the perpetuity of Mill. blessedness, the Pre- 
Mill. Advent and fiery indignation, etc., scattered through his interesting writings, which 
amply refute this view. Indeed, we cannot see how brethren, when the perpetuily of the 
Mill. heavens and earth is expressly affirmed by the Spirit, can possibly have a conflagra- 
tion of such an inheritance. On the other hand, we admire the logical consistency of 
that class of writers (as e.g. Dr. Seiss in his able third discourse in The Last Times, 
D. N. Lord in various articles in The Theol. and Lit. Journal, etc.), who make this fire Pre- 
Millennial, and have the Millennial earth to pass into the eternal ages without losing 
a particle of its glory by so terrific and destructive a conflagration. Let the student con- 
sider that covenant promises and numerous predictions based upon the same outweigh 
all such deductions of a deluge of utter destructive fire, Pre- or Post-Millennial. 


Obs. 10. This passage has received various interpretations, (1.) One 
class, to which we have alluded (Prop. 133, Obs. 1.; Prop. 141, Obs. 1, 
etc.), bring the most extravagant interpretation to bear upon Peter, b 
which they evolve not only the wtter destruction of the earth but that of 
the planetary system. As the very prodigality of expression and pro- 
fuseness of imaginary extent is—aside from the arguments -herein pre- 
sented—the best refutation of its unscriptural attitude, it may be passed 
by without additional remark.’ There is another class, allied with these 
in. a rigorous interpretation, but far more moderate in their estimation of 
the ultimate result of this fire. While advocating its universality and the 
burning up of all things, etc., they at the same time deny that annihilation 
is denoted or such complete destruction is intended as to forbid the re- 
newal and perpetuity of the same earth. In addition to the writers men- 
tioned (Prop. 140, etc.) who hold to this, many others could be added, as 
e.g. Augustine, Griffin, Jay, Gregory the Great, Fuller, Pope, Benson, 
Urwick, Hodge, James, Brown, Pye Smith, ete. The distinguishing 
peculiarity of these two classes is, that they make the conflagration post- 
Millennial. Another class, who make the fire about as disastrous as the 
second class noticed, and yet hold that it is Pre-Millennial, that it will be 
followed by the setting up of Christ’s Kingdom as predicted in the Millen- 
nial prophecies—are represented by Cumming * (The Gr. Trib., Lect., 12), 
Irving (Orations), Gill (Divinity), and others. These three classes, by the 
extent of the fire advocated, make no provision for the Kingdom to exist 
in its expressed covenanted terms, and none for the deliverance of inanimate 
and animate creation, having the same destroyed and an entire new creation 
erected from the ashes, etc. Instead of the curse being removed from the ex- 
isting world, the world falls deneath the curse and is sacrificed, so that an en- 
tire new one which has never borne a curse may be created. ‘The position, 
however, of the one party, that the fire is Pre-Millennial, is undoubtedly 
correct. (2.) Then we find a large class who make the entire fire a figura- 
tive description ; and these again are divided into different parties. Thus 
e.g. that one which makes the destruction of the heavens and earth the 
overthrow of the Jewish polity, etc., and the new heavens and new earth 
the introduction of the Christian polity, etc.; so Dr. Hammond, and 


various of the destructive critics. Others, as Prof. Bush (J/ill., p. 202, 


etc.), taking the figurative view, apply it to the overthrow of systems of 
error, etc., by the purifying influence of the truth (i.e. fire), which is yet 


* And yet, in justice to Dr. Cumming, it must be said that in various places he expresses 
himself as if limiting the general destructiveness of the fire, as e.g. in the context of the 
oft-quoted passage : “ Look at the floor on which you tread,” etc. See also his Ser. on 
Rey. 20 : 6. 


518 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 150. 


to bring about “‘that renovated order of things, moral, mental, and 


political,’’ ete. Dr. Thomas (Zipis Israel), and Christadelphians gener- 
ally, refer the destruction to the Jewish polity, but explain the new heavens 
and earth to be still future, the introduction of the new polity under the 
Messiah at His Sec. Coming (thus separating by a long interval what Peter 
unites in succession). In regard to such applications of the figurative 
sense, it may be observed, that the destruction here presented, whatever it 
may denote, is inseparably joined with the Sec. Advent, the Day of Judgment, 
and the Day of the Lord, and hence is still future; while the contrasting _ 
with the literal perishing at the deluge indicates that more must be attached 
to it than the simply figurative. Mede (Works, Exp. Peter), and others, in 
adopting the figurative conflagration, are more logical and consistent with 
the tenor of Peter’s statements when they make it adumbrating or sym- 
bolizing the overthrow of governments, systems, etc., at the close of this 
dispensation, preparatory to the establishment (comp. Lord, Apoc., 21:5) — 
of the Kingdom or government under the Messiah. It must be admitted, 
when the figurative language of Scripture is consulted and compared (see ~ 
Sir I. Newton’s Obs. on Proph., p. 1, Ch. 2; Faber’s Dis. on Proph., 
Daubuz, Perp. Com. on Rev., writings of Brookes, Bickersteth, etc.) with 
each other and with Peter’s language, there is sufficient force in the com- 
parison instituted to lead to a belief that it is, at least, included. ‘The 
Scriptures sometimes include the physical with the moral, etc., as in the 
birth, death, and resurrection of Jesus, etc. To make it entirely figurative — 
destroys at once the express contrast instituted by Peter respecting the 
perishing of the old world by water ; and to make it entirely literal is to — 
ignore the Scripture usage of such language. ‘Taking into consideration 
the views then prevalent derived from the prophets, the style in which the 
prophecies are given, and the fact that both things (viz., the overthrow of 
all human governments and the renovation of the earth) are really em- 
braced at this period, it seems the most consonant to believe that Peter 
comprehends both, that as water was used to destroy the old world, materi- — 
ally and in its governmental arrangements, so fire (not excluding other — 
agencies) shall be employed in modifying and changing the present heavens 
and earth, materially and in the overthrow of earthly governments, and — 
that the result will be the introduction of a new heavens, and new earth, 
materially renewed, and in the establishment of the Theocratic Kingdom. — 
The old ‘‘ heavens’ really did not perish excepting as they adumbrate 
governments, etc. The contrasting of the three worlds—the three heavens — 
- and earth—seems to demand something like this interpretation, indicating — 
that the truth lies somewhere between the figurative and literal applica- — 
tion, embracing doth in the manner pointed out. For, let us impress the 
reader with a fact, already noticed in Paul, that the apostles, in view of | 
the enmity and persecuting spirit already prevalent, and which they knew 
was yet to come, could not be ¢oo0 cautious to express their views respecting 
the certain overthrow of earthly governments ; and that all such teaching, 
to avoid bitter animosity and persecution, had, in the nature of the case, 
to be couched in prophetic language. The wisdom and admirable tact of 
Peter (as in Acts 3, using restitution) is noticeable, in his taking language | 
not only correspondent with the wsage of the prophets, but even in accord- 
ance with that employed by the nations around him,’ and which virtually 
comprehends both. (3.) Then again there is an able and growing party 
who advocate that the fire of Peter will be literally experienced, but that 16 


Prop. 150. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 519 


is confined to localities (some few writers have confined it to Judea or 
Palestine, others to the Roman earth, and still others have made it local, 
and by slow degrees, gradually extending over the earth), and will not be 
so disastrous or extensive as many. suppose. This view was early pre- 
sented, has more or less continued, and recently has had a number of 


_ writers to express it in a most forcible manner. D. N. Lord in several of 


his writings, Dr. Seiss in his Last Times (see it eloquently presented in 
Third Dis., also ‘‘ Day of the Lord’’), and others, have argued against the 
universality of the fire (1) from the declared perpetuity of the earth ; (2) 
the Noachic covenant, which promises no such destruction in the future as 
that of the deluge ;° (3) the saint’s inheritance ; (4) the meaning of Peter’s 
phraseology ; (5) the design of the fire, ‘‘ the perdition of ungodly men ;’’ 
(6) the agreements of Peter’s language with the descriptions of volcanic erup- 
tions, etc.; (7) the language of the prophets describing the same events, 
etc. ‘hey exhibit those fires as dreadful and connected with ‘‘ terrific 
phenomena.’ In conclusion : looking at those various interpretations, the 
dispassionate student will certainly feel inclined—considering the Oneness 
of the Spirit through whom holy men spake—to give the preference to 
those who, instead of taking Peter’s prophecy 7solated and then proceed to 
build upon it a series of tremendous doctrines, endeavor to ascertain its 
meaning by a comparison with the analogy of faith, with other predictions 
given by the same Spirit. Caution must be engendered by the simple fact 
that egually as strong language as Peter uses is employed by Nah. 1:5 in 
reference to Nineveh, and in Deut. 32 : 22; Micah 1:4; Isa. 18 : 9-14; 


Amos 9 : 5, etc., in such a way as to indicate a continuation of the earth, 


nations, etc., after terrible convulsions and punishments. The same 7s 
true of Isa. 24 : 19-23; Isa. 2 : 10-22; Jer. 4 : 23-28, and numerous other 
passages. The limitation even with which sometimes the word ‘‘ earth’’ is 
used, the verbal criticisms (Crit. Eng. Test.) which unite men of opposite 
views, the fact that change and not such destruction is evidenced by Ps. 


102 : 25-27; Heb. 1 : 10-12 (the parallelism limiting and defining the 


first clause)—all this should have its influence in forming our decision. 
Even the ‘* earnestly expecting and ardently wishing, and anticipating” 
(Bloomfield), ‘‘ earnestly desiring’? (Newcome), ‘* awaiting with eager de- 
sire’ (Barnes), this ‘‘ coming of the Day of God,’’ corresponding again 
with that of the prophets, with the pious Jewish Janguage, etc., should be 
regarded. While a comparison of the intent of this fire with the overthrow 
of the wicked—in which fire is also alluded to—Rev. 19 : 19-21; Matt. 
oot-46; Ps. 11-6; Dan. 7:9-11; 2 Thess. 2:83, Joel 3 : 9-165 


Zech. 14 : 1-15 ; Ezek. 38 : 22, etc., leads to the conclusion that it must 
' be—Peter-also linking it with Isa. 65:17, and 66 : 22—Pre-Millennial. 


Linked with a coming of the Messiah, with which the restored Theocratic 
Kingdom is associated ; with an earth, however it may experience the 
ordeal of fire, the same earth renewed ; with a continued materiality (see 
Chalmers’s Sermon on 2 Pet. 3:13), which, as in glorified humanity, etc., 
God employs, as the prophets teach, to display His attributes and glory 
and to make His creatures happy ; with a new heavens and new earth, 
which was inseparably connected in the Jewish mind with the Kingdom of 
the Messiah and areturn to a Paradisiacal state ; with the extirpation of sin 


- from the world and not with a destruction of that which is not in itself 


sinful ; with the inheritance of Abraham, the saints, and Christ Himself, 
which cannot be effaced without violation of God’s faithful Word ; with 


520 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 150. 


‘‘ the restitution of all things,’’ ‘‘ the regeneration,’’ the deliverance of 
groaning creation, the shaking of heaven and earth, and numerous other 
promises which are then to be realized—surely with all this before us, the 
conflagration of Peter can only be explained consistently with the uniform 
and concurrent teaching of Holy Writ. It cannot, it does not form an 
exception. ‘Taking, on the one hand, the most positive declarations that 


sin, suffering, opposing and hostile powers shall continuously exist down to. 


the Sec. Advent, and then, on the other hand, the emphatic predictions 
that these shall be rooted out of the very same earth—that all sorrow, 


misery, and wickedness shall cease to exist in it—and that it shall become. 


fruitful, beautiful, etc.,—it follows that the only position—consistently 


sustained by the reasons adduced—for a believer in all that God says, is 


that already indicated. Peter’s statement shows us, how both these Script- 
ural representations are sustained and verified ; how the sin-stained vesture 
and fashion shall be changed for the garments alone suited for the mani- 
fested royalty ; how this earth now can expectantly look for redemption and 


then can rejoice and exult in the possession of the same ; how God can (for 


He is not wasteful of material) take the old and out of it bring forth the 
gloriously renewed without impairing His own workmanship ; and how 
this earth, once pronounced good but now marred by sin, shall again be 
restored to all its forfeited blessings and to the singing of ‘‘ the morning 
stars’? and the shouting of ‘‘ the Sons of God’’ over its recovery.° 


1 See e.g. a specimen given by Dr. Seiss, p. 67, Last Times, which he appropriately 
calls ‘‘ sublime nonsense.” The descriptive powers of some men are exhibited in what 
may be aptly called “ fire-theology.’’ To give another illustration : In Priest’s View of 
the Millennium, we have the following : ‘‘ The planets dash against each other,”’ tly toward 
the sun and ‘‘ will dash one against the other, which indeed will be a wreck of matter 
and a crush of world on fire.’? Somehow or other, while this dashing of planets is going 
on, our earth still remains in its orbit to pass through the appointed ordeal ; it ** hangs 
amid the trembling air,” which air is caused to tremble by Gabriel’s voice that is equal to 
** the treasured thunders of ten thousand years bursting from their iron vaults” (what- 
ever that may mean), and “‘ the great solar vortex breaks forth in flames of fire,’’ ‘* lakes 
of fire, rivers of melted glowing matter, ten thousand volcanoes vomiting flames all at 
once, thick darkness, and pillars of smoke twisted about with wreaths of flame like fiery 
snakes, mountains of earth thrown into the air and the heavens dropping down in lumps 
of fire,” until finally the earth becomes ‘‘a molten sea of fire,” and it ‘‘ shall be thrown 
from its orb to where a hell of fire in the deep recess of eternal night hath its place.” 
Alas ! that numerous such specimens can be found in R. Catholic and Protestant writers, 
so derogatory to the Plan of Redemption and the honor and glory of Jesus Christ. It is 
saddening to read such views as are given by Prest. Edwards in his His. of Redemption, 
by Scott in his Com. loci (which is approvingly quoted by Bloomfield, Com. loci, as reduc- 
ing all things ‘‘ to as confused a chaos as that from which it was first created ;” and who 
also indorses Shakespeare’s oft-repeated saying respecting ‘‘ the great globe” dissolving 


‘* And, like the baseless fabric of a dream, leave nota wreck behind’’) ; by Barnes, Com. — 


loci, and others. We are forced to ask whether the doctrine of many divines does not 
accord with that of Sophocles, as quoted by Justin, On the Sole Gov, of God; 


““'That time of times shall come, shall surely come, 
When from the golden ether down shall fall 
Fire’s teeming treasure, and in burning flames 
All things of earth and heaven shall be consumed ; 
And then when all creation is dissolved, 

The sea’s last wave shall die upon the shore, 
The bald earth stript of trees, the burning air 
No winged thing upon its breast shall bear.” 


® Others, favoring a present development through existing means, interpret it to denote — 


‘a universal renovation of manners, sentiments, and actions throughout the world,” or 
‘a universal triumph of political freedom, general wisdom, and exalted piety’’—but how 
it is to remove the curse, make the earth beautiful, etc., as portrayed in Mill. descriptions, 


they fail to tell us—only asserting that it will, See an eloquent reply to this in Dr 


Prop. 150. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 521 


Seiss’s Last Times, pp. 82 and 83; also John Wesley’s Ser. on Rev. 21 :5, where he 
rebukes those who would limit the New Heavens and New Earth ‘to the present state of 
things’ or make it ‘‘ fulfilled when Constantine poured in riches and honors upon the 
Christians,” saying, ‘‘ What a miserable way is this of making void the whole counsel of 
God, with regard to all that grand chain of events, in reference to His Church, yea, and 
to all mankind, from the time that John was in Patmos unto the end of the world!’ . 

8 That the Stoics and many others advocated a renovation and the agency of fire, has 
been noticed by numerous writers. See Writings of Philo Judeus, vol. 4, p. 32, etc., 
Origen, Ag. Celsus (B. 5, ch. 20, etc.), Wetstein on 2 Pet., Burnet’s Theory of the Earth, 
Commentaries on the passage which, almost all, refer to the fact. For other views, Clarke's 
Ten Religions, Mallet’s Northern Antiquities, Northern Mythology, by Thorpe, Howitt’s Lit. 
and Romance of Northern Europe, etc. Barnes, Com. loci, refers to Seneca, N. Q. 3 : 28; 
Cicero N. D. 2; 46, Simplicius in Arist. de Celo, 1:9; Eusebius P. 15,18. Others, as 
Seiss, mention Plato, Plutarch’s reference to the Persians, Strabo, Virgil, ete. Others, 
(as Cyclop., hk. K.) Pythagoreans, Platonists, Epicureans, Phcenicians, Siamese, Brahmins 
—also the Sibylline books, Hystaspes, Ovid, Lucan, ete. 

4 Thus e.g. Bonar (Redemption, p. 117, etc.) limits it to Papal Christendom, making it 
the same as the burning in Dan. 7 and Rev. 18, chiefly exhibited in Europe, but may be 
felt over the whole world. The idea attached to the fierceness and destructiveness of the 
fire is this: that wherever it falls an utter destruction, not leaving root or branch, will 
ensue. It does not necessarily follow that the whole earth, every portion, is thus to be 
visited, for this must be ascertained by the general teaching on the subject. 

5 Which reminds one of Lederer (Israelite Indeed, May, 1867), that if God made a cove- 
nant not again to destroy all flesh, as He did by the flood, and we deny this by saying 
that He will do it, then ‘‘ we admit the interpretation of some Rabbies of old, who said 
that God swore never to destroy the earth by water, but He may destroy it by fire, or in 
some other way, to be correct. Then God would have sworn an oath with mental reser- 
vation, which He would condemn in man, His frail creature.’’ 

6 This, therefore, answers the alleged insuperable objection, urged and repeated by 
Brown, Barnes, Hodge, and a host of opponents, how il is possible for mortal men in the 
flesh (as the Jewish nation and spared Gentiles) to be “ tided over this all-enveloping, 
all-reducing deluge of fire” into the new earth. We answer, precisely on the same prin- 
ciple, that they allow the continuation of mortal men in the flesh in those Old Test. pas- 
sages (quoted in the text), where the earth is represented as wholly consumed, destroyed, 
dissolved, etc., and yet—forced by the analogy of Scripture—they admit, must be under- 
stood with limitations, because mortals still survive and the earth is not literally destroyed, 
only the portions thereof which experience the fire of vengeance. Now, if they, in their 
comments on the Old Test., can thus explain as consistent and truthful (without a doubt) 
language fully as sweeping and “ all-enveloping and all-reducing’’ as Peter’s, and tell us 
that this is the expression of the Holy Spirit, why, when the same Spirit in Peter employs 
similar phraseology must it be—nolens volens—understood without limitation, when the 
most cogent reasons exist calling for such a limitation. Simple consistency in their own 
interpretation of the Spirit’s declarations ought to make them less dogmatic in insisting 
upon one meaning only, and that the most destructive possible, to be given to 2 Pet, 3, 
in order to raise up, if possible, an insurmountable objection to Pre-Millenarianism. 


Obs. 11. But in this discussion we are not concerned in advocating any 
specific interpretation of Peter’s language. Let it be admitted, that all 
the explanations given are ‘‘ pitiful subterfuges,’’ and that the fire is 
universal, yet a believer in God’s Word should find no difficulty even in this 
extreme statement of the case. Let the conflagration be thus universal or 
local, universal by slow advances or confined to the Roman earth, universal 
_ by uniting Pre- and Post-Millennial agencies, or entirely Pre-Millennial, 
one thing ought to be self-evident to the believer, viz., that this fire, what- 
ever it may be, and however extended in its effects, will not and cannot 
destroy the mortal men in the flesh, the Jewish nation and spared Gentiles, 
whom God has determined to save. The difficulty is, as alleged, that we 
cannot tell how, if the conflagration is general, at the same time, these can 
be preserved. Taking it for granted that it is thus universal, we are told 
that we cannot give “a reason’’ for the hope that is in us, and that our 


522 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 150. 


theory is ‘‘a stupendous theological misnomer,’’ etc.’ Having already — 


shown, in various places, the just connection existing between reason and 
faith, it is not necessary to restate our position. While advocating the 
use of reason, yet, after reason has once admitted the Omnipotence, etc., 
of the Eternal One, it must be regarded as very unreasonable ¢o limit the 


Divine attributes. It is a characteristic of believers, in opposition to — 


unbelievers, to receive all that God says He will perform, even if not adle 
fully or satisfactorily to explain or reconcile all His words and predictions ; 
—and this is properly based upon the reason (derived from reason appre- 
hending God as described), that the wisdom and power of God will be found 
equal to any emergency that may arise in the fulfilment (in the order given) 
of His predictions, no matter how inexplicable they may appear unto us. 


Indeed, one of the writers (Shimeall) who expresses himself so strongly 


against us on the ground of impossibility, etc., gives us in the very same 


book a sufficient reply to his own objection in the following just lesson of 


faith urged against another party who lacked faith: ‘‘ We might ask, 
‘Is anything too hard for the Lord? Is our unbelief to be the measure of 
his truth? If afew had objected, before the events, the improbability, 
approaching not only to moral but to physical impossibility, that Messiah 
could ever be born of a virgin: suppose, further, he had objected to the 
improbability of such a religion as that of Christ, with such apparently 


inadequate support, and so contrary to men’s prejudices and passions, ever 


so prevailing in the world, as that one day all nations should bow to Him— 


how would such an objection meet this antagonist but by arguments that — 


would equally refute his own, viz., faith in the truth and power of God.” 


If this is so, why then urge “‘ physical impossibility’? against us, when © 
we even by no means make the emergency for such to arise in our inter- — 


pretation of Peter? A moral inconsistency or impossibility would be fatal 
to our argument, but that of mere ‘‘ physical impossibility’ (because the 
objector cannot see how it is to be done) has no pertinency or force relat- 
_ing to the accomplishment of any prediction that God has given, after the 
mighty exhibitions of His ability to perform anything and everything that 
He has determined. Witness the saving of a remnant in the flesh when 
_ the deluge encompassed the earth, the birth of Isaac, the salvation of Israel 


at the Red Sea, the protection of the flesh and even the clothing of the 9 


Hebrews in the intense heat of the king’s furnace, the conception of Jesus, 


etc., and surely with such manifestations of God’s most wonderful ability — 


to accomplish all things, we must utterly repudiate the principle that we 
are at liberty to reject any prediction, or to reverse its order of fulfilment, 


because we, forsooth, cannot comprehend or explain how it is to be done, 


or how it is to be reconciled with natural causes. Apply this unbelieving 
principle to the conflagration itself, to the resurrection of the dead, to the 
changing of the living saints, to the miracles of Christ, creation, the mode 
of our existence, etc., and see how little these, as well as a multitude of 
other things, are dependent upon our amount of knowledge concerning 
them. Prophecies, which before their fulfilment seemed of impracticable 
(from a human standpoint) accomplishment were exactly realized ; and 
thus others are given (isit to test the faith of Abraham’s seed ?) in relation 
to the future, which will be verified in like manner, no matter whether 


believed or not, simply because God will indeed perform ‘‘ a strange work,” 
‘“a new thing,’’ and while engaged in it He is abundantly able to ‘‘ cover — 
in the shadow of His hand,” so that (Isa. 43 : 2) ‘‘ when thow walkest 


. 


Pn 


Prop. 150. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 523 


through the fire, thou shalt not be burned, neither shall the flame kindle upon 
thee’ (or as Delitzsch: ‘‘ When thow goest into fire, thou shalt not be 
burned, and the flames shall not set thee on fire’’).? 


1 Reading such charges reminds us of what Dr. Auberlen says: ‘‘ In a time like ours, 
when not only the Gospel of the cross, but even the most elementary views of God, of 
right and light, are foolishness to the Greeks, and often even to the noblest of them, it 
is of paramount importance to be faithful in the simple and fundamental truths which, 
however insignificant they may appear, are the foundation of all the rest, and to give all 
honor to truth with manly, moral and logical energy, not heeding the contemptuous shrug- 
ging of shoulders of either friend or foe.”’ 

* The reader will find some very impressive remarks on faith in the ability of God to 
perform His predictions in Keith's Harm. of Prophecy, the last chapter. The expression 
of Tertullian, ‘‘ Credo quiaimpossibile est,”” which has excited the ridicule of multitudes, 
and is most sneeringly brought forth in recent works as evincing ‘‘ unreasoning faith,’’ 
contains a sublime truth, being simply founded on Christian faith, which must necessarily 
believe in that which is impossible to man—otherwise redemption has no need of the 
supernatural intervening. The foundation laid in the Person of Jesus the Christ, the 
superstructure, and the culmination—all demands that which is impossible to man. But 
this very faith in the impossible (as we will show under a following Prop.) is the most 
reasonable, because it alone meets the requirements of man. The reader will, no doubt, 
be pleased to be reminded of the quaint remarks of Sir Thom. Browne (felig. Medici, sec. 
9) : “I desire to exercise my faith in the difficultest point ; for to credit ordinary and 
visible objects is not faith but persuasion. Some believe the better for seeing Christ’s 
sepulchre ; and when they have seen the Red Sea, doubt not of the miracle. Now, con- 
trarily, I bless myself, and am thankful that I lived not in the days of miracles ; that I 
never saw Christ, nor His disciples. I would not have been one of those Israelites that 
passed the Red Sea; nor one of Christ’s patients on whom He wrought His wonders ; 
then had my faith been thrust upon me; nor should I enjoy that greater blessing pro- 
nounced on all that believe and saw not,” etc. 


524 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 151. 


Proposition 151. Zhis Kingdom is identified with “the new 
heavens and new earth” of Isa. 65 +17 and 66 : 22, of 2 Pet. 
8:18, and of Lev. 21: 1. 


Having shown that ‘‘ the new heavens and new earth” of Isaiah 
and Peter are identical, another step in the discussion is requisite, 
viz., to prove that the same is also denoted in Rey. 21: 1, or, that 
one and the same state is meant by the three prophets. This be- 
comes the more necessary since many attempt to invalidate our doe- 
trine by denying their identity, separating them, and making them 
descriptive of different eras of time. Thus e.g. some make the 
heavens, etc., of Isaiah and Peter something of the past and — 
present, while those of John are still future ; others make Isaiah 
refer to the Millennial era, while Peter and John follow that period ; 
others again make Isaiah and Peter relate to the Millennium and 
John’s heaven, etc., succeed it.’ We believe that they all refer to 
the same thing and to the same time; and for which belief the 
following reasons are assigned (comp. Prop. 148): 

1 In this connection one party has much to say respecting “ a Davidic age” and ‘‘a 
Solomonic age,’’ making the reigns of David and Solomon typical (Solomon ought to have 
turned out a better man to form a type) of those future periods, the Millennial and suc- — 
ceeding. But we cannot receive these types, which are not only merely conjectural, but — 
opposed to the fact that when Messiah’s Kingdom commences it is under one Head and 
eternal (see Prop. 159, on duration of Kingdom). Admitting that at the end of the Mil- 
lennium its glory may be greater, etc., yet such increase is not thus to be measured by 
Solomon’s reign. Excellent and able men indorse this view, but to us it seems harsh 
and unjust ; because even David’s Kingdom is no type of Christ’s but a reality which — 


David’s Son at the appointed time is to inherit, i.e. the same Theocratic throne and King- 
dom over the same elect people. (See Prop, 122.) 


Obs. 1. It is not necessary to repeat the arguments which show the con- 
nection of Isaiah and Peter. This has been done in the immediate preced- 
ing (e.g. 148 and 149) Propositions, to which, in justice to us, the reader 
will please refer. ‘The views of the Jews, the correspondence of language 
with their belief, the reference direct to Isaiah by Peter, etc., must, in 
order to make the line of argument complete, be duly considered. To one 
party of our opponents, let it be said, that conceding as they do a Pre- 
Millennial Advent of Jesus and His reign during that age, they must 
explain how this is to be reconciled with Peter’s delineation of the scoffers 
and their language, which cannot be thus applied to accord with their 
theory, or with their expressed views of the approach of ‘‘ the Day of 
God.’’ But the connection of Isaiah and Peter will appear more fully and 
distinctively by noticing how John corroborates it. 


The position of e.g. Lange’s Com., 2 Peter, loci, is alone tenable, viz., that of identify- 
ing Isa. and Peter as describing the same new heavens and earth: ‘‘ This hope (i.¢. 


PROP. 151.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 525 


expressed by Peter) is founded on the word of prophecy, Isa. 65 :17; 66 : 22; 30:26; 
Areaey. 21: 1,’’ 


Obs. 2. Before showing the latter, the reader ought to determine that 
the separation of John’s account of ‘‘ the new heaven and new earth” from 
its direct relationship to the Millennial age in ch. 20, or the finding it 
recorded after the account given of that era (and upon which so much 
stress is laid by some), is no proof whatever that its realization must also 
succeed that period. ‘This is so fully granted by many of those who differ 
from us, that it should not, in itself, be used as an argument against us.! 
It eminently deserves (to avoid confusion, etc.) a separate and distinctive 
description, which, connected by parallel utterances, sufficiently, as a 
comparison evinces, identifies the period of its coming. 

1 As illustrative we select several as follows: Prof. Bush (Mill., p. 94) says that it is 
**in accordance with a feature of the sacred writings of incessant occurrence, in which 
events, whether historically or symbolically related, are transposed out of their first chrono- 
logical order,” and quotes Lightfoot (Works, vol. 2, p. 61), ‘‘ It is a well-known and well- 
grounded maxim among Jews, that ‘non est prius et posterius in Scriptura.’ Their 
meaning in it is this, that the order and place of a text as it stands in the Bible doth not 
always infer or enforce the very time of the story, which the text relateth ; but that some- 
times—nay it occurreth very oft—stories are laid out of their natural and chronological place, 
and things are very frequently related before which, in order of time, occurred atter ; 
and so ‘e contra.’ Nor is this transposition and dislocation of times and texts proper to 
the evangelists only, but the same Spirit that dictated both Testaments alike ; laying 
texts, chapters, and histories out of the proper place in which, according to natural 
chronological order, they would have lain.’’ Horne, Jntrod., gives, “ On the Interp. of 
Scrip. Proph.,’’ p. 388, vol. 1, the following rule: ‘‘ The order of time is not always to be 
looked for in the prophetic writings ; for they frequently resume topics of which they have 
formerly treated, after other subjects have intervened, and again discuss them.” Victo- 
rinus (Apoc. 7 : 2), one of the earliest expositors, fully recognizes this principle : ‘‘ The 
order of the things said is not to be regarded, since often the Holy Spirit, when He has 
run to the end of the last time, again returns to the same times, and supplies what He 
has less fully expressed.’’ Many expositors, especially of the Apocalypse, express them- 
selves in the same way, and point out a number of instances (as e.g. the last Seal embrac- 
ing things under the sixth, ch. 7, ch. 11, ch. 12, ch. 13, ch. 16, ch. 17, etc.) in which events 
previously referred to are afterward taken up more in detail. Indeed, however men may 
differ in the application of the principle in particular instances, every interpreter must, 
in simple consistency, more or less adopt it. 


Obs. 3. Again, as one party seeks to make its view that of the early 
fathers, Barnabas and Tertullian (see Prop. 148, Obs. 4), it may be as well 
to state, that the references made by Barnabas and Tertullian do not relate 
at all to the non-identity of these new heavens and earth. They simply 
declare, what we also hold, that a complete restoration of all things will 
not be fully witnessed until the close of the Millennial period. On the 
other hand, we have the most positive proof that so far as ‘‘ the new 
heavens,”’ etc., of John is concerned, they believed it to be fully correspond- 
ent with and embracing the Millennial era. Thus e.g. Tertullian (B. 3, 
Ag. Marcion, ch. 24) says: ‘‘ For we also confess, that a Kingdom 1s 
promised us on earth: before that in heaven, but in another state, viz., 
after the resurrection, for it will be for a thousand years in a city of divine 
workmanship, viz., Jerusalem brought down from heaven ; and this city 
_ Ezekiel knew and the Apostle John saw,” etc. After declaring that this 
is the city for the saints at that time, he closes: ‘‘ This is the manner of 
the heavenly Kingdom.’ Barnabas, in his argument respecting the cove- 
nant being fulfilled in the seventh chiliad, makes the latter the Sabbath, 


526 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 151, r 
the ‘‘ blessed rest, when we have received the righteous promise, when 
iniquity shall be no more, all things being renewed (Rev. 21) by the 
Lord,”’ etc. Whatever views the Fathers may have entertained respecting 

succeeding ages and even changes, it 1s apparent from their writings that 

they made no distinction between Isaiah, Peter, and John on this point, 

but quote from all of them directly or inferentially as pertaining to the 

same period of tume. They speak of the perpetuity of the state introduced 

at the Millennial era, of the eternal duration of the Kingdom then estab- 

lished, and of the everlasting blessedness then bestowed, and in such com- 

prehensive terms that this ‘‘ new heaven and earth”’ enters into the eternal 

ages without being destroyed or passiny away. Admitting their liability to 

error, yet, 1f sustained by Scripture, a logical consistency, which is to their 

credit, supports that general unanimity among them. 


¢ 


Obs. 4. The matter, however, must be decided by a direct appeal to the. 
Scriptures, and as this decision is dependent upon time, when Rey. chs. 21 
and 22 will be fulfilled, it is in place to point ont the reasons why they 
must be linked with the Millennial period. (1.) The phrase ‘‘ new heaven 
and new earth’’ corresponds accurately with Isaiah’s and Peter’s language. 
This 1s so much felt that some have made Isaiah’s heaven typical of the 
other. (2) But that it is no type, and will not be superseded by the — 
heaven of Peter or John, is evident from the announcement that the heaven 
of Isaiah when once created will not pass away (Prop. 148, Obs. 4). God 
appeals to that heaven as indicating His unfailing faithfulness (Isa. — 
66 : 22), and the inhabitants (Isa. 65:18) are to ‘‘ be glad and rejoice 
Forever in that which I create ;’’ thus disposing of the typical theory, 
teaching the perpetuity of the heaven and earth introduced at the Millennial 
era, and informing us how to understand the fleeing away of the heaven, 
etc., in Rey. 20 : 11 (Prop. 148, Obs. 4). In reference to the last passage, 
in addition to its being parenthetical, given to identify the Person on the 
throne and convey an idea of irresistible power by what He had already 
performed, it may be said that the action described accords with what 
really transpires (as Millennial predictions show), when the Millenniumis 
introduced ; that from the creation of the new heaven, etc., at the Millen- 
nial era, owing to its perpetuity, ‘‘ no place was found for the old ;’ that 
it is not asserted that the new Millennial heaven fled away, but simply 
‘‘ the earth and heaven ;’’ that if it is maintained that the Millennial new 
heaven, etc., flee away, giving place to another, ¢hen we have a violation of 
the order laid down by Peter, who tells us that the present heaven and 
earth are to be changed, not for Millennial ones, and then afterward for 
another substitution, not a thousand years after the Sec. Advent, butat 
the Sec. Coming. He only recognizes one such creation after the present 
one, and in this sustains the perpetuity ascribed to the Millennial heayen 
by all the prophets, who with one voice describe at the coming of the 
Mighty One a glorious restitution which is perpetual in its nature. Taking 
also the view presented under Props. 147 and 148, that the phrase ‘‘heayen 
and earth’’ embrace the import, according to Scriptural usage, of govern- 
ment, dominion, and their supporters, it follows (as will be more fully 
shown under Prop. 159) that such a substitution after the Messiah’s 
Kingdom (which is everlasting, etc., and established at the ushering in of _ 
the Millennial era), cannot take place.’ (3) If ‘‘ the new heaven and new 
earth” of the Millennial era shall pass away, then the language of Rey. 


Prop. 151. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 527 


21:1, that ‘‘ the first heaven and the first earth were passed away,’’ would 
not describe it, seeing that that of the Millennium is not—admitting the 
very statements of our opponents—“‘ the first,’’ for they have the chang- 
ing of the present (first) heaven and earth into a new Millennial, and then 
the changing of this second one into another ‘‘ new’’ one. The mention 
of the word “‘ first’? guards us against the typical application, and shows 
which heaven and earth is changed. (4) 'Fhe phrase ‘*‘ and there was no 
more seda,’’ which is supposed to present a serious objection to our view, 
indicates that the Millennial heaven and earth of Isaiah is denoted. It is 
gratuitously assumed that because ‘‘ sea’’ 1s sometimes used in its literal 
sense, 1b must be Jiterally understood here. But—however the literal to 
some extent might, for aught we know, accompany it—we find in Dan. 
Me ets. 65 : 7 3 Rev. 138.213. Ps. 93 :3,.4; Hab. 3:8, and numerous 
places, flood and sea, mighty waters, etc., employed to denote the agitation, 
unsettled condition, revolutionary tendencies, anarchy, warlike and turbu- 
lent commotions of nations. ‘Take this meaning, so emphatically exhibited 
in prophetic usage, and it is predicted that during this period the nations 
(showing also that they survive) are disposed to peace under the Theocratic 
reign of Jesus, thus happily corresponding with many descriptions of the 
Millennial state which make this peculiarity, freedom from war, ete., a 
distinguishing excellence. King Jesus ‘‘ at His appearing and Kingdom”’ 
will introduce such an order of things that the turbulence of the sea will 
be unknown, and war between nations will cease.? (5) In Rev. 19 : 7, 8, 
9, just before the one thousand years, it 1s said that the marriage of the 
Lamb hath come, and His wife hath made herself ready, etc. ‘This con- 
clusively shows that Rev. chs. 21 and 22 are retrospective, and that they do 
not describe a new order of things after the Millennium. Would it not be 
strange, when ‘‘ the marriage is come,’ and *‘ the Bride is ready,’’ to post- 
pone the marriage a thousand years? Why does the Spirit assert the 
former, if we are not to understand that the marriage with (Rev. 21.: 9) 
‘*the Bride, the Lamb’s wife,’’ is then consummated, withoutso long an 
intervening period? With the Early Church and along line of worthies, 
this notion of an interval (derogatory to the Bridegroom and Bride) after 
the Coming of the Bridegroom (at Sec. Advent), must be rejected as 
untenable.* (6) By comparing Rev. chs. 21 and 22 with the Millennial 
prophecies, as e.g. Isa. chs. 60 and 54, keeping in view the connection of 
the latter with the Advent and the marriage, we are at no loss to see why, 
under the teaching of inspired men, the Early Church so universally held 
that all these prophecies portrayed a New Jerusalem state here on the earth 
in the Millenial age. It seems almost strange that any other opinion can 
be entertained, when the Spirit employs precisely the same language, pre- 
sents the same ideas, etc., in all these prophecies. If the passages alluded 
to are compared, such is ¢he sumilarity of blessing, of events, of deliver- 
ance, etc., that they necessarily must—if there is propriety in language— 
be applied to the same period of time. It will not answer to admit, as 
some do, that the same state is indeed described, but that only the eighth 
age or eternal state after the Millennium is meant by John, for then John, 
using Millennial phraseology, ought.to have specifically discriminated or 
intimated such a transference of idea; besides this, according to the theory 
of such, it is utterly impossible for them to receive Isaiah as describing the 
state mentioned by John without mutilating and expunging (as e.g. Isa. 
60:12; and Isa. 54:15, etc.) passages, which, taking their own admis- 


528 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 151. 


sions, are inconsistent with an era after the Millennial. The fact that the 
prophecies cannot thus be taken in their entirety, descriptive of one period, 
although employing the same language, etc., is against our opponents ; for 
denying their complete resemblance and identity, they plunge into diffi- 
culties from which there is no escape.* ‘To perfect this identity, the same 
blessings enjoyed in the New Jerusalem state are also attributed to the 
Millennial era ; such as the tabernacle of God with men, wiping away all 
tears, no more death, no sorrow, crying, and pain, making all things new, 
the glory of God, the open gates, the brightness that needs no sun, the 
river and the tree of life, no more curse, the throne of God and the Lamb, 
the beholding of His face, the name in the forehead, no night, the reign- 
ing, etc. (7) The period of inheriting is at the Sec. Advent (when the 
Mill. age commences, and this inheriting, in Millennial phraseology, is 
also found in connection with Rey. 21:7, thus accurately corresponding 
with the promises to the saints that at the Sec. Coming they shall obtain 
the New Jerusalem. Such is the impression made by Rev. 3:11, 12; 
Gal. 4:26; Heb. 12 : 22, seeing that the crowning, etc., is invariably 
linked with the Advent. This again is corroborated by Rey. 22 : 10-15 
where the city is spoken of as something immediately connected with the 
Advent of Jesus, which the righteous shall enter, etc. He comes, and gives 
the right both to the tree of life and to the city.° (8) While the New 
Jerusalem is manifested in this new earth, ‘‘ the nations’’ are permitted to 
enjoy its ‘‘ ight,’’ etc., agreeably to other Millennial predictions, as e.g. 
Isa. 60. Those who make the city symbolical of and embracing the saints, 
and then make these ‘‘ nations’? the same saints, involve themselves in a 
confusion of ideas. That these ‘‘ nations’’ are the same as those specified 
to exist in the Millennium is apparent from the simple fact that they sfill 
require ‘* healing.’’ The saints who inherit the city, with other blessings, 
are incorruptible, immortal (1 Cor. 15),and need no healing, while the 
nations being mortal have continued necessity to partake of ‘‘ the leaves of 
the tree for the healing of the nations.’’? The latter condition only corre- 
sponds with the one delineated in Mill. prophecies.* (9) The identity of 
the Theocratic element, the reign of Christ and His saints, the same 
grandeur and glory of the Kingdom, the exaltation of the married wife 
(Prop. 118), when ‘‘ the desolate one” is again remembered in mercy ; in 
brief, our entire argument bearing upon the Kingdom, clearly shows that 
the Kingdom of the Messiah, in the same period of time, is delineated by 
all of these prophecies—only one of them, Rey. 20 : 1-7, specifying a thon- 
sand years (upon which really this division is founded), of as a limit to the 
Theocratic Kingdom, but as the limit of Satan’s binding and of the non- 
resurrection of the rest of the dead. (10) But we are told that the con- 
tinuance of the seasons during the Millennial age is incompatible with the 
conflagration predicted by Peter and the state described by John. But 
here again is a beautiful consistency between Rev. 21 : 23 and Isa. 60 : 19; 
for the former expressly limits the ‘‘no need of the sun, neither of the 
moon’’ ¢o the city, indicating by the reference itself that they indeed exist, 
but that such is the brightness of the city obtained through its august 
Theocratic Ruler that it does not need that of these luminaries ; while the 
latter has reference to the same locality, being confined to the restored 
Jewish nation, Jerusalem its capital city (with which the New is asso- 
ciated), with Jewish and Gentile saints united with it, so that the same 
effulgence of the city, proceeding from the same great source, is represented 


PROP; ‘151. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 529 


as extending (not over the whole earth, but) over the holy land. The 
continuance of sun and moon is also intimated in the next verse. Besides 
this, the objection takes too much for granted, seeing that the design of 
Peter’s fire 1s nowhere asserted to be to eradicate the seasons; that the 
seasons, or rather sun and moon, are given a permanency equal to the 
existence of the earth, of Messiah’s Kingdom, and of God’s faithfulness in 
promise, that if the seasons cease, it must be based on the utter destruction 
not only of this earth (and the substitution of an entirely new and differing 
one), but of the solar system, all of which requires no serious refutation. 
Besides this seasons are mentioned in the ‘‘ every month”’ of Rev. 22 : 2. 
fit) The perfect agreement of Rey. 21 and 22 with Isa. 60,-etc., in 
describing ‘‘ the nations’’ and ‘‘ the kings of the earth’’ at this period of 
time can only be predicated upon a complete similarity of view in time 
respecting its occurrence.’ 


1 Some, as Shimeall, etc., admit that in the Mill. era, or new heaven and new earth of 
Isaiah, there is ‘‘a most signal change,”’ so that it will “ extend to the removal of the curse 
from the ground and also from the circumambient air which envelops the earth.’’ In 
brief, a return to the paradisiacal condition. We ask, if the curse is thus removed from the 
ground and air, and animals, etc., wherein arises the necessity of their destruction as 
given by Peter? Will God destroy what He has again made good? Will He destroy the 
inheritance thus restituted of the saints and of Christ fora time enjoyed? Can we be- 
lieve that a restored Eden can be thus summarily rooted out? Is the restored Davidic 
throne, the glory of the earthly built Jerusalem, the splendor and magnificence of the 
Kingdom instituted, as described by the prophets, to be thus fearfully overthrown by 
fire? No, never! Let able men entertain such views, yet are they opposed to the pilainest 
promises of God’s Word. And, stranger still, such persons object to our view—which 
makes no such demands on the ground of ‘‘ physical impossibility,” while overlooking 
the moral impossibility in their own theory. 

2 Numerous German, English, American, and other writers could be presented indors- 
ing the figurative use of the word ‘‘sea,”’ but they are not needed in the light of assigned 
Scripture usage. Should it be thought that the rising up of Gog and Magog is an excep- 
tion which forbids such an interpretation, we reply : (1) That it would also prevent us 
from receiving the predictions of the Millennial era, which promise universal and contin- 
uous peace, the utter removal of war, the destruction of warlike material, etc. It is, 
therefore, like many others, a general statement, which is true, the solitary exception 
occurring after so long an interval, only indicating or manifesting its correctness ; and 
(2) this exception may not, in a strict sense, prove to be one. The reason why the 
promise is given is evidently the implied comfort or idea that no ‘‘ sea’’ can exist in that 
period of time which will cause the least injury to the saints or to the new heaven and 
new earth established. Hence, when Gog and Magog arise, the saints and the Kingdom 
are not affected by it, seeing that immediate and swift destruction comes upon Gog from 
the Lord. 

3 Some few, as Waggoner, to avoid this difficulty, have the marriage consummated and 
Bride and Bridegroom both return to heaven and remain until the close of the thousand 
years ; but this is opposed to the entire order of events, and introduces inextricable confu- 
sion to a fair exposition. This will be noticed hereafter, in connection with the Millen- 
nium, Now, it is sufficient to say that such a view entirely misconceives the nature, 
locality, etc., of the covenanted Theocratic-Davidic Kingdoms, and ignores the restora- 
tion of the Jewish nation, the perpetuity of the race, ete. 

4 To illustrate: they cannot quote Isa. 60, etc., without denying the perpetuity 
assigned, or having part fulfilled in the Millennial age and part in the age following, 
etc. ; they cannot quote Rev. 21 and 22 without repeating Mill. phraseology which, 
against Mill. predictions, they tell us will not be realized until after that period. Such 
inform us that the New Jerusalem is a symbolic representation of the saints who are with 
Christ, and, if the theory is consistently carried out, then the saints only come down 
from God out of heaven upon the earth after the Mill. era, which is opposed to numerous 
testimonies to the contrary, as e.g. Zech. 14, etc. Thus also the reign of the saints, 
identified with the New Jerusalem, is after the Mill. period, which is opposed by Rev. 
20, etc. So the dwelling of God with man—the Theocratic relationship thus expressed—is 
after the same, which cannot possibly be admitted. Admitting, as we cheerfully do, that 


530 THE THEOCRATICO KINGDOM. [Prop. 151. 


the work of God is progressive as it relates to the race and the earth during these thou- 
sand years, yet the new heaven and new earth begin with that era, and with it also the 
New Jerusalem state. 

5 Let the reader compare e.g. John 14 : 1-3, fulfilled when Jesus comes again, with 
1 Pet. 1 : 4, 5, 7, 13, realized at the same time, and he must be impressed that the man- 
sions and the inheritance then obtained are eternal, ever-enduring, and not to be super- 
seded by their removal and the substitution of others. But we conclusively show that 
those mansions and that inheritance are gained at a Pre-Millennial Advent, and hence we 
insist upon their perpetuity. (Comp. also Prop. 170 on the Father’s House.) 

6 Delitzsch (Bib. Psych., p. 556) informs us that V. Hofman and Karsten hold to the 
New Jerusalem being in the Millennium ; Delitzsch, however, maintains that it is after 
that period, and explains ‘“‘ the healing of the nations or heathens” to denote only the 
increase of power, blessedness, etc., of the Redeemed in eternity, or, as Von Gerlach 
expresses it, ‘‘ a reception of God’s gifts of grace, as of the tree of life in Eden, an eter- 
nal becoming and growing.” So also Rinck and others. But this is a far-fetched expla- 
nation, especially when it is said that ‘‘ the expression ‘ health’ must not exactly presup- 
pose sickness, but indicates the perfect state of mature growth into the image of God,” 
etc. But the phraseology does not by any means “‘ indicate a perfect state of mature 
erowth,’’ but a state of imperfection which demands ‘‘ a healing’’ process to bring to 
‘* a perfect state of mature growth.” Delitzsch’s interpretation is governed by that on 
Rey. 21 : 1, but which we have proven is wrong, because making Isaiah and Peter corre- 
spond (‘‘ according to promise’’), it is easy to show that all three prophets are in agree- 
ment. According to Lange (Rev., p. 389) we must, in consistency, preserve the idea of 
*‘ the highest sanative operation of nature’’ (as then manifested). That physical healing 
is denoted, is seen (1) from the effects of the fall ; (2) from the Divine Purpose inculcat- 
ing a complete redemption that includes the physical ; (3) from the Millennial predic- 
tions incorporating such temporal and physical deliverance. 

7 For the reasons thus assigned, we cannot receive the view of Hofman (Prophecy and 
Fulfilment), Ebrard (The Rev. of John), Brookes (Maranatha), Guiness (Approaching End), 
and other able writers, who locate the renewal, the new heavens and earth, and the New 
Jerusalem state after the thousand years, thus forbidding the Patriarchs and others from 
receiving their inheritance and looked-for city until a long interval has intervened. The 
fact is, that such concessions made by Millenarians (as e.g. Birks in Four Proph. Empires, 
etc.) are taken advantage of by Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming), Gipps (First Res.), and others, as 
evidence of weakness and antagonism, and the discrepancy is shown that the lauded 
Millennial heavens and earth are swept away with all their glory, and that ‘‘ the New 
Heavens and New Earth” agree with their own Post-Millennial theory. The same rea- 
sons forbid our accepting of Lincoln’s (Lects. on Rev., vol. 2, ch. 19) portraiture of the 
last chapters of the Apoc., because he has some parts delineating the Millennial state and 
other portions the eternal state following, making it partly Millennial and partly Post- 
Millennial and eternal, This introduces confusion, and mars the symmetry of the predic- 
tion, and is the inevitable result of his believing (against the testimony of Scripture) that 
the Millennial earth, Christ’s glorious inheritance, is tc be utterly destroyed by fire. So 
also Smith’s (Key to Rev., p. 385) theory that ‘‘ the new heavens,” etc., is ‘‘ a figurative 
description of heaven,” and not a portraiture of something pertaining to the earth, must 
be rejected as utterly untenable, and evidencing an utter abandonment of covenant and 
prophecies relating to the earth. The opinion of Calvin, Prest. Edwards, and others 
that ‘‘ the new heavens and earth” of Isa. commences with ‘‘ the Gospel dispensation” 
(in moral regeneration, etc.) and extends to the final goal when it will be superseded by 
an entire new creation, is thus shown to be unscriptural, for Peter’s direct reference to — 
Isa. evidences its futurity and relationship, as we have proven ; and the past has never, as 
a matter of fact, evinced such a fulfilment of Isa. 65 : 17-25 and 66 : 15-24 as to make it 
corroborative of such a view. It is a fact that some (as e.g Durham, quoted by Brown, ~ 
p. 302, Ch. Sec. Coming) have this earth destroyed by a conflagration and a new earth and © 
new heavens introduced, but do not identify the latter as ‘‘ the seat of the blessed,’ and — 
are ‘‘ at a loss to know what was to be its destination.” Surely, such must totally ignore — 
the plainest statements of Scripture, and one must wonder that they undertake to com-_ 
ment on the Scriptures at all. The Compreh. Com., adopting Henry’s comment on 2 
Pet. 3 : 13, confidently appeals to Isa, 65 :17 and 66 : 22 as the promises alluded to and 
then, after the conflagration, realized ; but without the least effort to show how on its 
theory of a universal destructive deluge of fire it is possible for Isa. 65 and 66 to be ful: — 
filled, it coolly proceeds to make ‘‘ the new heavens and earth’’ of both Peter and Rev. 
21 (and, of course, by implication as the promise then fulfilled, also of Isa, 65 and 66) to 


Prop. 151. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 531 


be fulfilled after the Mill. age and after its adopted universal judgment. The self-evi. 
dent and rebutting discrepancy does not seem even to be noticed. Dr. Brown in Ch. Sec, 
Coming, Pref. to the Ed. of 1879, makes it the leading aim of his work to prove the fol- 
owing : ‘‘ It is the object of this book to show that ‘ the heavens and the earth which are 
now’ shall continue so long as sin and death remain, that is, not only to the end of the 
Millennium, but of the ‘little season’ of degeneracy and rebellion that is to succeed it ; 
after that’’ (i.e. as he afterward explains, after all probation is ended and the universal 
judgment has arrived) ‘‘ I ‘ look for new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwelleth right- 
eousness,’ unmixed with ‘ anything that defileth.’’’ Now, here is the fair implication 
that previously no new heaven and earth exists (unless it be in the sense given above by 
Calvin and Edwards), which is abundantly refuted by Isa. 65 and 66, describing a state 
of things which must, of necessity, precede the eternal state advocated by him. So 
jealously does Dr. Brown guard his theory and raise up alleged impossibilities, that (un- 
der the supposition that he can definitely determine the exact capabilities of the renewed 
éarth in the way of sustaining life) he makes, by reason of the conflagration, ‘‘ the new 
heaven and new earth” ulerly uninhabitable for mortal men, as follows (p. 300) : ‘* What- 
ever ‘ elements’ mean here, as contradistinguished from the ‘ heavens,’ it must be some- 
thing, the ‘ dissolution’ of which would incapacitate human beings, as at present consti- 
tuted, from subsisting for a moment. What, then, becomes of the theory of mortal men 
tenanting the new heavens and the new earth? It is nothing better than a dream ?” 
We are abundantly satisfied with “ the dream” of the prophets, when, as we shall show 
in detail, they describe it as a reality, but must express our surprise that resort should be 
had to such reasoning. To indicate how even Millenarian writers of acknowledged 
ability introduce confusion and antagonism, when their utterances are compared, we 
refer to the comments of Dr. Fausset. In Com. on Isa. 66 : 15 he makes it parallel with 
feisa..0 25; Ps. 50:3; Hab, 3:5; 2 Thess.1:8; and 2 Pel.3:7.”: In Com. on 2 Pet 
3:13 he directly refers to Jsa. 65 :17 and 66 : 22 as being then fulfilled. In Com. on Isa, 
65 and 66, he locates these passages in their realization with 2 Pet. 3 and Rev. 21, as con- 
sistency and unity demand. In Com. on Dan. 7 : 27 and Com. on Rev. 21, he has “‘ the 
new heaven and new earth’’ of Rey. 21 to follow the thousand years. Such discrepancies 
and antagonistic views are a blemish to the commentary, and cannot be reconciled by the 
supposition that the conflagration of Peter is partly Pre-Millennial and partly Post-Mil- 
lennial (the latter the most destructive, etc.), because (aside from the inconsistency of 


_ intervening a glorious Sabbatism which is thus to be ended) then the conflagration would 


destroy a heaven and earth, an inheritance, a Kingdom, a glory and blessedness, whose 
perpetuity for “ the ages of ages’’ is most positively declared. 


Obs. 5. Now, in justice to our subject, and to meet, according to our 
design, all forms of objections, a point must be noticed, which, if we were 
to consult simply feeling and the esteem with which we regard differing 
brethren, otherwise might be passed by. Our allusion is to the opinion 
entertained by some (as e.g. Waggoner) that Christ and the saints are not 
upon the earth during the thousand years, but come to it and reside on it 
after those years are expired ; to the view held by others (as e.g. Butler), 
that Christ and the saints go ¢o the third heaven, and reign from thence in 
the Millennial period (so also Hess, who concedes, however, that ‘‘ the 
monarch of this so flourishing Kingdom would indeed, as in the days of 
His resurrection, appear again visibly on earth, when some more important 
end requires He should’’), making the New Jerusalem a continuation of 
the same, etc.; to that of others, who (as e.g. Melville), think that when 
the Mill. age is introduced the saints shall be caught up to meet Christ, 
and that both the saints and Jesus will be in the New Jerusalem, not wpon 
the earth, administering the Kingdom then set up; to that of others, who 
(as e.g. Shimeall) believe that when the Mill. age begins, Christ and the saints 
will be ‘‘ in the air, as the capital of His universal earthly empire’ (to avoid 
the charge of caricaturing, see p. 316 of his J Will Come Again) the New 
Jerusalem state following the Millennial ; to that of others, who (as e.g. 
some of the editors of the old series of Proph. Times), believe that when 


the Mill. age is ushered in Christ and the saints will be in the New Jeru- 
salem, but separated and distinct from the earth—in brief, swspended above 
it.' | Writers from these respective classes have much to say concerning 
the ‘‘ aerial thrones,’’ and ** the general superintendency’’ conducted from 
““the air’’ or ‘‘ the heavens,’’ etc. The identification of ‘‘ the new heaven 
and new earth’’ of Isaiah, Peter, and John, being a representation of what 
is done, not in ‘‘ the air,’’ or in a place separate and distinct from the 
earth proper, or in the third heaven, but here on the earth, is a confutation 
of all such theories. More than this, a correct apprehension of the King- 
dom as covenanted to David’s Son and as predicted by the prophets posi- 
tively forbid such a withdrawal in part or whole of David’s Son and His — 
brethren from the very place specifically promised (not “‘ the air,’’ but 
‘* the earth’’) to Him and His saints. "The Harly Church, more consistent, 
knew nothing of such a@ separation of Jesus from His Davidic throne and 
Kingdom, which only was, and shall be, located on earth, and of such a 
reign of saints ‘‘7n the air” or “‘ on high,’’? somewhere instead of. being 
‘‘on the earth.’? Brethren may honestly think that they are honoring 
Christ and the saints, or that they are making (as Shimeall) Millenarian- 
ism more palatable for others, but they will allow us to say, with equal 
honesty, that planting ourselves firmly upon the oath-bound covenant which - 
expressly locates this very Kingdom, and upon the utterances of the 
prophets which places the Kingdom and the King here on the earth, at the 
head of the restored Jewish nation, etc., we hold that a disjoining, a sepa- 
ration of that which God has joined together, evinces, at least, a lack of 
faith in the very order and connection which the Word gives. Admitting 
that a diversity of view in regard to the details of doctrine is to be expected 
and allowed, yet upon this subject, which virtually leaves the Davidic 
throne and Kingdom (on the earth) without an occupant and head (trans- 
-planting Him to the ‘‘ air’? or Third Heaven, etc., where David’s throne 
and Kingdom never existed), it 18 proper to insist, in plain terms, upon 
that view which alone meets the conditions imposed by covenant and proph- — 
ecy. One writer (J. B., Proph. Times, Aug. 1868), even in distinguishing — 
between the Mill. age and the following New Jerusalem period, asserts: — 
‘* We have reason to believe that the real throne of God will not be on the — 
earth during the Millenntum.’’ All such opinions arise from not clearly 
apprehending what the throne of the Theocratic King is, and where it is 
located. Having sbown and proven in previous Propositions that God’s 
throne (not the Divine Sovereignty, Props. 79, 80) was on the earth, that 
it was incorporated with the Davidic, and that when the Dayidie is 
restored, as sworn to and solemnly predicted, God’s throne—the Theocratic — 
throne—is again restored for the God-man, the appointed Theocratie King 
to occupy, it seems fo be faithless to doubt the locality (Prop. 122) of this — 
throne. When the tabernacle of David, now in ruins, is rebuilt, when the 
glorious things spoken of the splendidly restored Theocratic rule are wit- 
nessed —does covenant or prophet give the slightest idea that this embraces 
anything outside of, or in the atmosphere above, the earth? If the trans- 
figuration (Prop. 158) really gave a correct representation, it follows that 
we have the King and the three classes wpyon the earth. The inheritance 
of Christ is om the earth ; the inheritance of Abraham and his seed is om 
the earth : the reign of Christ and of His saints is on the earth ; the taber- 
nacling of God again with man is on the earth ; the Kingdom under the 
whole heavens is on the earth ; a Paradise restored, with a God present in 


532 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 151. ; 
A 


PRop. 151. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 583 


the Person of Jesus Christ, is on the earth; a renewal, a restitution, a 
regeneration, a world to come, a day of the Lord Jesus, etc., etc., is on 
the earth—-nowhere do we find the least teaching, direct, that any of these 
things shall be witnessed and realized outside of this earth, or that saints 
are to be, in any way, separated therefrom. Such theories result from 
pure inference, and the main passage produced from which it is drawn, is 
the one relating to the resurrection and translation of the saints, who are 
‘to be caught up in the clouds (or as some, in clouds) to meet the Lord in 
the air,’ trom which it 1s wrongfully assumed that the Lord and the 
saints remain in the air. We might just as logically say that Christ is 
stillin the cloud that received Him; while they themselves do not con- 
stantly keep Him ‘‘ 22 the air,’’ for as the prophecies demand a personal 
manifestation of Jesus oz the earth, some allow that the King will occa- 
sionally come to the earth to fulfil those predictions. No! no! Simple 
in faith, unlearned in many things as the primitive church may have been, 
yet it was far too strong in faith and learned in the Scriptures to advocate 
opinions which restore a garden of Eden for Adam and Eve, and then 
carefully place Adam and Eve in ‘‘ the air’’ or up ‘‘ on high,’’ where the 
paradisiacal restoration does not affect them ; which repeals a curse from 
the earth, but translates those who had borne the curse to another place 
instead of making them “ return’’ as the prophets do, to see and enjoy its 
repeal ; which establishes a Messiah’s Kingdom, but carefully keeps the 
Messiah aloof from it ; and which, as one party, brings the New Jerusalem 
to the earth ; but suspended up on high somewhere in the atmosphere, where 
its gates are open for the kings of the earth to enter, etc. But we need 
not discuss the matter—our previous Propositions having done this—for 
these same writers when (for the time forgetting this theory of separating 
Jesus and the saints from their inheritance, etc.), opposing the prevailing 
notion that David’s throne is in the third heaven, use the very arguments 
that equally refute their own notion of its being ‘‘in the air,’’ or some 
other place. ‘Thus one (Shimeall) forcibly says: ‘‘ The sum of the whole 
matter is simply this : David has-no throne in heaven.’’ (May we ask, Had 
he one ‘‘in the air?’’) ‘‘ And Christ, though born a King, and crucified 
as a King—the King of the Jews—yet ‘the Kingdom and dominion and 
the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heavens,’ has never vet been 
given to Him or His saints. But there stands the immutable oath of God 
to David, that Christ as His ‘Son according to the flesh ’—mark, not ac- 
cording to the Spirit—shall sit on His throne.’’ Precisely so; for any 
other view detracts from the simplicity, beauty, and sublimity of our system 
of truth. Hence, we have no sympathy with that view which would make 
the *‘ air’? more holy than the renewed earth, and the remaining “‘ in the 
air’ less ‘‘ gross and sensual’’ than being on the redeemed earth, the 
theatre of Christ’s glorious work, and the place (His dwelling-place in 
Zion’’), where the Second Adam enters the restored Eden; we would 
rather, if it is a simple belief and even childlike, contemplate our King as 
actually and truly personally present, reigning in His covenanted land, 
throne, and Kingdom, wrested from Satan, dwelling in His “‘ fest’? and 
‘* Inheritance,’ and thus manifesting, in the very place of His rejection, 
sufferings, and death, His Davidic—real—Sonship and Lordship. And 
we love to think of the saints enjoying, in the very place of their former 
trials and sorrows, the blessedness of perfected Redemption, of completed 
restitution. Instead of detracting from the honor of David’s Son and of 


534 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 151. 


the saints, it is certainly adding to the same and to God’s glory to advocate 
the carrying out of the covenanted promises, the plan of restitution, which 
restores man truly and literally to his long-lost Eden and through a personal 
Second Adam—present in this Eden—recovers a lost dominion on the 
earth.’ 


1 This last view is by far more logical and consistent than the others, seeing that it not 
only admits the identity of the heaven and earth of Isaiah, Peter, and John, but, in a 
manner, associates them. Some of the reasoning following, therefore, is not relevant to it. 

2 In this connection we may introduce a passage of Scripture, Eph. 1:14, “ the 
earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased possession.” This 
earth is, evidently, that ‘‘ purchased possession” which the meek inherit (not “ the air” or 
some other locality), for simple consistency demands that the promises to the Patriarchs, 
etc., of the land through which they passed, saw, etc., should be their inheritance—an 
inheritance obtained for them through the Christ. But that we may not be charged with 
forcing a meaning out of Eph. 1 : 14, we refer to one of our most prominent opponents, 
and give his comment. Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 306) opposes the tendency to make 
the last clause, ‘‘ redemption of the purchased possession,’’ equivalent to ‘‘ the Church” 
or ‘‘ purchased people,’’ and favors the idea of ‘‘ acquired possession or inheritance” in 
view of its being something prepared for us, an inheritance separate from the person 
himself, something to be accomplished for us and not in us, etc. He correctly holds that 
its ‘‘ needing to be redeemed” shows that it is “ something alienated from us, but is 
again to be made ours ; not a possession altogether new, but an old possession, lost, and 
again to be reclaimed from the powers of evil, which now overmaster and destroy it.” 
He argues that just with the redemption of the body, so with this possession ; it is some- 
thing recovered, and not simply to be made— something alienated and under the power 
of evil that is to be restored, and that this is the earth under the curse, promised as ‘‘ an 
everlasting possession’’ to Abraham and his seed. We, therefore, insist upon it that any 
theory, however plausibly presented, which separates in the slightest degree the Patri- 
archs and saints from direct contact with their promised inheritance, is thus far defective, 
and dishonors the completeness of Redemption, for it virtually makes the earth still un- 
suitable for the saints. F 


¢ 


PROP.. 152.| THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. e539) 


Proposition 152. Zhis Kingdom is connected with the perpetua- 
tion of the human race. 


This follows, of necessity from the preceding Propositions. The 
Kingdom, as covenanted and predicted, imperatively demands it ; 
for it could not in its strictly Theocratic order exist without the 
restored Jewish nation, with which it is inseparably connected. The 
Theocracy is no type but a reality ; its restoration is not an ideal 
matter, but one of actual occurrence. Hence the re-establishment 
of the Theocratic Kingdom always specifies or takes for. granted the. 
continuation of the race. This results not merely from its cove- 
nanted relationship, but from its very design, which is the salvation 
of the race in bringing to it. the government, etc., that it needs. 

- The reader will, of course, observe that this Proposition confirms the position that 
we have taken respecting 2 Pet. 3, for the Word of God does not contradict itself. This 
perpetuation proves most conclusively that the conflagration cannot possibly be as uni- 
versal and destructive as many allege, who are compelled by their ultra views of the same 
to ignore the Scriptures on this subject. Thus e.g. take Isa. 51 : 8, and, after stating that 
*‘the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall wax old asa garment,” 
after declaring in reference to the wicked ‘‘ the moth shall eat them up like a garment, 
and the worm shall eat them like wool,”’ it is then added, as expressive of the continued 


result (as we shall now show in detail) : ‘‘ But my righteousness shall be forever, and my 
salvation from generation to generation.”’ 


‘Obs. 1. Complete Redemption requires the perpetuation of the race after 
the Sec. Advent. Down to that Advent the race, as such, is not saved ; 
this is so clearly announced that it needs no proof. Yet it is a truth that 
the Redeemer will restore al/ the forfeited blessings, that He will bring 
salvation to the world, and that He will destroy all the works resulting 
from evi]. This is admitted in general terms by our opposers, but in the 
restitution of those forfeited blessings they leave out one of the most pre- 
cious, viz., the perpetuation of the race in a state of innocency and holi- 
ness—and thus constitute an imperfect Redemption of man. ‘They forget 
that defore the fall the command was given to “‘.multiply and replenish the 
earth,’ and that the fall prevented this earth from being peopled by a 
race, holy, God-fearing, and serving. If restitution indeed means a 
restoring to its former state and condition, and if it includes a restoration 
of the very things lost by sin, then, if complete, as the word insists it will 
be, at must embrace this long-lost, long longed-for intended benefaction. 
The command of God given to Adam and Eve before the fall to fill the 
earth with a holy progeny, but sadly marred by the corruption entailed by 
sin, will yet be fulfilled in their descendants, since His Divine pleasure 
respecting the real status of the race is evidenced in the injunction, and 
His Divine purpose, thus indicated, cannot be frustrated by man’s fall. 
The interrupted design of making the race itself holy God will yet carry 
out, and not leave Satan glory in a defeat. The oppressive burden borne 


536 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PrRop. 152. 


by the race and productive of fearful suffering shall be graciously removed 
from it, so that God’s merciful end to fill the earth to its utmost limits 
with a righteous people will yet be realized. ‘‘ I am the Lord, I change 
not,’’ is a Divine attribute, which is God’s glory ; and hence looking back 
to see what He Himself intended this race of man to become, we find in 
His expressed intention the Divine Will in the matter ; and of Him it is 
said: *‘ My counsel shall stand, and I will do all in my pleasure’—** I 
have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass ; I have purposed it, I will also 
doit.’’ Therefore, we believe, in humble reliance upon the unchangeable- 
ness of God's purpose, that a holy, happy race shall yet possess this earth, 
and that it will be perpetuated precisely so far as God had intended it 
should be before man fell. Olshausen (Com., Pref. p. 117) expresses this 
so tersely that it is worth attention : ‘‘ The proper fundamental idea of 
the doctrine of God’s Kingdom upon earth (which) is so simple, that we 
cannot understand how its truth could ever be doubted, until we remember 
the farragoes of nonsense which have been propounded under its sanction. 
This simple radical idea is merely, that as, 1n regard to an individual man, 
God, by the Saviour, redeems not merely a particular part of him, his 
spirit alone, his soul alone, or his body alone, but the whole man, his 
body, soul, and spirit, so the redeeming power of Christ has for its object 
the deliverance of the entire hwman race, and of the creation in general, 
from the yoke of sin.’ God’s purpose is delayed for a time—which to 
finite man appears long, but to God is ‘‘as a day’’—until the Saviour is 
provided, and the proper material has been gathered even out of the fallen 
race, for the leverage requisite to lift the race out of its sunken condition. 
The provision of the Saviour, the process of gathering out ‘‘ the peculiar 
people,’’ who are to be the source of blessing to the race, proclaims that 
there is only a brief—to God—interval or interruption, of which He avails 
Himself to make His own triumph and glory the more conspicuous and — 
permanent. And it is this very feature, which, perhaps more than any 
other, magnifies and exalts the inexpressible greatness, majesty, and glory 
of Itedemption in Christ. For, instead of gaining here and there ‘‘ those — 
that believe’ out of the nations, saving ‘‘ the few out of the race while 
‘‘the many”’ are lost, confining Salvation to the number of the saved 
gathered until the Sec. Advent, and leaving the race with its multitudes in 
the hands of Satan (thus giving the latter, as some one has aptly said, the 
victory in point of numbers), God. in Christ, employing those that are 
saved as instrumentalities (comp. e.g. Props. 15% and 156) perpetuates sal- 
vation in the deliverance and perfpetuation of the race until @ cowntless 
host of righteous ones arises, a multitude of swarming generations of re- 
deemed ones appear to replace the gap made by sin. God, instead of cast- 
ing away the perpetuation of the race in holiness—as a thing of nought—_ 
and remaining satisfied with ‘‘ the fragments’’ gathered, regards this as 
‘“a precious stone,’’ which He carefully polishes and sets with renewed 
lustre in His crown as of priceless value.? This immeasurably exalts the 
work of Christ, the purpose of His incarnation, sacrifice, present exaltation — 
and glorious reign, the greatness of the design, and the grandeur of the 
Salvation that He Himself contemplates to accomplish. It invests Him 
with a@ perfection as Redeemer and a sublimity as a King, mighty to save, 
that no other view can possibly bring to Him.* 


1 Rey. R. Newton (Proph. Times, Aug., 1863), after arguing effectively that one of the 
chief works of Satan was the deteriorating and corrupting of the race of man, and tha 


Prop. 152.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 537 


Christ in ‘‘ destroying the works of the devil’’ (1 John 3 : 8) will counteract this, sup- 
poses that after some individuals of the race are saved, the race is cut off and becomes 
extinct, and adds against such a supposition: ‘* That extinct race will be an enduring 
monument of his (Satan’s) triumph. He will have it to boast that he so far succeeded in 
his work as to bring Jehovah under the necessity of changing His purpose, of altering or 
modifying His original design. This is a thought not for a moment to be indulged.” 
And yet what a favorite it is, at present, with multitudes, who do not realize how incom- 
plete it leaves Redemption, 

* Rev. Newton introduces on this point the following figure: ‘‘ It (i.e. the saving of 
some and leaving the race as such unrestored) is to regard the preservation of the frag- 
ments chipped off from a great diamond by the lapidary, in his work of polishing it, and 
carefully gathered up by him, as the whole design of his labor ; losing sight of the glory 
that will accrue to him from the precious stone itself, when the polishing and setting of it 
are finished, and it is seen shining forth in peerless beauty, the admiration of all who 
behold it.”” Let us remind the reader how this doctrine of ours most effectively meets 
the objection urged against Christianity, that it has nothing to do with man as a race, 
but with man as an individual. Thus e.g. Feuerbach, Essence of Christianity, p. 150, 
HK. T., says: “ Christianity cared nothing for the species, and had only the individual in 
its eye and mind.” This is hardly true, even of the preparatory stage, much less when 
the Kingdom isestablished. Here, too,.we find a complete answer to the objection urged 
by another class of writers (e.g. Savage, in Christian Union, Feb. 28th, 1877), who assert 
that ‘* the outcome’’ of the Divine System of Salvation ‘‘ is irremediable misfortune to 
the majority,” and which is called ‘‘ fiendishness,’’ ete. The Plan of Redemption, 
taken as a whole, and admitting its results, amply vindicates God from all such one-sided 
charges. 

8 Brown (Ch. Sec. Com., ch. 8) endeavors to prejudice others against our view, by pro- 
nouncing it “a revolting speculation,’’ “ startling,’’ ‘‘ monstrous,”’ ‘‘ abhorrent ;” and 
censures Bickersteth, Birks, and others for presenting it, because of its being ‘‘ in the 
last degree repulsive.’ “ loathing,’’ ‘‘ wretched interpretation,” ‘‘ painful speculations,’’ 
etc. We leave the reader to judge for himself which theory is the most worthy of credence, 
his own, which limits Redemption and forbids a complete restoration of forfeited blessings, 
or ours, which makes Redemption proportionate to the costly and astounding provision 
made for it in the incarnation, death, resurrection, ascension and return. of Jesus Christ ; 
- and commensurate with the perfections of the Saviour, constituting Him a perfect Re- 
deemer. How he can stigmatize our doctrine by the epithets given, when it opens before 
us such a grand outlook, so honorable to Jesus and the saints, and so fruitful of happiness 
to the race, is beyond our conception, unless it be attributed to prejudice. Again : some 
writers (as e.g. p. 195 Princeton Review, April, 1851) hold up to animadversion— with evi- 

dent horror—that we teach that ‘‘ sensua] indulgences are to be enjoyed forever,” in view 
of this multiplication of the race after the Pre-Millennial Advent, All that is necessary to 
say in reply may be thus expressed : he must settle this question with God Himself, if he thus 
judges of the marriage relation as instituted in Eden and as it shall be exhibited in the 
new heavens and new earth (Isa. 65 : 17-23). We cannot thus dishonor the relation of 
husband and wife, parent and child, with its hallowed associations and results, especially 
when, as the Scriptures teach, jt is designed as an instrumentality to honor God. He 
unjustly implies, without positively asserting it, that we have the glorified saints thus to 
marry and to be given in marriage, over against the declaration of Christ, while the truth 
is, that all Millenarians discriminate between the saints and mortal men in the flesh. 
Then he endeavors, dishonorably, to associafe us as follows: ‘‘ The Mohammedans, it 
does seem to us, only carry out the same idea a little farther, when they give to every be- 
liever a tent in heaven, fourteen miles square, with seventy wives, and the power of 
associating with all at the same time!’ We leave the writer to reconcile this gross sneer 
with God’s Word, which (as we shall show) eulogizes this perpetuation of the race as a@ 
crowning glory of Redemptive mercy and love, because it so dwindles the proportion of 
_the ultimate lost to a mere fractional part, and so immeasurably exalts the number of the 
saved, instead of bestowing a fragment of the race, that the contrast between the work of . 
Satan and the triumph of God in Redemption is thereby inconceivably heightened, 


Obs. 2. While thus firmly holding to and advocating the perpetuation 
of the race after the Sec. Advent in a condition similar (not attained at 
once but gradually) to that before the fall, yet, to avoid misapprehension, 
it is necessary to define our position more accurately. Holding to a res- 


* 


5388 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. -152. 


toration of the race to that which was forfeited by sin, our opinion is 
guided mainly by the account preceding the fall. Able writers (as D. N. 
Lord, Rev. Newton, etc.), contend for an eternal, everlasting perpetuation 
of the race, perpetual and strictly never-ending, and rely exclusively upon 
the words rendered ‘‘ eternal,’’ “‘ perpetual,’’ ‘‘forever,’’ etc. The argu- 
ment thus presented looks plausible and weighty; sufficiently so, that 
while not fully accepting of it, we at the same time do not deny it. The 
reasons which influence us to this caution are the following: The words 
depended upon (as eternal, perpetual, etc.) have sometimes, as critics of 
the most diverse sentiments state, a limited meaning, denoting simply a 
long duration, or a duration coeval with existing orderings or dispensa- 
tions. The fact that actual eternity, never-ending succession, is meant, 
must be derived from a more detailed statement, in which this is asserted. 
Now, it is not stated that if Adam had not fallen his posterity would have 
gone on perpetually and forever increasing. ‘This is only inferred. The 
announcement before the fall is simply to ‘‘ multiply and replenish the 
earth,’’ and the inference might be made (as some theologians suggested), — 
that at some remote future period, when the earth was filled with inhabi- 
tants, a general glorification would cause the multiplication of the race to 
cease, etc. If never-ending generations had been promised to Adam, then 
indeed the argument in favor of this view would be valid, for restitution 
would then embrace it. Then again, coming to the close of the Bible, 
where the fact is admitted of generations witnessing and enjoying the light 
and glory of the New Jerusalem state, and the decided impression is made > 
for ages even, yet nothing specific is asserted of never-ending generations. 
Our position is this: We are satisfied to end the discussion where the 
Bible ends it, viz., with a portion of the race glorified and the race itself 
redeemed from the curse, passing on to higher stages of blessedness, and 
entering into the eternal ages in this happy condition. If Adam forfeited 
never-ending generations—if this was part of God’s original design—then 
the restitution will restore and carry it out; but if not, then only that — 
wonderful increase commensurate with God’s design will be produced. 
Here we stop: that the race is perpetuated after the Advent is true ; that 
this will continue on after the thousand years (which only limits Satan’s 
binding, etc.), is most certain ; that it even may continue on forever may, 
for aught we know, be also correct (seeing that some language can scarcely 
be interpreted otherwise), but as to the latter, not feeling positive, we stop 
with ‘‘ the many generations’ of Isa. 60:15. The doctrine is not essen- 
tial in our argument in that form, for if we show, as the Bible does, a 
completed restitution of all things, that is all that is required to perfect 
our system—the rest can well be left for the succeeding or eternal ages to 
develop. Desirous, on the one hand, not to limit the mighty power of 
God, and on the other hand not to pass beyond that which is positively 
(not merely inferentially) asserted, we proceed, with this expressed cau- 
tion, in our argument, with the simple remark added, that such a posture 
accords best with the ideas of the primitive church on the subject. So far 
as the ordering of God. in the matter is concerned, we are willing cordially 
to accept of the same, whatever it may be. 


; 
Brown (Ch. Sec. Coming, p. 173) thus refers to a just principle, which should make ug 
careful of dogmatizing in this direction : ‘‘ What canon of criticism is more self-evident 
and more universally recognized than this, that terms and phrases expressive of perpetw 
are to be stretched no further than the known duration of the thing spoken of ?—as when 


Prop. 152. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 539 


Jews were commanded to keep such and such of their institutions ‘ throughout their 


generations by an ordinance forever ’—-that is, of course, not through all eternity, but 


through the whole duration of their peculiar polity, and no longer.’ This, while true, 
does not sustain his rejection of our doctrine, seeing that, aside from those terms thus 
employed, we have the most ample evidence to sustain our position. 


Obs. 38. The early Church, consistently with the doctrine of the King- 
dom advocated, taught that after the Advent and after the resurrection 
and glorification of the saints, the Kingdom then established—being the 
Theocratic-Davidic restored under Messiah, David’s Son—would have 
the Jewish nation and spared Gentiles for its willing subjects. This, 
after the references made to their belief, needs no additional proof. At- 
tention is called to it for two reasons. The first is: that, unless such a 
faith is Scriptural and was given under the teaching of the men who 


organized the primitive churches, it 1s unaccountable that a belief in so 


ae eric’ a point which involved the doctrine of the judgment—in 
brief, the most momentous interests of man—should have been so exten- 
sively circulated and embraced without opposition, and a counter state- 
ment, from the Church. The second is: the unjust means resorted to 
(and even practised at this day) in making out that these early Fathers do 
not carefully distinguish between the glorified saints (who neither marry 
nor are given in marriage, and hence of whom no multiplication of the race 
is asserted) and the men in the flesh, but that they teach that the glorified 
saints, as well as the others, continue in the marriage relation and produce 
the generations that follow. ‘The falsity of this accusation has been so well 
met by honest men who are no Millennarians, that a citation of the fact 
will be all sufficient to exonerate us from holding to an opinion which 1s 
not to be fownd in the writings of any of the Millenarian Fathers, or of 
their successors. Our apology in thus specially directing the reader to 
this point, 1s the circumstance that books are written and circulated at the 
present time reiterating this often refuted charge.‘ Dr. Lardner (Lard- 
ner’s Works, vol. 2, p. 691, etc., Bickersteth’s Guide, p. 190, etc.) gives 
an impartial account of the ancient faith in this respect, saying on this 
point: ‘‘ But that they (i.e. the Fathers) received marriage, and the fruits 
of marriage, to belong to any of the raised saints does not appear to me a 
clear point.”’ Then refering to Origen and Jerome, as expressing and 
insinuating this charge, he adds: ‘*‘ But Ireneus and Lactantius, who 
were Millenarians, do not express themselves in that manner ; what they 
say is, that at the time of the first resurrection there will be found some 
good men living upon the earth, and that of them, in the space of a thon- 
sand years, shall be born a numerous race, a godly seed, over whom like- 
wise the raised saints are to reign, and by whom they are to be served.’’ 
So also Bish. Bull, quoted by Prof. Bush (Mill., p. 14), and many eminent 
writers, having no sympathy with our views, declare themselves, vindicat- 
ing the Fathers and our doctrine from so gross a charge. Mede, well 
posted in Patristic lore, informs us by telling Dr. Twisse (see Bickersteth’s 
Guide, p. 191) “how wrongfully the ancient Chiliasts, and Lactantius by 
name, are charged to hold that the saints which rise from the dead shall 
marry and get children ; whereas he expressly affirms it only of those who 
shall be alive in the body when Christ comes, nor did any of the rest of 
the Fathers, Justin, Irenzeus, Melito, think otherwise.’’? If even one or 
more Millenarians could be found (they are not discoverable, and hence 


° 


= 


540 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 152. 


no one that has ever brought the charge has presented a single quotation 
directly taken from a Millenarian writer advocating such a view) who 
have taught this—this—the mistaken opinion of one or more individuals 
—should not be char ged upon us as a class, or upon our system of doctrine 
as a natural sequence following from it, when the immense majority and 
overwhelming mass of testimony are against it. his is a cheap way (but — 
costly) of exciting hostility against a a party—an appeal to ignorance and 
prejudice which only exposes the weakness of those who “resort to it. 
Many of our opponents, we are happy to say, are too manly, intelligent, 

and righteous to yield to such caricaturing of a faith held by some of the 4 
noblest men that ever trusted in and labored for Jesus. As to the alleged 
charge of ‘‘ carnality,’’ ‘‘ grossness,’’ and ‘‘ sensuality,’’ arising from the 
dwelling of the olorified saimts and men in the flesh in the same Millennial 
new earth, this has been so fully answered in another place that it needs 
no reply here. If this is God’s or dering ; if the saints occupy the exalted — 
positions assigned to them as Kings and Priests, ruling and ministering 
over the restored race ; rig ast glorified saints are associated with the 
Mighty King in a glorious Redemptive process ; if they are specially, in- 
view of this relationship, the inhabitants of that New Jerusalem that comes 


down from God, out of heaven upon this earth ; this is amply sufficient to 
justify it. 
1 Thus to illustrate : The author in The Kingdom of Grace (who conceals his name from 
merited rebuke), although fully aware of our views and method of dealing with the subject 
(for he had previously largely quoted from Rev. Dr. Duffield, Winthrop, and others who 
are guarded in distinguishing the immortal from the mortal, etc.), deliberately asserts 
(p. 187) that it ‘‘ is the belief of every consistent Millenarian that men possessing a celes- 
tial and immortal nature alone will be on the earth” during this period (i.e. Mill. age) ;_ 
and after declaring this untruth, builds a long argument on the impossibility of having the 
Mill. prophecies fulfilled, as such saints would not build, plough, marry, ete., carefully 
concealing from his readers the explanation given by Millenarians. To show the dishonesty 
of the writer, when referring to p. 199 of the same book, he uses an argument exactly the 
reverse, viz., that the dead saints are raised and glorified, the living saints are changed 
and yet have men in the flesh still abiding in the Millennium, and hence are contradic- 
tory. Such is a specimen—out of many that could be adduced—censuring us for having 
no men in the flesh to fulfil Mill. songs, and forcing us into the position to make the 
saints themselves marry, etc. ; and then again condemning us for having such men in 
the flesh, making out an inconsistency in “their being on ‘the same earth, and in either ~ 
case never alluding to our mode of dealing with the subject. Such a procedure is not — 
worthy of additional remark. ; 
2 The reader may judge for himself respecting Lactantius and the passage supposed to 
teach the doctrine we are opposing. Lactantius (Christ. IJnsti., ch. 24), after having” 
stated the return of Christ, adds: ‘‘ But He, when He shall have destroyed unrighteous- 
ness, and executed His great judgment, and shall have recalled to life the righteous who 
have lived from the beginning, will be engaged among men a thousand years, and wil 
rule them with most just command. Which the Sibyl proclaims in another place, as s 
utters her inspired predictions : ‘Hear me, ye mortals; an everlasting King reigns,’ 
Then they who shall be alive in their bodies shall not die, but during those thousand yea 
shall produce an infinite multitude, and their offspring shall be holy and beloved by 
God ; but they who shall be raised from the dead shall preside over the living as judge: 
But the nations shall not be entirely extinguished, but some shall be left as a victory tor ; 
God, that they may be an occasion of triumph to the righteous, and may be subjected to 
perpetual servitude.” The nearest approach to the alleged teaching (but which does not 
contain it) that we have been able to find in the ancient writings, is that in the “Test. of 
Simeon in the Twelve Patriarchs,” in the expression, ‘‘and as ; cedars shall holy ones be 
multiplied from me forever,” but this is apocryphal and of no weight. i 
3 The view of a non- -perpetuation of race (based chiefly on the. judgment and confla 
gration) after the Sec. Advent (so Brown, Waldegrave, etc.) ; the opinion that th 
renewed earth is to be given up to an entire new race to be inhabited (so Pollock 1 


PROP: 152.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. DAL 


Course of Time, B. 10, and others) ; the notion that no mortal men are to be found in the 
Millennial age, but only the glorified (so Homes in Res, Revealed, Burchell in The Midnight 
Cry, Perry and others) ; the hypothesis that the world instead of perpetuating the race is 
the theatre of their punishment (as Pres, Edwards, etc.-_and during at least the thousand 
years by Waggoner, etc.) ; the alleged scientific prediction that ‘‘as the final outcome of 
things, the entire universe will be reduced to a single, enormous ball, dead and frozen, 
solid and black’’ (so Fiske, p. 16, The Unseen Universe, with which compare Campbell 
and Byron’s Vision of the Last Man. Onp.31 Fiske informs us that ‘our race is pretty 
sure to come to an end long before the destruction of the planet from which it now gets its 
sustenance,” Others, however, claim that fire will be the agency by which the race is 
swept away); these, and all other views, erected upon an extravagant estimate of the 
conflagration (as to include even annihilation), are evidently the result of a lack of 
knowledge respecting the Kingdom of God, the actual demands of covenant and proph- 
ecy, and the repeated promises and assurances given concerning the continuance of 
the race. Indeed, as the reader can see for himself in the progress of our argument, 
the most positive and overwhelming proof is presented in its behalf, so that it has influenced 
able writers, a multitude of able men, to advocate it as an essential doctrine of the Pre- 
Millenarian system, without which the Kingdom, as covenanted, cannot possibly ‘be 
established, the prophecies, as recorded, cannot be realized, and the reign of Christ and 
the saints, as portrayed, cannot be experienced. 


Obs. 4. Briefly, it would be interesting to trace in what manner this 
early doctrine, once so prevalent—that the Jewish nation and Gentiles in 
the flesh would survive the Advent, and the fearful judgments then poured 
out upon the nations, and would form the subjects of that world-wide 
dominion under Christ and His resurrected brethren—was gradually under- 
mined and finally almost rooted out. What was said in another place, in 
a general way, respecting the decline of Millenarianism before the incom- 
ing flood of hierarchical and papistical doctrine, will also apply here, but 
yet this specific point finds a solution in the rise and progress of distinctive 
doctrine, to which it stood in opposition. Passing by the misstatements of 
Origen, Jerome, and others (which Mede and others justly expose), let us 
confine ourselves to a few exegetical and doctrinal phases which had a de- 
cided influence in this direction. The unfolding of the present prevailing 
view of the Judgment Day and of Christ’s Coming only to act in a judicial 
capacity, the plainest of philological errors (fastened by monkish writers 
upon the neck of the Church), viz., ‘‘ the ending of the world,’’ instead 
of “the ending of the age’”’ or dispensation (as all critics now admit, in 
accord with the early Church)—these, and similar perversions, converted the 
Lischatology of the multitude into a palpable contradiction to that pre- 
viously entertained. Then followed what before the Church, owing to its 
cherished doctrine of the Kingdom (which was unsuited to the hierarchical 
tendencies), utterly repudiated, viz., the closing up of all earthly things 
(some including even the utter destruction, and some the annihilation of 
the earth), the ending of time, and, of course, the non-perpetuation of the 
human race. Strange that even the Sibyl (Sidylline Oracles, B. 3), speak- 
ing of the future age, should preserve greater consistency than professed 
theologians in saying: ‘‘a race shall be restored as it was in the ancient 
times.’ 'This change thus produced, gradually but firmly incorporated 
into the belief of the Church, was but feebly defended at first, and owed its 
continued and intrenched position to the fact that the party who adopted 
it became the popular one, obtaining, through civil patronage, the exclu- 
sive control of the doctrinal position of the Church, and crushing, by the 
weight of assumed authority, all opposing views. Looking over the 
Scriptural basis alleged in support of so radical a departure from the 


542 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 152. 


primitive faith, it is found that the main leading Scripture adduced in its — 
favor is Matt. 25 : 31-46. Around this passage, as on a pivot, all others 
are made to revolve. Having examined this (Prop. 134), it may be dis- 
missed with the remark, that it is only more recently, driven to it in self- 
defence, that this departure from the early faith is sought to be defended — 
in a systematic form by our opponents. It is necessary—for the sake of — 
completeness—to refer to the line of argument adopted. In addition to 
the passages usually presented in old works, we have the following reasons 
assigned in its behalf by Dr. Brown (Christ’s Sec. Coming), who is re- 
garded as the ablest of our opponents. ‘The reader will notice that they — 
are all based on mere inference, for no one has ever yet found a passage 
within the Bible that directly teaches that the multiplication of the race 
ceases after the Advent of Christ ; the inference being suggested by a pre- — 
conceived notion of the Judgeship of Christ, the Judgment Day, and the 
extent of the conflagration mentioned by Peter. Thus Dr. Brown informs 
us that ‘‘the Church will be absolutely complete at Christ’s Coming,” — 
and implies from this that after that no others will be saved. Aside from — 
our direct arguments in various Propositions which prove that such a con- — 
clusion is erroneous, it is sufficient to say that our doctrine itself embraces 
the completeness of the elect (i.e. those gathered out and accounted worthy — 
to become kings and priests), who become “ the first-fruits,”’ ‘‘ the Chareh 
of the first-born’’ associated with Christ in rulership, etc. The Scriptures — 
teaching swch completeness, which is consistent with the Plan of the admin- 
istrations of the Kingdom, do not at the same time declare that no others 
—after this specific number of chosen ones are gathered—shall be saved. 
To say this 1s adding to the Word of God, and is not ¢o distinguish 
between things that belong to different dispensations. In the next place 
we are told that ‘‘ Christ’s Sec. Coming will exhaust the object of the 
Scriptures,’ that ‘‘ the Word” and ‘‘ the Ordinances” ‘‘ shall then abso- | 
lutely cease as means of grace and salvation to mankind,’’ and from such 
an extravagant postulate the deduction is made that none will be saved — 
after the Sec. Advent. The early believers, instructed by inspired men, — 
must have been indeed very foolish—yea the apostles themselves must have 
greatly misconceived the object, the gracious design of Christ’s Sec. Com- — 
ing—when they believed it to be a coming ‘‘ wnto salvation,’ and urged — 
all to look and pray for it—not as ‘‘ the goal of all revelation, its furthest — 
horizon, its last terminus,’’ but in order that the glorious predictions of the — 
prophets of revelation might be realized. ‘The assumptions so far-reach- 
ing defeat themselves by being too sweeping ; for admitting even that 
some things in the Scriptures are only adapted to one period of time (i.e. 
preceding Advent), that is no reason for assuming that when the Theocracy 
is re-established great changes will not occur in the manner of the divine’ 
administration, making new revelations, etc., necessary (Prop. 167) to adapt 
the world to the reign then inaugurated. The climax is reached in the 
next assertion, that ‘* the sealing ordinances of the N. Test. will disappear 
at Christ’s Coming,”’ and inferring hence that none can be saved after that 
period. But how does he know that they will ‘‘ disappear,’’ after Christ’s- 
declaration that He would drink of the fruit of the vine with His disciples” 
in His Kingdom, and when at the very time the Jewish nation is con- 
verted, seeing Him whom they pierced, an allusion to water is made? 
Suppose eyen that they do ‘‘ disappear,’’ is not God able, if another dis- 
pensation is to follow, to institute, if it be requisite, a new order of ar 


| 
: 


| 


| 
| 


Prop. 152. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 543 


rangements to carry on the work of redemption? Artfully as the objec- 
tions are made, they virtually limit the ability of God to effect the changes 
that may be required in each succeeding dispensation, The remaining 
reasons derived from the intercession of Christ ceasing, the work of the 
Spirit for saving purposes ending, etc., are answered in other places more 
in detail, so that it 1s needless to dwell upon them.’ Let us turn to another 
writer, far removed from Dr. Brown, and a representative of a totally 
different class, who, while accepting of a literal first resurrection, etc., 
denies the perpetuation of the Jewish nation and Gentiles, Waggoner (Ref. 
of Age to Come) assuming that when Christ comes this dispensation ends, 
and is not followed by another, but by the eternal age, hence argues that | 
there will be no salvation for the race, all probation being ended. His 
main argument is derived from the universality of the language employed 
respecting the condemnation of the law (viz., that all the wicked will be 
condemned by it), and the belief of the Gospel (viz., that all that believe 


shall be saved). Hence, there are only two classes, while we are charged 


with creating a third class, neither condemned by the law nor saved by the 
Gospel. This, however, is a misapprehension of our faith in the matter ; 
for instead of creating a third class, neither wicked nor righteous, we have 
the Jewish nation converted by the appearance of the Messiah, and the 
spared of the Gentiles also receive and cordially embrace the truth as it is 
in Jesus. ‘The universality of language does not by any means forbid the 
future conversion of nations under the administrations of King Jesus ; for 
the wicked shall perish at the Coming of Jesus (as a class, those who are 
given up as incorrigible—even among the Jews), and yet some, who are 
willing to become repentant and obedient, shall be saved. This is illus- 
trated by the universality of expression that all men shall die, etc., and yet 
we find some that will not die, being translated. ‘This indicates the 
danger of building a doctrine purely wpon inference drawn from such lan- 
guage. Universal as it is, yet some exceptions may occur under it, being 
in correspondence with the Divine intention. For, even in the present 
dispensation, infants, small children, and heathen form an exception to 
the generally applied principles. Believing in a coming dispensation, as 
taught, we are not concerned in explaining the modifications that may 
occur (and reconcile them with what men may infer), of which we are no¢ 
the judges, but leave them as they stand recorded with our hearty accept- 
ance, also believing that they will be found in accordance with the Spirit 
of anteceding dispensations. That probation is found in “‘ the new heavens 
and new earth’”’ is evident from e.g. Isa. 65 : 17 seq.; that ‘‘ the inhabi- 
tants of the earth will learn righteousness when God’s judgments are in 
the earth” (Isa. 26:9) is frequently declared ; and that the removal of 
evil, etc. from the suffering nations is linked with the resurrection (as e.g. 
Isa, 25 : 8 comp. with 1 Cor. 15 : 54) is sustained by the general analogy of 
Scripture. Let such brethren be reminded, that back of all such znferen- 
tial proof as they present, is the Davidic covenant, the Pre-Mill. Advent, 
resurrection, etc., which must first be duly considered, before such an 7n- 


_ complete Redemption is accepted, vitiating even the restoration of the 


promised Theocracy. We would rather keep in view those fundamental 
and positive teachings—too much overlooked, owing to their simplicity— 


_ which land us, after some preparatory stages (including this dispensation), 


right at the opening door of the race’s grand destiny ; which bind the pre- 
dictions from the earliest to the latest prophet into one connected chain of 


544 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 152, 


evidence testifying that the Kingdom of David’s Son is established here on 
the earth for the express purpose of unfolding and carrying on the eternal 
purposes of God respecting the race, for a time (‘‘ a moment’’) delayed by 
the fall of man and the procedure required for redemption.? 

1 For an extended and able (even severe) reply to those objections urged by Dr, 
Brown, see Lord’s Theol. and Lit. Journal, Nos. for Apriland July, 1851. Some English 
works in answer have also appeared, but the writer has not had access to them, such as 
by Bickersteth, Bonar, the Duke of Manchester and others. * 

2 In this connection, the attention of the student is again called to the fact that the 
Church out of this dispensation is called ‘‘the Church of the first-born” (Heb. 12 : 28), 
i.e., all who have part and lot in the first (Pre-Mill.) resurrection. The expression itself 
has reference to a distinguished, pre-eminent relationship to God—a special nearness to — 
Christ—but it also plainly implies that others also will be born and sustain relationship to 
God as His children. We have here in the ‘first born,” (1) a special calling to favor, 
having a first-born son’s interest and privileges ; (2) the result of grace and not of 
nature, being the offspring (through the creative power of God) of God ; (8) the beginning 
of sons whom God will utimately gather in as the fruits of Redemption ; (4) the 
precedence in honor and dignity over the other sons whom God will cause to be born in” 
His.‘ house.’’ 


Obs. 5. In deciding this subject the student ought to receive the testi- 
mony of the converging witnesses, contemplated independently in various 
propositions. The mass of corroborating proof in behalf of our position is 
so great that we can only briefly allude to some of it, leaving the reader to 
refer to the places indicated for a more detailed statement. ‘The Pre- 
Millennial Advent (Prop. 121) at once decides the question ; for if Jesus — 
comes before that age is introduced, then, as a matter of course, men in the 
flesh live after His Coming during that period. 'This the prophecies ineul-_ 
cate. That it is Pre-Mill., as the early Church held, has been proven. 
Thus also the Pre-Mill. resurrection of the just (Props. 125-129) implies _ 
the same thing, in view of the Advent linked with it as the resurrecting 
agency. And, as stated, so plainly is this connection made that the resur- | 
rection is allied with Christ’s obtaining the sovereignty over the nations of 
the earth, as e.g. Rev. 11 : 15-18. Indeed, the Davidic Covenant (Prop. — 
49), which has not—since the overthrow of the Kingdom—been fulfilled 
down to the present day, but which we have shown is to be verified a¢ the 
Sec. Advent, alone proves the necessity for such a continuation of the race, _ 
seeing that without the restoration of the Jewish nation (Prop. 111, 112, — 
etc.) it is impossible to re-erect it as covenanted. 'The manner in which 
that Jewish nation is restored (Prop. 113), under the personal auspices of 
its Mighty King, whom the nation shall again see and with deeply repent- 
ant hearts acknowledge, is additional evidence that the race is perpetuated 
after the Second Advent. Taking any other position vitiates the election 
(Prop. 24, ete.) of that people, and makes God’s promises to them, and 
His covenant with them, a nullity. Denying this perpetuation, forces our 
opponents to make prophecies and promises relating to the Divine Purpose 
conditional, which (Prop. 18) introduces weakness and wncertainty—it 
not more—into the Word. Prophecies, too, which are admitted to be un- 
conditional, as e.g. Dan. 7, notwithstanding they are linked with a Com- 
ing of the Son of man, which Jesus Himself refers to the future, are made, 
owing to their embracing in the Kingdom, ‘‘ under the whole heaven,” 
‘* neople, nations, and languages,’’ to be fulfilled in the present dispensa- 
tion because of the implied and granted perpetuation of the race. Let an} 
one turn to the prophecy of ‘‘ the married wife’’ and ‘‘ the barren woman’ 


| 


lan 
7 


Prop. 152. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 545 


(Prop. 118) and sce the increase predicated of the latter after the marriage 
with the former and the restoration of the latter to God’s favor. Can a 
consistent interpretation be placed upon the passage without admitting the 
early doctrine? ‘Take the faith of the pious Jews (Prop. 20, etc.), of John 
the Baptist (Prop. 39), of the disciples sent out to preach (Prop. 43), and 
can this continuation of the race embraced in that faith be discarded with- 
out convicting them of gross error and folly? Take the preaching of 
Jesus (Prop. 44, etc.) and the postponement of the Kingdom wntil His 
Sec. Advent (Props. 58, 66, 68, etc.), and it 1s impossible to conceive of a 
Kingdom, such as preached and postponed, that does not include this very 
feature. This can only be rejected at the expense of denying that the 
same Kingdom which was overthrown (Props. 32, 33) shall again be re- 
stored (as prophets predict) ; of transforming the throne and Kingdom into 
something very different (Prop. 122, etc.) from that which the grammati- 
eal language indicates; of ignoring a renewed (Prop. 50) covenant and 


substituting another in its place ; of misinterpreting the design (Prop. 86) 


of the present dispensation ; of materially changing the force (Prop. 196) 
of Christ’s temptation ; of exalting the deliverance of inanimate (and ani- 
mate) creation (Prop. 146) over that of the race ; and of weakening the anal- 
ogy of Scripture.’ “‘ The world to come’”’ (Prop. 137), in its Jewish usage, 
adoption, meaning, and specific appropriation to the covenant promises, 
clearly teaches the continuation of the race in ‘‘ the habitable world ”’ still 
future.? So also the comprehensiveness of ‘‘ restitution’’ (Prop. 144), of 
‘“regeneration’’ (Prop. 144), of the dominion of the Second Adam (Prop. 
82), of ‘‘ the transfiguration’’ (Prop. 153), of the reign of the saints (Prop. 
154) cannot be consistently explained without including the perpetuation of 
the race. ‘‘ The day of the Lord Jesus Christ’’ (Prop, 138) and ‘‘ the 
morning’ of that day (Prop. 139), at ‘‘ the end of the age’’- (Prop. 140), 
unmistakably includes this feature (and shows that Waggoner’s theory that 
Christ comes and then withdraws with His saints for a thousand years is 
untenable—for such a withdrawal is nowhere asserted, but His presence in 
this day and at this morning in His “‘ inheritance,’’ ‘‘ the purchased pos- 
session’? is announced). Our doctrine does not make God’s effort at direct 
rulership over a nation in the flesh a failure (Prop. 201), but shows how 
God, out of this very unpromising condition (resulting from man’s sinful- 
ness), raises up agencies by which this rulership shall yet be manifested im 
overwhelming grandeur and majesty. In vindication of this, we point to 


the Judgeship of Christ (Prop. 132)—as explained and defended—to the 


Judgment Day (Prop. 133)—as represented in the Word—to the Millennial 


| predictions (Prop. 119, etc.), received without transposing or mutilating, 
_ and from these we learn, that nations in the flesh after the Second Advent 
_ and their perpetuation, are requisites to insure the proper fulfilment of 


loly Writ. ‘The glory of that Judgeship, the blessings of that Judgment 
period (in which tke earth and its nations are to rejoice), and the happiness 
of that Millennial era, can never be realized without these. The ‘‘ un- 


_ changeable priesthood’’ of Jesus Christ (Prop. 155), as well as the priestly 


office of His associated rulers (Prop. 156), certainly implies that there must 


be generations of men who are to be benefited by that priesthood extending 
_ Into “‘ the ages,’’ seeing that it is founded on the adaptation and relation 
that it sustains to those (not glorified saints who themselves become 
_ “priests’’?) whom it is designed to benefit. The intercession is not 


limited and made intermediate between the two Advents. Thus also, the 


546 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 152. 


work of the Spirit for saving purposes is not confined to this dispensatior 
(Prop. 171), etc., but extends into the age to come, where its greatest mani- 
festations—in glorifying the saints, in converting, etc., the nations—are 
yet to be witnessed. It is—in view of this preponderating evidence given 
through different phases of the subject and preserving a wnity of purpose 
—simply faithless to suppose that the conflagration of Peter (Prop. 149° 
and 150) is to prevent the fulfilment of this perpetuation of the race, 
The identification of ‘‘ the new heaven and new earth’’ of Isaiah, Peter 
and John (Prop. 151) confirms our position, seeing that it proves the 
identity of the Millennial era with its perpetuation of the race, with that 
of the New Jerusalem state. Such, enumerated with the utmost brevity, 
are some of the reasons which incline us to accept of a doctrine which logi- 
cally results from covenant and promise ; which even ‘‘ the uneducated 
and ignorant’ (as one calls it) primitive Church could not fail—owing to 
its nearness to apostolic teaching—to grasp ; and which, instead of dishon-— 
oring God, or His Christ, or the glorified saints, brings honor and glory to 
the Father, Son, Spirit, and ‘ the first-fruits’’ out of the nations, and ulti-— 
mately to the nations themselves deliverance from the oppressive burden 
borne for thousands of years. Even some of our opponents, in view of the | 
sublime opening which it unfolds in the future, have, at least, conceded — 
that it is ‘a magnificent theory ;’’ it is more, for it is the truth of God. 

1 Those, as Whitby, Grove, etc., who make the creation in Rom. 8, the Gentile world, 
only increase the difficulty of their position ; for, accepting of that interpretation, then 
it follows that the Gentile world will exist after the manifestation, 7.e., resurrection, ete. — 
Speaking of analogy reminds us of Dr. Brookes (Maranatha) saying of the judgments still 
future: ‘‘We might argue from analogy that a heavenly people, the Church, would be 
preserved from it, like Enoch ; and that an earthly people, the faithful remnant among ~ 
the Israelites, would be preserved through it, like Noah; while the ungodly who have 
despised His love would be overwhelmed by it, like the antediluvian world.’’ om 

2 The reader is reminded that the word ‘ oikoument”’ used in the phrase ‘‘the world 
to come,” not only denotes ‘‘ the inhabited earth or world,’ but is directly employed — 
(being but used fifteen times) to designate the earth in its relation to people, mortals, Da- — 
tions living upon it, as Matt. 24:14; Luke2:1; Acts 17:6, 31; Heb.1 :6; Luke4 205) 
and 21 : 26; Acts11:28 ;and 19 : 27 ; and 24:5; Rom.10 :18; Heb. 10:5; Rev. 32 105% 
and 12 :9;and 16:14. Usage thus abundantly confirms our position. wy 

3 The reader is reminded that an additional reason may be derived from Christ being 
@ priest forever, or the ages ‘‘after the order of Melchisedec,’ Kurtz (His. of Old Couya 
vol, 1, p. 221) lays much stress on the fact of Melchisedec being then king at Salem, an 
possessing the country promised to Abraham, This Abraham acknowledges, and gives — 
tithes, while the king blesses him. If this is typical, why not extend it into the age to © 
come, where it will be actually realized? (Comp. Prop. 155.) 


Obs. 6. Keeping under consideration the reasons already presented — 
favoring the perpetuation of the race, attention is directed to various 
passages which proclaim the same truth. Allusion has been made to the 
contrast found in the beginning and ending of the Bible. After this dis-_ 
pensation has closed and another age of ‘‘ the ages’’ (Prop. 139) has been 
ushered in, and the New Jerusalem state is experienced by the saints, in 
strict accordance with Isa, 60: ‘¢ The nations of them which are saved,”* 
the honor and glory of ‘‘ the nations’’ are mentioned (Rey. 21 : 24, 26), 
which is only applicable to then existing ‘‘ nations’? on the earth, seeing 
that the saints gathered out of all nations are never designated by this 
plural form of ‘‘nations.’’ The saints are elected out of nations and in 
their aggregate form ‘‘ the peculiar people’’ or ‘‘ nation,’ to whom the 
Kingdom is given, while ¢hese nations are spoken of as saved in their 


Prop. 152. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 547 


national capacity, indicative of another dispensation. Taking even the 
interpretation of our opponents of the city as representing or symbolizing 
the saints, the nations walking in the light of this city must be people 
separate and distinct from the city itself. This is, as we have already 
stated, corroborated by “‘ the healing of these nations,’’ obtaining access— 
like the saints before them—to the tree of life restored to this paradisiacal 
earth, thus obtaining immortality as Adam would have done had he not 
fallen. (This is indicative that all obtain their immortality by the same 
process, and that the process of salvation continues.) And, the language 
is so worded as to imply progressive or successive healing as may be re- 
quired by the growth of these nations.” It is singular how oppositely 
opinions are expressed ; for one (Priest’s View) who spiritualizes the Mil- 
lennial prophecies and yet acknowledges the first resurrection to be literal 
(but carefully places the resurrected ones in the third heavens), is forced 
to admit that these “‘ leaves’’ are for the healing of the mortal nations then 
living, and in his application proceeds, beyond even Millenarians, to 
make out that there is no death in the Mill. age (which is contradicted by 
Isa. 65 : 17 seq., etc., and the final removal of death after the thousand 
years, Rev. 20:13, 14). The fact is, that such passages briefly expressed 
presuppose @ previous acquaintance with the prophecies which proclaim 
that some will be spared. Turn to Isa. G6, and it is declared that when the 
Lord comes to plead “‘ by fire and by His sword with all flesh,’’ ete. (v. 15, 
16), He will “* gather all nations and tongues’’ (asin Rev. 19; Matt. 25 ; 
Joel 3, etc.), and after punishing this gathering it is expressly said that 
some will escape (v. 19), who shall be sent to distant nations to declare 
God’s glory to the Gentiles. Then the restoration of the Jewish nation is 
asserted, and in connection with it this weighty assurance, ‘* for as the new 
heavens and the new earth which I will make shall remain before me, sarth 
the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain.’’ Here we have, then, 
after this terrible coming to Judgment, after this gathering of nations, 
and after the creation of this new heaven and new earth, the spared Jewish 
nation and the spared Gentiles. An increase is predicated of the Jewish 
nation, and the promise belongs to them, as the context shows, in their 
national capacity. Again: Isa. 24 describes the fearful ordeal through 
which the earth is to pass before ‘‘ the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mt. 
Zion and in Jerusalem,’’ etc., and in y. 6 it is said: ‘‘ Therefore the in- 
habitants of the earth are burned and few men left?’ (a remnant is also 
alluded to in y. 13), showing that some will be spared. This is followed by 
the reign here on earth, and in the description of it (next chapter) nations 
areincluded. In addition, the song that is to be sung in the land of Judah 
(ch. 26) corroborates this statement.* That some are spared is also seen in 
Isa. 10:19, 20, 21, when ‘‘the consumption decreed shall overflow in 
righteousness ;’’ in Ezek 36 : 36, where some of ‘‘ the heathen are left’’ 
when the Jewish nation is restored and the ‘‘land that was desolate is 
become like the garden of Eden,’’ ete.; in Ezek. 89 : 21, 22, 23 and Ezek. 
38 : 23, when God will, by the overthrow of the last confederation (comp. 
Rev. 19, ete.), make Himself ‘‘ known in the eyes of many nations’ and 
** heathen’? who have escaped ; in Isa. 45:20, when ‘‘ the escaped of the 
nations’’ shall see ‘‘ Israel saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation,”’ 
etc.; in Ps. 69 : 35, 36, as a result of Christ’s work, ‘‘ God will save Zion 
and will build the cities of Judah, that they may dwell there and have it in 
possession,’’ etc. The restoration of the Jewish nation, at the very time 


548 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 152, 


that God will ‘‘ raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen’’ and ‘* will 
build it as in the days of old’’ (Amos 9 : 11-15), is followed by the rebuild- 
ing of the waste cities, the perpetual occupation of the land, and the pos- 
sessing ‘‘ the remnant of Edom and all the heathen’? who shall then be 
converted. In Rev. 15 : 4 (comp. Rev. 14), after the gathering out of a 
select number, i.e. the elect, we are told that the fearful plagues which 
follow down to the ushering in of the Millennium are not designed 70 ea- 
terminate the race remaining, but to bring them into obedience, ‘* for all 
nations shall come and worship before Thee ; for hy judgments are made 
manifest.”? As intimated, it is impossible—taking Isa. 60 to describe one 
period of time, and noticing the manner of introduction, the events con- 
nected therewith, the inexpressible glory that is experienced, etc.—to 
locate that passage to be fulfilled Jefore the Second Advent, seeing that the 
condition of nations and of the earth is asserted to be the reverse of all this 
down to that Coming. In this Scripture we have the restoration of the 
Jewish nation, other nations, many generations, and increase, specifically — 
mentioned. The same is true of Isa. 61 : 4-11 and Isa. 62: 1-5. In no 
other way can the longevity of Isa. 65 : 20-22, taking place in ‘‘ the new 
heaven and new earth, be explained ; for ‘‘ as the days of a tree shall be the 
days of my people,” etc.,can only be predicated of such a prolonging of 
man’s life that it shall be like the duration of a tree—a return to the origi- 
nal condition. While the one who is condemned to premature death 
manifests not only a rule over subjects in the flesh, but an actual return to 
the former Theocratic punishment. The same longevity is expressed in 
Zech. 8: 4 witha joyful increase, so that ‘‘ the streets of the city shall be full 
(comp. Isa. 44:4, etc.) of boys and girls playing,’ etc., and. this occurs 
when “I (the Lord) am returned unto Zion and will dwell in the midst of 
Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called, A city of truth and the Mountain 
of the Lord of hosts, The Holy Mountain.’’ And added to this is a rebuke 
to those who will not credit it in the words: ‘‘ Lf 7t be marvellous (hard or 
difficult) in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these days, should it 
also be marvellous in mine eyes? saith the Lord of hosts.”’ | 

1 A writer, L. C. B., Proph. Times, Dec., 1871, p. 190, says that the phrase ‘‘ of them 
which are saved’’ is ‘‘ discarded from all the late critical editions of the text.” The 
oldest mss. (see Tischendorf’s N. T.), however, retain it. Besides this the expression as 
it stands fully sustains the same writer’s position, since it refers to those nations who 
are spared, i.e, saved in the fearful tribulation (Isa. 60, Zech. 14.), etc. Lord also 
omits the phrase in his Apoc., and so does the late Revision, Lange, etc. Its reception 
or omission (which the reader will decide for himself) does not affect our argument, 
simply because the mention of ‘‘nations” then existing, and the identity of description 
with Isa, 60 (an admitted Mill. prophecy) is amply sufficient for our purpose. 

* The ‘ overcomers’’ of the church of Ephesus (Rev. 2:7) also partake of ‘ the tree of 
life,” but if we take the positive declarations of 1 Cor. 15 respecting the transformation to 
immortality and incorruptibility, they certainly do not eat thereof to perpetuate life, just 
as they do not ‘‘drink of the fruit of the vine in the Kingdom of God” (Mark 14 : 25; 
Math. 26 : 29; Luke 22:18) in order to sustain life, or as an essential to salvation. It 
must, in the nature of the case, be to them only a source of enjoyment and pleasure. No 
one for a moment thinks that Jesus, David’s Son, requires a constant partaking of the 
tree of life in order to sustain His immortality, and the saints being expressly fashioned 
after Jesus, made like unto Him, must be—as the promises indicate—in the same happy 
condition. Fausset (com. Rev. 22:2), on ‘ healing,’’ comments: ‘* The leaves shall be 
the health-giving preventative securing the redeemed against—not healing them of sick- 
nesses.” “ Alford utterly mistakes in speaking of ‘nations outside’ and ‘ dwelling onthe © 
renewed earth, organized under Kings, and saved by the influences of the heavenly city.’” 
We apprehend Fausset to be mistaken and Alford correct, because (1) it is inconceivable 
that saints glorified and raised up to immortality, haying incorruptibility, and made 


Prop. 152. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 549 


like Jesus, should still be susceptible of sicknesses so that they must take a medicine, a 
preventive ; and (2) Alford is abundantly sustained by the Scriptures, ase.g. Isa. 60 and 
54. The fact is, that the accessibility of the nations to the tree of life serves to explain 
how it is that the blessings of the Millennial age are produced. Some make ‘healing’’ 
equivalent to ‘‘service” and apply it to the saints, as designed not to give but perpetuate 
life ; we prefer, on the other hand, ‘“ healing’’ as more in analogy with the actual results 
of the Millennial age, and that while both saints, and those of the nations who secure God’s 
special favor by obedience, have access to the tree of life, to the one class it isa means 
of increased enjoyment and to the other a means of rejuvenation and life. Hence Bicker- 
steth (Prom. Glory, p. 232) is correct when he says ‘‘ that there are nations on the earth 
who walk in the light of the city, as distinct from the city itself,” calling it an ‘“‘ unspeaka- 
bly magnificent truth.” So Mede (Works, p. 772) remarks : ‘‘We must distinguish be- 
tween the state of the New Jerusalem and the state of the nations which shall walk in 
the light thereof. They shall not be both one, but much differing.’’ Dr. Craven (Lange’s 
Com. Rev., p. 391) presents his views as follows : ‘‘We should also distinguish between 
the citizens of the city and the nations (21 : 24). The former are risen and glorified Saints 
who constitute the Bride, the governors of the New Creation. The latter are (probably) 
men in the flesh, who walk in the hight of the City, who bring their glory and honor into 
it, and who are healed (or kept in health) by the leaves of its tree of life, i.e., who are under 
its instruction and government.’’ ‘‘ The nations will consist (probably) of men in the flesh, 
freed from the sin and the curse, begetting a holy seed, and dwelling in blessedness under 
the government of the New Jerusalem. They will be, not the offspring of the glorified 
Saints, who ‘neither marry nor are given in marriage’ (Matt. 22: 30), but the descend- 
ants of those who live in the flesh during the period of the Millennial Kingdom.’’ In 
several places he speaks of ‘‘ the reign of the saints over the race and the earth,” which is 
the decided opinion of numerous able writers. 

? Some might regard our argument incomplete if we did not notice Waggoner (Ref. of 
Age to Come), who asserts that because the word ‘‘ all’’ is employed in “ali nations,’’ ‘all 
inhabitants,’ ‘‘ all wicked,’’ etc., being judged in these last days, that no one will escape. 
Again let it be said that this shows how important it is to interpret no prophecy isolated 
from its mates. How often it is asserted that ‘‘all men” shall die, etc., and yet Paul 
predicts that some will not die. Such phraseology is current among all nations, indica- 
tive of a vast multitude—greater proportion, etc. So ‘all’’ Judea came to John, “all” 
came to be taxed, draw ‘‘all’’ men, etc., which does not literally mean every individual, 
but denotes something that is general, almost universal. Waggoner’s criticism on Isa. 
24 : 6 and also Loughborough’s (The Saints’ Inheritance) on the same, making ‘ the few men 
left’’ the saints that go to the third heaven, is shown to be erroneous by what follows on 
the same earth, as we have indicated. These two writers, with a few others, have, against 
the primitive church faith, etc., certainly succeeded in introducing a novelty (advocated 
by a Jewish Rabbi) in the shape of doctrine, viz.: that for a thousand years the earth is 
left ‘‘empty and desolate’’ of all inhabitants, the wicked being burned up, and the saints 
housed in the third heaven, from whence they and Christ shall return, at the 
end of the thousand years, to reside on the renewed earth. This is opposed by the de- 
scriptions usually following of a succeeding Millennial age in which nations exist, by 
Satan being bound during these thousand years in order not to deceive existing na- 
tions, etc. This is based on a total misconception of the Kingdom really covenanted, 
and numerous propositions as given indicate its error. Founded chiefly upon pressing a 
universality of language (which past fulfilment, as Nah. 1: 5, ete., should teach how to 
understand) to an extreme, it places itself, as a theory, in an awkward position, when (as 
Loughborough) it makes Isa. 65 : 17 seq. to be fulfilled after the one thousand years. Con- 
fused by verse 20, we are told that this cannot apply to the new earth state, because John 
says that there will be no more death, hence if we are to accept of King James’s version, 
‘it must apply to what transpires just as that state is ushered in,’’ i.e. the sinner, although 
he be an hundred years old, is accursed,—not permitted to enter the land, and dies a 
child. He forgets, however, that a thousand years having thus elapsed, his system makes 
no provision for either sinner or child. He feels this difficulty and introduces (which 
does not help him) this rendering given by Paganini : ‘‘ There shall be no more carried out 
thence to burial, an infant of days,ora youth, or an old man, who hath not filled his days, 
for the man of an hundred years shall be as a youth. 


Obs. 7. So numerous are the testimonies and allusions, that attention 
can only be directed to the most important. Zech. 14 presents us a 


550 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRoP. 15259 


powerful argument in our favor, seeing that not only the Coming of the 
Lord and of His saints and the establishment of His Kingly authority 
‘* over all the earth’’ is distinctly announced, but that the continuation of 
the Jewish nation is designated, and ¢hen it is asserted (v. 16) that some 
shall be ‘‘ left of all the nations which came against Jerusalem’ and shall 
acknowledge (owing to the judgments inflicted) the supremacy of the 
King, and tender worship unto Him. ‘This corresponds with the increase 
of Christ’s government (Isa. 9 : 7), which also follows a ‘‘ burning and fuel 
of fire,’ and a sitting ‘‘ upon the throne of David” (thus restored). This 
agrees with what is recorded in Isa. 59 : 21 that His Spirit and words shall 
perpetually abide with the nation, and its “‘ seed’’ and ‘‘ seed’s seed,’’ when 
*‘ the Ttedeemer shall come to Zion and unto them that turn from trans- 
gression in Jacob.”’ This accords with Ezek. 37 : 25, when at the time 
the nation is restored in its undivided form and ‘‘ my servant David shall 
be their prince forever,’’ then the nation shall dwell in the land ‘‘ wherein 
your fathers have dwelt ; and they shall dwell therein, even they, and their 
children and their children’s children forever.’’ (Comp. Jer. 32 : 39, 40; 
Jer. 33 : 7-14; Joel 3: 27-30, etc.) The waity on this point running 
through Scripture is surprising, and the repeated declarations on the sub- 
ject seem to be given as if to meet the lack of faith in such predictions. 
Take Ps. 102, and notice the continuation of nations, not only after the 
Lord ‘* shall appear in His glory,’’ when “‘ the set time to favor Zion 18 
come,’ and ‘‘ when the people are gathered together, and the Kingdoms to 
serve the Lord,’’ but after the heavens and earth are changed ‘‘as @ 


vesture,’’ then ‘* the children of thy servants shall continue and their seed — 


shall be established before Thee.’’ 'The connection makes this conclusive. 
That most expressive Ps, 72 (keeping in view the Pre-Mill. Advent) de- 
scribes the extended dominion of David’s Son over all the earth, all 
nations, ‘‘ throughout all generations’? (making them of the city to flourish 
like grass of the earth), so that the idea of successive generations of men 
assumes great prominency in the prediction. So also Ps. 45, which de- 
scribes the fall of the king’s enemies, the King in His majesty with the 
Queen and the King’s daughters and virgins manifested, significantly adds : 
‘* [Twill make thy name to be remembered in all generations,’’ etc. (Comp. Per. 
145 : 13; Isa. 34: 17; Ps. 146: 10; Isa. 51: 8, ete.) Admuittmge (Ome 
2) that ‘* everlasting’ and ‘‘ forever’? are sometimes employed in a limited 
sense (the actual duration being determined by the nature of the thing to 
which it is referred), and that when applied to the race of man it includes 
that period—whatever it may be—in which the race shall produce its succes- 
sive generations ; admitting, too, that the future is made up of succeed- 
ing ‘‘ ages,’’ and even designated ‘‘ cternities’’ (so some critics), yet such 


is the comprehensiveness of the Janguage employed, the vastness of design 


aimed at indicated by details and the direct association with the re-estab- 
lished Kingdom of the Messiah, that, only inclined to go as far as “ the 
all generations,” etc., whatever they may be in number—an timmense 
increase must necessarily be denoted by the use of such terms. The *‘ per- 
petual generations’? in the covenant with Noah (Gen. 9 : 12-16) not only 
denotes that God will not again, for He will remember *‘ the everlasting 
covenant,’’ destroy all flesh upon the earth in His wrath, but that there 
will be a vast, enormous succession of generations of men. ‘This is corrob- 
orated by the covenant made with Abraham (Gen. 13:14, 16; Gen. 17: 
5-8), which embraces, not only successive generations and a multitude of 


Prop. 152. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. bol 


nations, but so numerous that they shall be ‘‘ as the dust of the earth, so 
that if aman can number the dust of the earth, then shail thy seed also be 
numbered,’’ evincing such a host (comp. Jer. 33 : 22) still to come into 
existence as shall surpass the ordinary powers of enumeration—a condition 
very different to that hitherto occupied by the Jewish nation, decimated 
and downtrodden as it has been. All such promises are bound to the 
period still future, when (Ps. 89 : 4, 29, 36, 37, etc.) David’s throne is 
re-established unto “* all generations ;’? when (Luke 1 : 32, 38) ‘‘ the Lord 
God shall give unto Him (i.e. Jesus, Mary’s Son) the throne of His father 
David and He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever (through the ages),”’ 
so that there will be (Eph. 3 : 21) ‘to Him glory in the Church by Jesus 
Christ?’ (so Barnes, Com. loci, says literally) *‘ wato all generations of the 
age of ages,” or *‘ unto all the generations of the eternity of eternities, or the 
eternity of ages.’’ or (a8 Bloomfield, locz) *‘ through the succession of all gen- 
erations unto the latest period of eternity.”’ 


Fausset (Com. Eph, 3:21) comments: ‘*‘Unto him be the glory in the Church in 
Christ to all the generations of eternal ages,’ lit. ‘of the age of the ages.’ Eternity is con- 
ceived as consisting of ages (these again consisting of ‘ generations’) endlessly succeeding 
one another.” The Latin Vulgate (authorized Dublin Transl.) renders Eph. 3:21: ‘To 
Him be glory in the Church and in Jesus Christ, wnto all generations world without end. Amen.” 
And Eph. 2:7: ‘‘That He might show in the ages to come the abundant riches of His 
grace, in His bounty toward usin Christ Jesus.” The New Revis. has, ‘‘ Unto all gener- 
ations for ever and ever. Amen.’ The Kingdom, as various writers have noticed, is 
linked in its duration with successive generations, expressive of the increase of His govern- 
ment. Hence, according to the sentiment of Prov. 14:28, ‘* In the multitude of people is 
the King’s honor,’’ we may well believe that proportionate to the greatness and extent of 
this Kingdom, by such continued accessions, will the honor and glory of David’s Son be 
splendidly magnified and reflected. 


Obs. 8. It may be appropriate to notice some objections that are urged 
against this view. The author of The Kingdom of Grace (p. 9) gives such 
a variety of them mingled together that we reproduce them with our an- 
swers given parenthetically. He opposes our using (!) the prayer, ‘‘ Come, 
Lord Jesus, even so, come quickly,’’ because we then pray God to end this 
dispensation (we look for one more glorious); to let no Gospel be preached 
to sinners (it is successfully proclaimed to Jews and Gentiles and the saints 
are priests); to multiply no more trophies of victorious grace (we im- 
mensely increase these trophies by the salvation of the race) ; and to finish 
the number of the elect (true, in order that the vast project of redemption 
may be carried on through the agency of these same elect). To prove this, 
he attributes to us what we do not teach, as e.g. that the wicked will be 
all destroyed, so that there will be none to whom the Gospel shall be 
preached (the incorrigible will be, while those repentant under God’s judg- 
ments will be spared); that as only Christ and glorified saints will be on 
the earth during that period (which isa mistake), there will be no more death 
(correct as to saints, and as to those who may afterward be glorified, but 
not as to one class) nor propagation of the race (after quoting in other 
places Millenarian authors who directly teach the same). Hence we are 
guilty of intentionally praying ‘‘ that the Gospel dispensation may quickly 
end, and that the number of the elect may be limited and cut off, rather 
than increased”’ (which is not our language or idea, for we pray not that the 
Gospel shall end, but the dispensation, and not that the number of the elect 
may be limited, but that the number God has determined may be speedily 


552 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 152. 


completed ; and this, in order that God’s redemptive purposes may be car- 
ried out). This, he remarks, is opposed to what Paul says, ‘‘I am not 
ashamed of the Gospel of Christ’’ (that is, ‘‘ the Gospel dispensation’’— 
which certainly is an interpretation of the Gospel that needs no refutation), 
‘* for it is the power of God unto salvation’’ (neither are we ashamed of the 
Gospel of Christ because it brings us salvation, perfected, in His King- 
dom); and concludes by telling us that when we pray for the Saviour to 
come, we ought to mean and pray for His Coming at death (this is spirit- 
ualizing away the Second Advent as ‘* the blessed hope,’’ and putting in its 
place a penal characteristic). We have thus allowed the objections of one 
to appear in their involved manner, and thus briefly answered them, to 
indicate the nature and practice of a class of books circulated. Others are 
advanced of a similar character. Thus e.g. a prominent Divine, arguing 
against the saints and mortal men living in ¢he same ‘‘ new heaven and 
new earth,’’ gravely asserts that ‘‘ the supposition is self annihilating,” 


4 


because ‘‘ the one class with glorified bodies and the other with natural, — 


cannot inhabit the same world ;’’ and then adds: “ If this is the Kingdom 
of heaven, how can the flesh and blood of fallen man inherit it?’’ The 
first part needs no refutation, seeing that the matter solely depends upon 
the teaching of God’s Word, while the latter part is a confounding of 
those who inherit (i.e. the glorified saints, who actually receive a rulership 
in the Kingdom) with the subjects of the Kingdom. The objection, so 
often repeated, that it would be degrading for Christ and the saints to 
dwell on the same earth where nations in the flesh reside, has been several 
times noticed and answered, so that it requires (comp. Prop. 203) no addi- 
tional remarks. Brethren should be careful how they designate that pure 
Theocratic arrangement—once established—to be manifested in David’s 
Son and spoken of as one of great glory and power, ‘‘a degrading’’ posi- 
tion, lest they be found to be lowering, treating with disrespect, the Divine 
ordering and the Kingdom of Jesus. The exaltation, as well as the specific 
work and design contemplated, is an ample vindication of such a dwelling 
and reigning on the earth, an earth, too, lifted up from its present condition 
of suffering and degradation. This, while displaying God’s wonderful 
condescension, love and mercy, in being willing to act in the capacity of an 
earthly ruler, at the same time immeasurably exalts the worth of man in 
the scale of being, and the astonishing greatness to which the race itself 
will be elevated. But of all the objections, probably the one most confi- 
dently advanced by some, is the following, viz., that if such a propagation 
of the race continues after the Second Advent, the earth will not be able 
to contain the vast multitude, that there will be ‘‘ 20 standing room,”’ ete. 
This is simply imitating the spirit of the lord who disbelieved Elisha’s 
prediction of plenty in Samaria; denying the ability of God to perform 
what He has promised, or that His wisdom and power is equal to any and 
every emergency. If the fact is revealed, the manner of its accomplishment 
may be safely left with the Almighty. Unbelief is not the measure of the 
fulfilment of Holy Writ. ven if there should be successive generations 
eternally (which we neither affirm nor deny), reason can suggest ways by 
which the difficulty could be removed, viz., as supposed by various writers, 
in successive translations, transference to other worlds, etc. God may 
have ways utterly unknown tous. In the re-creation, when ‘‘ J make or 
create all things new,’’ the earth itself may be, for aught we know, en- 
larged * to adapt it for the ages tocome. Admitting creative agency ex- 


Prop. 152.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 558 


erted, we can assign—as the universe indicates in its infinity of phases— 
no limit, for the physical conditions that we faintly see revealed in other 
planets and stellar systems may be partly or entirely engrafted upon this 
earth. Who can tell e.g. that it may not shine forth in that day with 
rings like Saturn, etc. With the increased fertility of the earth, with 
God’s ability, if need be, to supply manna, with successive translations, 
with God’s power to meet necessities that He may cause to arise, with an 
objection relating to the exceeding distant future—so distant that it does 
not concern us—concerning which, owing to its remoteness, God has 
given no detailed information—it 1s unwise and faithless fo reject revelation 
for mere assumption, and assumption, too, reflecting upon the Divine at- 
tributes.» Much that was said respecting the extent of the conflagration 
(Prop. 150) will also apply here. The simple question to be decided is the 
one, whether God has thus predicted the multiplication and perpetuation of 
the race? if this is determined in the affirmative, then all such objections 
have no weight when placed in the balance against that Word. Instead of 
suggesting difficulties and impossibilities when God promises an astonishing 
display of /Zis wonder-working attributes, we are content to receive and 
believe the promises that Messiah’s Kingdom shall yet be set up at His Sec. 
Coming—a Kingdom adapted to the character and wants of man (to the 
redeemed, the individual, society, and the nation), in which ‘‘ every knee 
shall bow of the heavenlies, of the earthlies, and of the undergrounders’’ 
(so Sirr, Hirst. es., p. 104), ‘‘ and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ 
4s Lord to the glory of God the Father ;’’ in which Jesus, seated upon this 
judgment seat or throne, shall indeed be ‘‘ Lord both of the dead and the 
living ;”’ inwhich ‘‘ the Church of the first-born,’ the exalted “* first-fruits” 
shall witness a mighty redemptive harvest following in the revolving ages ; 
and in which, Ps. 113, the glorious Hallel shall be sung, reflecting praise, 
not only upon the Lord on account of His majesty and dominion over all 
nations, and in exalting the poor and needy to be Princes, but in making 
*‘ the barren woman to keep house (Marg. read to dwell in a house) and to 
be a joyful mother of children.”’ 

1 Isa. 33 : 17 may have an indirect reference (marg. reading, and Alexander’s version, ‘‘a 
land of distances,” an extended land), which instead of meaning ‘‘foreign travel,” ‘ re- 
mote parts of Judea,” of ‘‘ seeing far and wide,’’ etc., may denote either that the land shall 
be given in the distant future or that the land shall be enlarged, extended. Lange’s Com. 
loci expresses the idea of ‘‘a wide extended land”’ pertaining to the Messianic future, 
saying : ‘‘ As royal pomp and beauty adorns the person of a king, so immeasurable extent 
does His land.’’ The Heb. is, ‘‘of far distances.” 

? The writer has met with several arithmetical calculations, which, making the most 
ample allowances for the past population of the globe, indicate that less than one third 
of the island of England would give sufficient ‘‘ standing room’’ for all the race that has 
ever existed. These, interesting as they may be to meet some absurd speculations, etc., 
concerning the resurrection, do not amount to much in the eyes of a believer. For the 
latter constantly feels that the promise is ours, but the manner of fulfilling it belongs to 
God. The objection, if it has any force at all, is equally applicable, and more so, to a 
propagation of the race on an unrenewed earth, with its vast tracts of desert, etc., for a 


Millennial era of three hundred and sixty thousand years! Whitbyans, therefore, should 
be the last to urge it. 


554 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 153, — 
I Aa 


Proposition 1538. This view of the Kingdom with its two 
classes (viz. the translated and dead saints, glorified, forming 
one Class, and mortal men the other) is forcibly represented’ in 
the transfiguration. | 


The transfiguration, not only in view of its being so notable an 
occurrence, but of its being a typical or real representation of 
Christ’s Coming in His Kingdom, is worthy of separate and special — 
consideration. — abe 

Dr. Hodge (Sys. Div., vol. 3, p. 796,) says: ‘*The transfiguration on the Mount was 
a type and pledge of the glory of the Sec. Advent, 2 Pet. 1:16.” This is correct as far as 


it goes, but the transfiguration embraces much more, viz.: the glory of that Sec. Advent 
as manifested in His Kingdom. 


Obs. 1. Notice its introductory. ‘* About eight days before’’ (Luke 9 : 
28), Jesus told His disciples what they must do in order that they might 
be rewarded when the Son of man should come “ in the glory of His Lather 
with the holy angels’? (Mark 8 : 38), or, ‘in the glory of His Father with 
His angels’ (Matt. 16 : 27), or, ‘Sin His own glory, and in His Father’s, 
and of the holy angels’? (Luke 9:26). This, undoubtedly, refers to the 
Second Advent. Now, keeping in view the idea thus advanced, and, mark 
it, addressed to Jewish hearers who invariably linked the Coming of the 
Son of man in glory with the prediction of Dan. 7 : 13, 14 (respecting the 
glory and Kingdom then manifested), our Saviour proceeds now to give 
His disciples (with their Jewish interpretation of Daniel uncontradicted) 
an assurance that He will give some of them a specimen of this Coming in 
glory. In Matt. 16 : 28 follows: ‘ Verily I say unto you, There be some’ 
standing here (Mark: some of them that stand here ; Luke: there be some 
standing here) which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man 
coming in His Kingdom (Mark : till they have seen the Kingdom of God 
come with power ; Luke: till they see the Kingdom of God).’’ That this 
Coming in His Kingdom does not refer to the Church (so Barnes, Storr, — 
etc.), 1s evident from the connection which the language sustains fo His 
Coming at the Second Advent, the time of judgment and rewarding pre- 
sented in the context, and from the fact that the Coming is to be witnessed — 
only by ‘* some,” i.e. a few, then present. ‘T’o interpret this as an invisible 
Coming at the destruction of Jerusalem (Prof. Bush, Whitby, etc.), mak- — 
ing out a fulfilment of Dan. 7, is forced and unnatural, being a violation — 
both of the preceding and succeeding context and the Jewish interpreta- — 
tion of Daniel as held by the disciples and evidenced by their preaching. — 
As Olshausen has well observed (Com. loci) that ‘‘ the immediate connec- — 
tion of these words (in Matthew) with the foregoing context, in which the — 
Coming in His glory refers so wnmistakably to the Parousia, does not admit 
of this explanation (viz., as describing powerful manifestations of living 


SP ROP. 153. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 555 


Christian principle), without reference to the personal return of Jesus.’’ 
The translator of Olshausen, Dr. Kendrick, adds the following pertinent 
note: ‘‘ I think 7 can scarcely be doubted that ‘the Coming of the Son of 
man in His Kingdom’ refers here ¢o the following scene of the transfigura- 
tion. ‘lhe words ‘shall not see death until they see the Son of man,’ 
refer not to length of life, but to privilege ; some shall have the privilege 
of beholding Him in His glory even before they die. So some ancient com- 
mentators. ‘The transfiguration is thus regarded as a type of the Saviour’s 
future glory in His Kingdom.’’ Schmid (Bib. Theol. of the N. Test., p. 
220) explains the passage to refer to ‘‘ His return as Lord and King of 
His-Kingdom on earth, in the clouds of heaven for judgment.”’ Lange 
says that Chrysostom and many others believe this to relate to the trans- 
figuration ; and Lange, Meyer, and others think that it has respect to 
His future manifestation of, or state of, glory. That it unquestionably 
refers to the transfiguration is conclusive by the use of the phraseology, 
“the Son of man coming in His Kingdom’ (which was only employed, 
Props. 81, 85, 180, etc., in reference to His personal Coming, etc.), and 
_by the fact that immediately following, a few days after, occurred the trans- 
figuration, which even our opponents admit (as Bloomfield, Com. loci) to be 
afigurative representation of Christ’s final Advent in glory to gudgment.”’ 
Avoiding the idea of its being ‘‘ figurative’ (for it was real), the scene 
enacted in the transfiguration is a representation of the very appearance 
that the Son of man will assume when He comes in glory at His Second 
Coming in His Kingdom. That all the disciples hved—did not taste of 
death—until long after the transfiguration (so Whitby) is no objection to 
its reference to that scene, because all but three did die without having 
‘the privilege’ of seeing it. The indistinct allusion to the three disciples 
who should witness this Coming of the Son of man—the manner of specify- 
ing it without mentioning the names of the parties who should see it—binds 
this passage in the strongest possible manner to the following transfigura- 
tion, because the disciples thus favored were expressly charged to keep it a 
secret until after Christ’s resurrection. Hence, this very Coming to be 
seen being intended as a strictly private or secret matter, explains the in- 
definite language of Jesus both in reference to the persons and the time, to 
avoid the questionings, etc. (Jones, Notes loci), that would assuredly take 
place, had He been more specific. 'This is only another of those indirect, 
most delicate, but most powerful, attestations to the truthfulness of the 
Kivangelists. And, as Judge Jones has well suggested, owing to this indefi- 
niteness of language (which must have surprised the disciples at the time), 
we are indebted to the fact that the Evangelists who state it are also care- 
ful—to remove all obscurity—to narrate in immediate connection—as the 
best comment—the promise and consequent fulfilment.? 


1 Neander (Life of Christ, Sec. 181) takesa liberty with the text of Matt. 16 : 28 not al- 
lowed by the passage. He says: ‘‘ He (Christ) announced to them that many among them 
would live to see this Kingdom of God,’’ ete. Now the three Gospels, instead of saying 
‘‘many,’’ all unite in the same word ‘‘some,’’ and confine these ‘“‘some’’ to ‘‘some 
standing here.’’ It is limited to'a few among those present, and as the connection—in- 
mediate—shows, to three persons. The notion that the Church was the Kingdom intended 
suggested the ‘“‘many.’’ Fairbairn (On Proph., p. 443) surely failed (purposely ?) to see 
the connection that this verse sustains to what follows, or he would not have said that it 
could only be applied to the apostles witnessing ‘“‘the manifestation of Christ’s divine 
power after His ascension, when introducing the new dispensation and formally remoy- 
ing the old. This is the only thing that can be regarded as properly falling within the 


556 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 153. 


terms of the description.” We suppose he refers to the day of Pentecost, which was the 
coming of the Comforter, which not some but all the apostles witnessed, and which 
ignores the context and the testimony of Peter, substituting mere conjecture. Nean- 
der is influenced by his ‘‘ pectoralistic theology’’ (see Kurtz, Ch. His., vol. 2, p. 355), and 
Fairbairn by his Anti-Millenarian bias, Brown (Com. loci), as a matter of course, applies 
this to the establishment of the Christian Church ‘‘ beyond doubt,’’ as if assertion were 
proof. Ebrard (Gosp. His., p. 340 and 343) gives a choice criticism in order to enforce such 
an application of the text, as follows: ‘‘ Jesus was speaking here, not of His own return, 
but of the formation of His church, and especially of the events of the day of Pentecost ; 
this would be apparent from the preposition en (in His Kingdom), which must mean in 
and not to. Christ comes in His Kingdom, when he founds His church, and appears 
therein. His coming to judgment would be coming to the Kingdom, not coming in it. 
He could only be represented as coming in the Kingdom, if by kingdom we were to un- 
derstand the ornalus regius, or the angels attendant upon Him ; but this would be entirely 
opposed to the usage of Jesus and His apostles.” Briefly in reply: (1) Hf Ebrard is 
correct it would not be true that some, or a few, witnessed it; (2) he is contradictory, 
for in the same work, he has the Kingdom already formally established by the appoint- 
ment of the twelve—then received at death, and again at Pentecost, etc.; (8) his refer- 
ence to judgment is based on the Popish idea which we reject ; (4) the Sec. Advent is 
invariably associated with a kingdom in which the Son of Man is the central figure, or 
with which He is associated ; (5) the criticism is unworthy of the ability of the writer, 
and was evidently suggested by a preconceived opinion. Alexander (Com., Matt. 16 : 28) 
applies it thus: ‘It has reference to a gradual or progressive change, the institution of 
Christ’s Kingdom in the hearts of men and in society at large, of which protracted pro- 
cess the two salient points are the effusion of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost and the 
destruction of Jerusalem more than a quarter of a century later, between which points, 
as those of inception and its consummation, hes the lingering death of the Mosaic dis- 
pensation and the gradual erection of the Messiah’s Kingdom.’’ This interpretation is 
based on an entire misapprehension of what constitutes the covenanted Messianic King- 
dom, as elsewhere shown, and pointedly violates the usage which appropriates person- 
ality to the phrase ‘‘Son of Man,” and which, therefore, only denotes a personal—not 
spiritual—coming. Hence we must reject, as unsatisfactory and contradictory, all inter- 
pretations which do not apply this ‘‘some”’ to the three favored disciples, as will be 
shown in detail. 

2 Matthew Henry (Com. loci) says: ‘*Christ has said that the Son of Man should 
shortly come in His Kingdom, with which promise all three Evangelists industriously 
connect this story, as if Christ’s transfiguration was intended for @ specimen and an 
earnest of the Kingdom of Christ, and of that light and love of His which therein appear 
to His select and sanctified ones, and so Peter speaks of it as the power and coming of 
our Lord Jesus.”” The reader, if observing the force of verse 27 (which coming is 
admitted to refer to the Sec. Advent and to be a personal one), can readily see for him- 
self that ‘‘the coming” of v. 27 being thus associated must relate to a similar coming. 
Dr. Rutter (Roman Catholic) in his Life of Jesus, p. 263, remarks: ‘ As these last words— 
Matt. 16 : 28—cannot be understood of the last coming of Jesus, some understand them 
of the glory which He received by His resurrection, others of the glorious establishment 
of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ throughout the world by the preaching of the gospel. 
But others, with greater probability, refer them to His transfiguration, an account of which 
is immediately subjoined by the Evangelists. This promise of a transitory view of His 
glory He was induced to make, first, to prove what He had just asserted, viz., that He 
should one day come, in all the glory of His Father, to judge each man according to his 
works ; secondly, to afford by this glorious scene some consolation to His apostles, who 
had heard, not without the greatest emotions of grief, the prediction of His approaching 
death, and the necessity they were under of following Him.”’ 


Obs. 2. Another feature as introductory ought to be considered. Just 
previous to this promise that some should see Him as He would come in 
His glory, the confession had been made by Peter that Jesus was ‘‘ The 
Christ of God’’ (Luke 9 : 20); ‘* The Christ’ (Mark 9 : 29); ‘‘ The Christ, 
the Son of the living God ’’ (Matt. 16:16). In these words are contained 
not only a reference to His Messiahship as the promised King, but (as in 
Matthew) to the Theocratic (Divine) relationship that this ruler as the 


Prop. 153. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 557 


Anointed One sustained. (Comp. Prop. 205). It is God again conde- 
scending to act as Theocratic ruler in the person of this Jesus. The 
phraseology denotes the Theocratic Rulership as associated with the restored 
throne and Kingdom of David. There is xo dowdt concerning this accord- 
ing to Jewish usage, etc. Having dwelt largely upon this Theocratic order- 
ing in other propositions, it is only necessary to repeat that, identified as 
this Kingship was with the Jewish nation, the term ‘‘ Christ’’ was an 
equivalent to the phrase ‘* Aing of the Jews,’’ as seen in the significant 
superscription of the cross, and in Herod, the Priests, and Scribes making 
** the Aing of the Jews’’ in the question of the wise men identical with that 
of ‘* Christ.”” Notice carefully, that Jesus cautions His disciples to tell no 
one that He was ‘‘ The Christ ;”’ that this injunction is given after the 
death of John the Baptist, after the representative men of the nation took 
counsel together to destroy Him, after His rejection by the leaders of the 
nation and the refusal to repent ; that the postponement of the Kingdom 
had already been determined, as evidenced by Jesus, immediately after this 
confession, referring to His approaching death—through the Elders, Chief 
Priests, and Scribes—and resurrection. The mention of His death in con- 
nection with Ilis ‘* Christship,’’ as a matter of course perplexed (as the 
narrative shows) the disciples. To give an assurance that He was still 
“The Christ,’’ although He would ‘‘ de killed,’? He now promises to 
‘* some’’ such an evidence of His being ‘‘ The Christ,’ that they could no 
more doubt its reality and its ultimate visible fulfilment on earth.’ If 
‘* Christ’? only means, as multitudes inform us, that Jesus is ‘‘ the 
anointed One to save sinners,’’ can any one assign a reason—just and 
proper—why the disciples should be charged to secrecy respecting the title. 
But denoting as it does that Jesus is the Theocratic King, the appointed 
One to rule over the Jewish nation both as David’s heir and God’s Son 
(God thus ruling in and through Him), we see a reason why He should 
not, at that time, be proclaimed ‘‘ The Christ,’’ viz., that this would be 
in effect announcing Him as ‘‘ the Aing of the Jews,’’ which, in view of 
His rejection, the postponement of the reign, the contemplated sacrifice, 
the unnecessary collision, charges, accusations, etc., that would be evolved, 
it was not prudent or advisable toadopt. Now, although this ‘‘ Christship”’ 
was to be kept a secret for wise purposes, and to avoid the animosity of 
His enemies and the jealousy of the Roman power, yet Jesus promises to 
give a favored few such a manifestation of that same ‘* Christship’’ that it 
may be effectual in sustaining them, amid the terrible trial that was com- 
ing, and in preparing them, and through them, believers, for His removal 
from the earth. The disciples saw Jesus, but not as ‘‘ the Coming One”’ in 
His Kingdom ; they only saw Him in His state of humiliation ; but the 
former is a reality as well as the latter, and the confession of the former 
having been elicited, Jesus now graciously proceeds to verify the former, so 
that hereafter, when withdrawn for a time, the apostles may proclaim the 
glorious truth that He is indeed ‘t The Christ’’—‘' The King of Jsrael.”’ 
This very withdrawal of Jesus, the fact of His death publicly by crucifix- 
ion, the unbelief of the Romans and Jews in His resurrection, etc., being 
thus a protection (although as history informs us, Prop. 73, the applica- 
tion served to arrest the attention of the Roman Emperor) to the preach- 
ing of His ‘‘ Christship’’—for then, as now, the vast multitude have no 
faith in its legitimate meaning (Prop. 184)—as applied to Jesus, and none in 
its ultimate fulfilment as the title itself imports. The trial of the nation 


558 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 153. 


being ended by the death of John the Baptist, and by the conspiracy — 
against the life of Jesus, and now the trial of the Son of man and that of 
His devoted followers coming on, in this extremity something eztraordi- 
nary—something out of the usual course of events—is needed to indicate 
the truth which the approaching death seems to crush, and that need is 
supplied in the wonderful transfiguration.* 


1 It is interesting to the student to notice that after the death and resurrection of Jesus, 
the injunction of secrecy being removed, this title of ‘‘Christ’’ becomes a favorite one, 
not merely as some suggest owing to ‘‘popular usage,” but because the evidences pre- 
sented proved Him to be such ; the title suggested the glorious fulfilment of covenant 
and promise. The same Peter who made the confession, who saw the coming of the 
Christ in His glory, was the first to proclaim (Acts 2 : 30) ‘‘that God had sworn with an 
oath to him (David) that of the fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, He would raise — 
up Christ to sit on His throne,” ete. 

2 Another feature which shows that the covenanted Kingdom is not the Church, and 
that it is still future, is exhibited in Peter’s rebuking Jesus for asserting His death, and 
thereply of the Saviour. Peter had just confessed that Jesus was ‘‘ the Christ,’’ and this 
naturally suggested the pleasing prospect that then, at that time, He would inaugurate 
the Kingdom which was invariably linked with the manifestation of ‘‘the Christ.” The 
reference toa coming death given by Jesus, of course, was opposed to such an expecta- 
tion, and hence the strong language of Peter. The mistake of Peter, which, alas! is the 
mistake of the vast multitude, was that he looked for the Messiah’s Kingdom in a world 
groaning under the curse of God ; that he had no proper conception of the expedients 
and preparatory measures that were necessary before this world would be prepared for 
the Messiah’s Kingdom as predicted by the prophets. Therefore the sharp answer of the 
Saviour follows, which is alleviated by the privilege afterward allotted to Peter. The 
student, if closely observant, will also notice how one of our previous propositions (that 
the Kingdom was not set up in the time of Jesus)is sustained by the fact that Jesus 
forbids even the announcement that He is ‘‘the Christ.’’ Jesus, foreseeing His rejection 
and death, and the resultant postponement of the Kingdom, secretly gives this mani- 
festation, and forbids its publication until after His death, thus delicately and lovingly 
saving His followers from a dreadful persecution. For if this had been done publicly 
and noised abroad—prematurely, as after events showed—it would have been seized, 
interpreted, and reported by His and their enemies to the Roman power as rebellion, the 
same charge precisely which the Jews pressed before Pilate and secured the crucifixion. 
This desire to save others, and even the nation, from unnecessary evil 1s the key to several 
things, as e.g. His refusal to give a sign to the Jews, and His revealing at times more of 
Himself to Gentiles than to Jews, to which infidelity ignorantly objects. 


Obs. 3, The transfiguration itself 1s a@ real occurrence, as the entire nar- 
ration fully demonstrates. Passing by the mere unfriendly supposition of 
Strauss that it is a mythical fabrication of the love of the marvellous to 
eclipse the account of Moses, or, the simple ignoring of it, without expla- 
nation, as unworthy of credence (a summary way of disposing of Scripture, 
which certainly taxes reason), or the attributing it to an ‘‘ optical allu- 
sion,’ in which thunder, lightning, mists, and an excited imagination 
play their allotted parts, let us briefly consider what some have called — 


‘*The Dream of Peter’’ (Iturness, etc.), or a kind of visionary appearance 


(Palfrey), a scenic representation which appeared mentally or in some 
other way to the disciples, but had no real existence—so that Jesus, instead 
of being really transfigured, only appeared to be so in a dream, or kind of 
vision. ‘The ablest defender of this view, probably, is Dr. Neander, who 
(Life of Christ, Sec. 185) admits, however, that it may be ‘‘ an objective 
fact,’’ 1.e. a real, outward transaction, but, if so, it took place in view “‘ of 
some unknown object for it,’’ of which we must “‘ confess our ignorance.” 
Being thus at a loss—from his Church-Kingdom standpoint—to account 


for its occurrence, 1f a@ real manifestation, he inclines to adopt the theory — p 


Prop. .153. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 550 


of its being ‘* a subjective psychological phenomenon,”’ i.e. that it was only 
a mental conception, a vivid dream or vision induced by the impressive 
circumstances in which the disciples were placed, viz., by the prayer of 
Christ. Thus one of the most sublime exhibitions of Christ is transformed 
by this eminent man intoadream, He admits the difficulty how, if a vis- 
ion, a mere mental affair, the three disciples obtained it at the same time 
and in the same form. Strauss, Renan, and others are more consistent 
and logical in their rejection of the whole matter as mythical, than Nean- 
der and others are in receiving it, and then divesting it of all force and 
propriety, by constituting it a kind of dream, If only a dream, why, as 
Neander queries, should all three at the same time dream it ; > why then 
forbid its revelation to others; why present it as a matter of historical 
fact ; why specially assert that they beheld it ‘‘ when they were awake ;’’ 
why should they, from an upright position, fall upon their faces with 
dread, and what need of the Saviour to encourage them ; and why intro- 
duce Peter as speaking? The style of narration, the particulars given, the 
design intended—all forbid such a caricaturing or belittling of that sub- . 
lime representation. Having just shown that the preceding context con- 
templates that ‘* some’ of the disciples then present should ‘‘ see,’’ with 
their own eyes, ‘‘ the Son of man Coming in His Kingdom,’’ and finding 
that ‘‘ siz days after’’ three of these same disciples did see this transfigura- 
tion, which represented Jesus in His glory as ‘‘ The Christ,’’ we are fully 
prepared to find that these witnesses are positive in asserting that it was a 
real transaction, as e.g. John (Jno. 1 : 14) ‘* we beheld (Gr., we distinctly 
saw, so Bloomfield, etc.) His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the 
father.’’. Barnes (Com. loci) says: ‘‘ There is no doubt that there is ref- 
erence here to the transfiguration on the holy mount. ‘To this same evi- 
dence Peter also appeals, 2 Pet. 1: 16-18. John was one of the witnesses ' 
_of that scene, and hence he says, ‘ We beheld His glory.’ ’’ John thus vin- 
dicates the reality of the transaction, and sustains the three Evangelists in 
their representation of it. Then Peter (2 Pet. 1 : 16-18) mentions the 
place, the ,voice and saying from the Father, and emphatically declares 
that tose who were on ‘‘ the holy mount’’ at the time ‘‘ were eye-witnesses 
of His Majesty.’’ ) 


Among the reasons assigned by Neander (His. Plant. Ch. Church, vol. 1, p. 376) for 
rejecting the Epistle of Second Peter as spurious, one is based on Peter’s allusion to 
the transfiguration. He says: ‘‘ But it certainly is not natural to suppose that one of 
the apostles should select and bring forward from the whole life of Christ of which they 
had been eye-witnesses, this insulated fact, which was less essentially connected with 
that which was the central point and object of His appearance.”’ It certainly is doing 
injustice to the Epistle to come to it with a low estimation of the transfiguration, and 
then judge it by such a previously formed standard. Dr. Neander utterly failed to 
comprehend ‘‘this insulated fact,” to see how it stands related to ‘the Christ,” how 
vitally it is connected with the one great event to which both covenant and prophecy 
point, and how an apostle favored with so special a privilege of beholding that which 
represented the future Advent of the King in glory, would ‘naturally’ refer to it 
as a@ most important and precious revelation. 


Obs. 4. The transfiguration, following the announcement that ‘‘ some’’ 
should, before their death, see ‘‘ the Son of man Coming in His King- 
dom,” is a representation of the Kingdom in some of its aspects, ViZ., 120 
the glory of ‘“the Christ”? or King, in the presence of (who also ‘* appeared 
in glory,’’ Luke 9 : 31) the translated and dead saints, and in the witness- 


560 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 153, 


ing of that glory oy mortal men. It was a temporary display, an outward 
manifestation or revealing of the majesty and glory that belongs to Jesus 
when He comes at the Second Advent in His Kingdom with His saints to 
reign over the nations. That this is the correct idea appertaining to this 
astonishing transaction is evident by regarding Peter’s reference to it. He 
(2 Pet. 1 : 16-18) says: ‘‘ We have not followed cunningly devised fables” 
(as so many now allege) ‘* when we made known unto you the power’ and 
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of His Majesty,” 
etc. Notice that he calls this transfiguration scene, ‘‘ the coming of 
the Lord Jesus Christ,” thus identifying it fully with Matt. 16 :27, 28. 
This is unquestionably, then, linking it with the still future Advent asa 
striking exhibition of the glory that shall be revealed—which is confirmed 
by Peter introducing this allusion to prove that Christ would thus again 
come, and by his uniting such a Coming with (ch. 1 : 11) ‘‘ the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ,’’ and with His Coming, 
the new heaven and new earth (ch. 3 : 4, 13) of prophetic promise. (See 
also the references to this Coming in first Epistle.)’? Let us survey these 
several aspects. First and supreme stands forth the transfiguration of 
Jesus, changed in form, so that ‘* His face did shine as the sun and His 
raiment was white as the light’ (Matthew) ; ‘* His raiment became shining, 
exceeding white as snow, so as no fuller on earth can white them’’ (Mark) ; 
‘* the fushion of His countenance was altered, and His raiment was white 
and glistening (Luke).”? Here is the Theocratic Aing arrayed in light and 
glory, His face shining with brightness like that of the sun and His gar- 
ments dazzling in their whiteness. Thus (comp. Rev. 1 : 13-16, etc.) will 
the Mighty Christ appear when He comes to re-establish the Theocracy. 
Next we have ‘‘ two men’ (Luke 9 : 30), Moses and Elias, who also ap- 
peared ‘‘in glory.’ The Coming of Christ in His Kingdom is usually as- 
sociated with that of the saints, His brethren, who are co-heirs with Him 
in the same glory. Hence, to give a representation of His Coming—His 
appearance when Coming—in His Kingdom it was eminently suitable to 
have—to fill out the picture—the saints, glorified, also represented. 'This 1s 
done ; and in view of the fact that at His Second Advent these are made 
up of two parties, viz., the dead saints and the living saints translated, 
these two, Moses and Elias, are purposely chosen as a correct exhibition of 
the two parties—forming one class—who shall then appear “‘in glory” 
with Christ. Moses represents the body of saints who have died, but who 
will also be glorified with Christ ; and as he was in converse with the glori- 
fied Saviour, so will they also be in nearness to Him. Moses and Elias both 
appearing ‘‘in glory,’’ seems to indicate the same glorification of body.’ 
Elias represents another body, who, like himself, shall not fall ‘‘ asleep,”’ 
but shall be translated without experiencing the power of death. These 
two, the dead and the living, who shall be glorified at the Coming of 
Jesus, are graphically portrayed in 1 Cor. 15 :51, 52, and 1 Thess. 4: 15-17, 
These not only see His glory, but partake of the same, 1 Jno. 3:23; Phil. 
8 : 21, etc., for of them it is said: ‘‘ When Christ” (notice, as *‘ Christ’’), 
*‘ who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory, 
Col. 3 : 4. But in addition to these, we have, to meet the prophetic 
announcements and to fill out the representation, ¢hree persons, Peter, 
James, and Jonn, wnglorified, mortal men living on the earth, who see this 
glorified Christ and His glorified associates, and are so deeply impressed, 
so delighted with the exceeding glory revealed, that through the spokesman 


Prop, 153.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 561 


Peter, the emphatic declaration is made: ‘‘ Lord, tt is good for us to be 
here.’ ‘Thus, if willing to receive it, will it be at the Second Advent, 
when Christ, ‘*'The Christ,’? comes in His glory and with His brethren 
gathered and glorified, then shall the spared Jewish nation and Gentiles, 
as prediction after prediction in glorious language portrays, rejoice and 
ecult in the marvellous glory that shall be manifested. Jesus personally 
appears in His Kingly aspect ; the saints personally are present in their 
glory ; the disciples personally behold and admire the astonishing splendor 
and *‘ majesty” of the scene. Jesus is here, ‘‘ the Coming One”’ (a phrase 
well understood by the Jews), as He will exhibit Himself ‘‘ in His own 
Kingdom;”’ the saints form ‘‘ the first-fruits,’’ who, as the predicted ‘‘ kings 
and priests,’’ reign with Christ in His Kingdom ; and the mortal men are the 
servants or subjects (as even the tender of the three tents indicates) who glad- 
ly receive this glory, and are willing to abide under its radiance. The con- 
versation respecting the approaching death at Jerusalem indicates that 


this was a temporary assumption of glory, in order to be, if we may so ex- 


t 


press it, a counterpoise to that which virtually—to the Jews—seemed to 
end the fondly anticipated Christship of Jesus, giving a most direct proof 
that the covenant and prophets would yet be fulfilled. The voice of the 
Father, lovingly acknowledging (having previously in answer to prayer 
brought about this supernatural change in David’s Son) the Christship of 
Jesus and the power thus committed unto Him, binds the whole together 
into an earnest, actual reception of glory, which, thus represented, shall 
characterize David’s Son and Lord when He comes to restore the fallen 
throne and Kingdom, and reigns indeed and in truth the manifested 
Christ. ‘The presence of the Father and some kind of avowal, or, confes- 
sion, or acquiescence is requisite to meet the requirements of prediction 
(comp. Prop. 83) concerning the Coming of the Messiah in His Kingdom 
(as e.g. Dan. 7; Ps. 2, etc.), and thus perfect the representation of the real 
Lheocratic position of Jesus.° Surely, when considering how many partic- 
ulars this transfiguration meets, how it demonstrates in the most forcible 
manner ‘* Zhe Christ ;’’ how it supplies additional evidence of the ultimate 
manner of procedure in the Redemptive scheme, 7 is folly to ascribe all 
this, compressed into a few brief sentences, to the natural descriptive 
powers of ‘* uneducated and ignorant’’ men, or to make it out a trivial, un- 
important affair not worthy of our special attention.® Viewed, as we have 
done, in the light of the great, leading doctrine of the Kingdom, it stands 
forth, pre-eminently, as a Divine confirmation of the Theocratic Kingship 
of Jesus, of the glory of His saints, and of the happiness of the nations 
who shall witness it—a fact so striking and corroborative of the ultimate 
Redemption of saints and of the race, that Peter seizes upon it as a grand 
proof that Jesus shall come unto so great Salvation,’ 

' Sirr (First Res., p. 60), in his reply to Gibbs, aptly refers to the fact that Peter, one 
of the eye-witnesses, employs the same word ‘‘ power” used by Mark. 

* Nast (Com., Matt. 7: 1-13) speaks of the transfiguration ‘‘as an earnest of that glory 
which was His destined inheritance,’’ which “typically foreshadows the earnest of glory 
which was promised to the faithful followers of Christ,’’ and which ‘is an emblem of the 
Kingdom of glory in which the risen saints shall dwell with their Saviour.’ It ‘ strength- 
ened Jesus for the last decisive struggle,” and encouraged ‘the faith” of the disciples. 
While he thus correctly makes the transfiguration a resemblance of the future, he errs 
in two particulars: (1) He makes it “typical,” ‘an emblem,” whereas it was a realistic 
representation ; and (2) he does not link this transfiguration scene with the previous con- 


text (Matt. 16 : 28), but makes it, ‘‘Christ’s providential coming to overturn the whole 
Jewish policy in the destruction of Jerusalem, by which catastrophe the Christian 


a 


562 THE TITEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 158, 


Church was finally and fully separated from Judaism.’’ A number of Pre-Millenariagal 
like Nast, make the transfiguration typical of the Kingdom, while others more correctly 
affirm it to bea real actual resemblance of the appearance of Christ and the saints in 
the Kingdom ; and this, probably, is also the opinion of the former, since they regard it 
as “an earnest,” ‘‘an example,” ‘*a representation on asmaller scale,” etc. When eg, 
Olshausen says: ‘*The transfiguration was intended to prefigure the Kingdom of God, | 
in which the glorified saints shall dwell with Jesus,” he evidently means, as his addi- 
tional remarks show, that this occurrence was not strictly a type (which may be differ-_ 
ent from the antitype) but a real likeness. 

8 It is sufficient for our argument that Moses represented the body or portion of the 
saints who died. And, for aught we know, he may have had a resurrection body; at 
least this conjecture is quite as good as that of Lange, etc., that spirits have corporiety — 
or form, or that his body was used on this occasion, or that (as Th. Aquinas) he made- 
use of a body not his own, or that (as Delitzsch) he assumed a visible appearance con- 
formable to his future body, or that (as Grotius) God gave power to see the body in this 
instance, etc. Yet we may give a reason for our conjecture. Kurtz (His. Old Cov., vol, 
3, p. 495), when answering the question, ‘‘ Why should Jehovah Himself bury Moses?” — 
says: ‘It is true that Moses was not saved from death in the same manner as Enoch and 
Elijah ; he really died and his body was really buried—this is expressly stated in the © 
Bible history—but we may assume, with the greatest probability, that, like them, he was” 
saved from corruption. Men bury the corpse that it may pass into corruption. If Jeho- 
vah, therefore, would not suffer the body of Moses to be buried by men, it is but natural 
to seek for the reason in the fact that he did not intend to leave him to corruption, but 
at the very time of his burial communicated some virtue by His own hand, which saved 
the body from corruption,” ete. Why not, however, assume that He buried him in order 
that his resurrection might be more privately (as the translations, etc.) secured? The 
justice of God being satisfied by his death, grace is specially manifested in view of his 
typical character (as Mediator or Prophet), etc., and because of the toreknown fact of his 
participating in this very transaction, A resurrection similar to Christ's, without seeing 
corruption, would suit this typical character. But we have more than this :—Jude'’s. 
reference to the body of Moses (v. 9) seems to favor a resurrection. Why did the devil 
claim the body, if not in view of the fall and its doom to corruption or the grave? If it 
was to be buried like other bodies and Leleflin the grave, there could have been no cause 
of fispute—even suppose the body would be embalmed or made incorruptible, yet it 
was bound, like all other dead, by death, that Satan (as Paul says, Heb. 2:14, “He has 
the power of death’) introduced and wields. The ground of disputation was that 
something very special, quite out of the ordinary way of disposal, was to be done with the 
body of Moses. What so reasonable as to suppose a resurrection, which Satan would 
undoubtedly oppose as an entrance into and interference with his dominion ; especially 
when this was done previous to the provision made by Christ by which death could be 
overcome, etc. ? Moses, no doubt, gave, by the particular sin mentioned, Satan an oppor- 
tunity to press his claim ; God allowed it so far as death itself was concerned, but may 
have tempered the same with mercy by a brief detention. = 

4 It seems strange that notwithstanding the accumulated proof that the disciples saw a_ 
transient representation of ‘‘ the Christ’’ as he would appear in His Kingdom, that a 
men, under the influence of a theory and of hostility to Millenarianism, shonld en. 
deavor to make this transfiguration no fulfilment of Matt. 16: 27, 28, and in doing this 
urge the destruction of Jerusalem (which John only survived) as the fulfilment. How 
this can be reconciled with a coming in glory, with a coming of the Son of Man (i.e. in His 
humanity), etc., we are not informed. More than this: this coming is specifically pre- 
dicted, over against all such assertions, to be one, not for the destruction of Jerusalem but 
for its salvation, as eg. Ps. 102: 16, ‘‘ when the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear mm 
His qlory,’’ —with which compare Micah 3 : 12 in connection with following chapter. Zech 
14, Amos 9: i1, ete. The very selection of the mount, distant from the temple and Jern 
salem, was no doubt intentional, in order to give no basis—inferential—to some of th 
interpretations of this coming. It may be added: the glorified condition of Ch is 
Moses, and Elias thus indicates, as various Props. prove, the futurity of the Kingdom,— 
Kingdom not to be realized at the First Advent in humiliation, not during the absen 
of the Bridegroom, but at the Sec. Advent, when He and His saints come ‘in glory. 

5 Olshausen, Com. loci, makes a suggestion which will arrest the attention of the crit 
student, viz.: that this acknowledgment of the Father thus given was virtually thus ap 
pointing Him the Ruler and Lord of the earth, and that the Saviour refers back to a 
transaction when He says ‘‘all power was given (so Greek) to me in heaven and OB 


. 


' 
A 


ERop. 153.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. i OOS 


earth.’’ Kendrick, in a foot-note, adds: ‘‘the Aorist ‘was given’ seems to point to a 
special occasion of the bestowment of the power, and may confirm the author’s view.” How 
this adds an argument to the realily of the occurrence need not be stated. That this virt- 
ually insured such authority to Jesus is indisputable, but the reader must observe the 
caution, that while this is so, it was thus delegated to Him, not outwardly assumed, see- 
ing that from this state of glorification He returned to His state of humiliation, May we 
add :—how greatly this transfiguration must have encouraged David’s Son to meet death. 

6 This indicates how to estimate such criticisms ase.g. West. Review, Jan., 1873, p. 94, 
that when Jesus promised His disciples that some should see Him coming in His kingdom, 
He was ‘evidently mistaken,’’ implying that it never took place. So also the use 
Spiritualists make of this sublime scene, viz.: degrading it into an indorsement of the 
anti-scriptural seeking after the spirits of the dead. Thus, e.g., Howitt (His. Supernat., 
vol. 1, p. 218) makes this an ‘‘ express abrogation of the Mosaic law regarding the spirits 
of the dead.’’ Jesus is constituted into a medium and His important works are performed 
through the spirits of the dead. Is there a truth, that some men will not pervert? 

1 Pre-Millenarians hold fast to this consoling, hopeful view of the transfiguration ; many 
writers of eminence in this country and Europe substantially present the interpretation 
as given. But the reader is cautioned against two errors engrafted upon this division of 
classes. 1. The class of mortal men, thus represented, is not (as a few allege) a special, or 
another, race placed in an Adamic condition relative to Salvation, but the regular descend- 
ants of our fallen race, elevated and restored through Christian and Theocratic influences 
to a state of purity and holiness. Otherwise a Perfect Redeemer would manifest Himself 
unable to restore a forfeited blessing, to save the race as avrace. This class also beconie saints, 
but subordinate to the saints raiséd to special 'Theocratic position under ‘‘ the Christ.” 
2. We are not authorized (as the Duke of Manchester in The Finished Mystery), to limit the 
saints elevated in the Theocracy to Kingship and Priesthood with Christ, to those living 
between the First and Second Advents. The transfiguration which introduces Moses 
and Elias who lived before, evidences this fact, which is abundantly proven by the funda- 
mental basis of this dispensation, viz.: that we live under the Abrahamic covenant, renew- 
ed in Christ, and which (Prop. 50) contains the promise of inheritance. Hence the Script- 
ures, logically, as flowing legitimately from a consecutive Plan, insist upon an engraft- 
ing on the Jewish stock, a continuation of the election, the virtual becoming by adoption 
the children of Abraham, so that we may inherit with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob... The 
glorified saints represent all—of the past ages—who are worthy to inherit the Kingdom 
and glory with the Christ, and hence (as Judge Jones, Noles, p. 173) we may regard our 
Lord’s brief intercourse with these departed saints as a type, or exhibition on a small 
seale, of the society and intercourse between Him and His redeemed in His Kingdom. 
In this sense, it was a fulfilment of His Promise (Matt. 16 : 28), for it was an open mani- 
festation of Himself, as Son of Man, in the glory with which He will appear in His 
Kingdom. 


Obs. 6. In this connection it may be well to consider the disputed pas- 
sage, Matt. 10 : 23: ‘* Ye shall not have gone over (marg. end or finish) the 
cities of Israel, till the Son of man be come.’’ Under the influence of the 
Church-Kingdom theory, this Scripture has received the most varied in- 
terpretations. Barnes (Com. loci) gives the most prevailing, when he 
makes the Coming of the Son of man to mean “‘ the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem and the end of the Jewish economy.’ 'This is contradicted by the fact, 
well expressed by Olshausen (Com. loci), that the Coming of ‘* the Son of 
man’ ‘‘has a definite doctrinal signification—it always refers to the 
(Parousia) Second Coming.’’? The phrase, so expressive of His humanity, 
indicates a visible, personal Coming, which was not exhibited at the de- 
struction of Jerusalem. Beside this, all excepting John were deceased 
before the city was overthrown. ‘This direct reference to a personal Com- 
ing is also opposed to the conjectures that it denotes the outpouring of the 
Spirit on the day of Pentecost (which was the sending of the Comforter 
by Christ) or to Christ’s presence in the Church (which is never desig- 
nated as the Coming of the Son of man). Others, seeing that the phrase- 
ology involves a personal presence, suppose that (as Lightfoot) His resur- 


564 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 158. 


rection is denoted ; but this is always spoken of as a rising from the dead, ~ 
not asa distinctive Coming of the Son of man. Others make it to mean : 
‘¢ You will not need to hasten through all the towns of Judea, in the per-— 
secution which you are to meet with ; I will be with you again ere that,” 
but, as Olshausen remarks, this is against fact, for *‘ Jesus does not come to 
them, but they come back (Luke 9 : 10) to Jesus ; besides, it Is a harsh in- 
terpretation not suitable to the spirit of the language.” Olshausen’s own 
view is, that there isa blending of the subsequent mission of the disciples 
with the present one, reaching down through their successors fo the Second 
Advent. This interpretation is ably advocated by Sirr (frst Mes., pp. 
61, 62), who paraphrases, ‘‘ Ye shall not finish the reformation of the cities 
of Israel, ye shall not perfect these cities, till the Son of man be come.” 
But this is evidently seeking after a meaning, and making up one to suit 
the case, for the language appears to be specifically addressed ¢o the disei- 
ples, is at variance with the expressed itinerary of the disciples through the 
cities of the Jews (which was the work then actually in progress), and is 
not applicable, owing to the contemplated downfall of those cities.’ There 
are ouly two interpretations which reconcile, fully, this passage with the — 
peculiar phraseology contained in it, and, especially, without doing vio- 
lence to the implied personal Coming. The first is that of Newton, 
Wilson, etc., viz., that the Son of man alludes to His triumphal entry — 
into Jerusalem, which occurred subsequently (Matt. 21: 1-11). This is 
represented as a typical Coming of the Son of Man, being (v. 5) a fulfil: 
ling of the prophet, ‘‘ Behold, thy King cometh unto thee,” etc., and was 
so regarded (v. 9) by the multitudes. This took place before the disciples 
had made the tour of the cities, and meets the conditions of the passage. 
The second is that the transfiguration, which also occurred after this say-— 
ing, is in all respects a fulfilment of the passage—the Coming of the Son— 
of man in His personal appearance being accurately represented by the 
transaction as we have just delineated. ‘This Scripture, therefore, which 
has been so persistently used in advocacy of the Church-Kingdom theory, — 
etc., is susceptible of a far more consistent and scriptural explanation 
from our standpoint than from that of our opponents.’ 


1 This passage is variously disposed of by interpreters, Thus, e.g., Brown (Com., loci) — 
rejects Lange’s application to Christ’s coming to them personally before they had com-— 
pleted the round of the cities, and refers it to the establishment of the Church and the 
destruction of Jerusalem, saying: ‘The Coming of the ‘Son of Man’ has a fixed 
doctrinal sense,” which is true, but he certainly fails to designate it. Dr. Alexander. 
(Com.) considers it ‘‘an indefinite expression, meaning sometimes more and sometimes — 
less, but here equivalent to saying, till the object of your mission is accomplished.” 
Nast (Com. loci): ‘By this Coming of the Son of Man we may understand either the 
ushering in of the new dispensation by the resurrection and ascension of Christ, or the 
overthrow of Judaism by the destruction of Jerusalem.’’ Rev. Brown (the Evangelist) 
and others make this reference future, relating to the future period of the Jews’ conver- 
sion, when, they say, Christ will come before it is finished. But this is forced, (1) because 
personally addressed to the apostles ; (2) applicable to a work then in progress, and. i 
places then existing ; and (3) the Jews, as a nation, converted under Elijah and the 
Messiah, and not under a mission of the apostles. <A writer, E. M., in the Prophetie 
Times (vol. 7, p. 166), gives a view (which Dr. Alexander in his Com. calls a ** good: 
sense,” although rejecting it) which merits the attention of the student ; in the parallel 
passage, Luke 10: 1, we find that ‘‘ After these things the Lord appointed other seventy 
also, and sent them two and two before His face into every city and place whither Ile 
Himself would come.’’ ‘The idea then is that the twelve, just as the seventy, acted as fore- 
runners, preparing’for the personal arrival of Jesus Himself. The only objection that can 
be urged against this interpretation is the one assigned by Olshausen in the text as appM- 


Prop. 153. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 565 


cable to the twelve. If admissible, it would preserve the distinctive personality 
included in the phrase ‘‘Son of Man.” 

® Hither of the two interpretations given in the text, as well as the last one presented 
in the previous note, afford a meaning which brings the passage in harmony with the 
analogy of Scripture. Able men adopt the one or the other, and recently the interpreta- 
tion applying it to the transfiguration has gained ground. (So e.g. Rev. Dr. Nast, art. 
in West. Uh. Advocate, Aug. 6, 1879.) 


Obs. 6. Before concluding, it is well to contemplate an additional cir- 
cumstance, which conclusively shows that the transfiguration was both a 
reality and a representation of the future Advent. The veritable appear- 
ance of Elias at the transfiguration suggested the question of the disciples 
(Matt. 17 : 10), ‘* Why, then, say the Scribes, that Elias must first come ?’ 
Jesus had just proven Himself to be ‘‘ The Christ ;’? Elas had been seen 
with Him, and Peter had, in view of the offer he made to erect a tent for. 
him, hoped that he would remain and fulfil what Malachi (4 : 5, 6) had 
predicted of him. But Elias disappeared, for “‘ when they lifted up 
their eyes, they saw no man, save Jesus only,”’ and ¢his removal prompted 
the question. All this sustains the real occurrence of the wonderful pre- 
figurement of the Second Advent. Notice, however, not only what sug- 
gested the question but the reply of the Saviour. The Scribes held (comp. 
Justin’s Dial. with Trypho., ch. 8) that Elias would be a forerunner of the 
Messiah when He came to re-establish the Kingdom; the disciples saw 
him, not as forerunner, but coming after Jesus came, and then instead of 
remaining he departed from them. ‘They wish to know whether the 
Scribes were not in the wrong concerning this opinion. ‘The answer is 
given that the Scribes taught correctly, for ‘“* Jesus answered and said unto 
them, “lias truly cometh first’’ (as the Scribes say), ‘‘ and’? (when he shall 
come) ‘‘ he will restore all things.’’ That is, the appearance of Elias in the 
transfiguration and his departure does not make that doctrine of the 
Seribes nugatory. Then follows the allusion to John the Baptist: “ But 
L say unto you, that Elias ts come already and they knew him not, but have 
done unto him whatsoever they listed.” The intent of this is sufficiently 
plain from Luke 1:16, 1%, viz., that ‘‘ he (John) shall go before Him in 
the spirit and power of Elias ;’’ that is, he should ke a forerunner of the 
Messiah like unto Elias who is also predicted to be such. But a deep 
reason underlies this likening of John to Elias. Let the reader turn back 
to the propositions pertaining to the preaching of the Kingdom, and he 
will find abundant proof showing that John actually tendered the Kingdom 
on condition of repentance to the Jewish nation. He thus came as Llias 
will come, having the same spirit and power, and, if the nation had received 
him, would have accomplished what Llias ts to perform. The more 
modern notion that John was in all respects the Klias predicted in 
Mal. 4:5, and that no other need to be expected from the language of the 
Saviour here, was unknown to the early (Brookes, “7. of Proph. In- 
i77p., p. 90, says “‘down to Jerome’’), Church. . One of the earliest 
Commentators, the martyr Victorinus (On the Apoc.), asserts that Elias 
will yet come in the future, quoting Mal. as follows: “‘ Zo, J will send to 
you Elias the Tishbite, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the children, ac- 
cording to the time of calling, to recall the Jews to the faith of the people that 
succeed them.’’ Tertullian (On the Res., ch. 22), Commodianus (dnstruct., 
Sec. 41) and others, make Elias still future, an idea being developed that 
_ he would be a contemporary of the Antichrist at the last times. So deeply 


566 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. _ [PBor. iam 


rooted was this opinion, derived from the primitive Church, that even 
Augustine (City of God, B. 20, ch. 28) advocates the personal Coming of 
Elias and the conversion of the Jews before the Advent of Christ to judg- 
ment. Modern commentators have revived and defended this early view, 

as e.g. Olshausen, Judge Jones (Notes), Ryle, Hitzig, Maurer, ‘Ewald, 

Alford, Steir, Fausset, Mal. 4:5, 6. It not being our purpose to discuss 
this point, ! but only to indicate its relationship to the Second Advent, a 
brief mention of the reasons why John the Baptist is not to supersede, or 
make unnecessary, the still future Coming of the Prophet Elias, must 
suffice. (1) John, aw inspired man, directly affirms, in answer to the 
priests and Levites (Jno. bese 1), that he was noé Elyah, which he could 
not have done, if he was the one predicted by Malachi 4 : (2) John was. 
a harbinger of the Kingdom (i.e., he tendered it, and in fi sense is Elias), 
but the Jews rejected the offer of the Kingdom, and he did not ‘* restore 
all things’? as Elijah the prophet, more successful, will do.? (8). John 
did not come ‘‘ defore the coming of the great and dreadful day of the 
Lord,’’? which in Malachi js associated with that terrible period when the 
wicked shall be burned up as stubble, etc., a day which, awful as it is to 
the ungodly, is designed’ (not, as some assert to make out a case, for the 
destruction, but) for the deliverance of Jerusalem, as is seen by Joel 2 : 31 
seq.—and which is linked with the Second Advent.* (4) That John is only 
Ehas in a certain sense is apparent from the indefinite language of Matt. — 
11:14. ‘ All the prophets and the law prophesied wntie John, and if ye 

will receive (it), this is Elias which was for to come.’? On this verse 
Olshausen observes that the clause ‘‘ if ye will receive (it)? with a compari-_ 
son of all the passages ‘‘ clearly shows that the Redeemer called him so | 
(Elias) only in a certain sense, viz., because he wrought in the spirit and 
power of Elijah, as Scripture says, Luke 1 : 17.’* (5) John coming in © 
the spirit of Khas is rejected, and thus is no¢ the Elias, because Jesus Him- | 
self, of whom he is the forerunner, is also rejected by the nation, while 
the forerunner of the manifested ‘‘ Christ’? is swecessful with the nation ; | 
the mission of both John and Elias being to the same nation. (6) Those 
passages must not be interpreted according to the Jewish standpoint then — 
entertained, viz., that there was but *‘ one captivity under Babylon, but — 
one return from Babylon, one Advent of Khas, one Advent of the Messiah 
and that His Advent of glory and power in His Kingdom. Whereas, in — 
fact, wo oppressing Babylons were foretold, and ¢wo returns from captiv- 
ity, ¢wo Advents of Elias, and ¢wo Advents of Messiah, and yet but one 
Kingdom.’’ (Jones’s Notes on Scripture, foot-note, p. 179.) The rejection 
ot the Kingdom and its postponement serves to explain the apparent diffi- 
culties and adds most forcibly to the inspiration of the Word, evincing a 
preservation of unity in the most delicate of Divine purposes. Such a 
remarkable preservation of agreement, indicative both of God’s willingness 
to make John the Elias, if the nation had repented under his preaching, 
and of God’s foreknowing that John would de rejected and that another 
Hlias was therefore appointed to come, is deyond the ability of *‘ mere- 
fishermen’’ to concoct, bearing as they doa relationship to ¢he deepest pur- 
poses of God. The two Adyents, the one in humiliation and the other in 
glory (the latter transiently represented in the transfiguration), forms ‘he 
hoy y for apprehending these extraordinary statements—preserves consist-— 
ency in prophet, John, and Jesus—satisfactorily answers the question of 
the disciples, and directs us in accepting of the transfiguration as a real- 


PrRop,, 153. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 567 


ity, pointing onward to the glory to be revealed at the Second Advent, for 
which glory the Jewish nation shall have Elias sent to them on «@ special 
and successful mission.° 


1 See a good art. by Rev. Dr. Richards (art. 3) in Lord’s Theol. and Lit. Journal for 
Ap., 1857, who quotes from what must be an able writer, signed Azor, Jewish Chronicle, 
vol. 4, p. 132, etc. Jones has interesting remarks in Noles on Scripture. So also Rev. 
Garratt, Proph. Times, p. 109 seq., May, 1868. Comp. our reference to Elijah under Prop. 
113, where his specific mission to the Jewish nation is stated. Dr. Craven, in note, p. 
340, Lange’s Com. fev,, adopts the view advocated by us and so many Pre-Millenarians. 

2 So Kurtz (Sac. His., 8. 145), ‘that Elias truly should first come and restore all 
things for the Lord’ s second appearance unto judgment, but that, already at His first appear- 
ance in lowliness, an Elias had appeared in John the Baptist.” ~ 

3 Drs. Ebrard and Kendrick, in attempting to correct Olshausen (Com. on Matt. 11 : 14), 
. who correctly refers ‘“‘the great and terrible day” to the Second Advent (when Jesus 
comes to tread the winepress, etc.), certainly are incorrect when they make ‘‘the day of 
the Lord” to begin with Christ's incarnation. See this amply refuted Prop. 138. 
Besides this, these very men, excepting in this solitary place, are unwilling to make out 
a dispensation of mercy and grace to be ‘‘ terrible,” etc. 

4 Lord (Theol. and Lit. Journ., Oct., 1860, p. 240) interprets: ‘+The expression, ‘if ye 
are willing to receive (it),’ i.e. are disposed to receive (it), means, not if ye will believe 
what Isay, but if ye will take it in the sense in which I sayit.” We are, however, 
inclined to receive the interpretation of Dr. Richards (Theol. and Lit. Journ., Ap., 1857, p. 
597), which supplies (the verb having in the original no object expressed) ‘‘him” 
instead of ‘‘it,’? making the phrase ‘‘if ye will receive him,” etc. This accords best with 
the facts in the case, the Kingdom being offered on condition of repentance by John, and 
if the nation had received him he would indeed have become Elias to them. Hence the 
hypothetical statement. See Judge Jones’s Noles on Matt. 17:10 seq., and Alford loci. 
The student will carefully notice, that while John’s mission to the nation as a na- 
tion was a failure, such a failure is not attributed to the second forerunner, but that the 
nation as such will repent and receive Jesus as the Christ (Zech. 12:10, etc.). Elias 
will be specially commissioned to the nation, and the result, as predicted, will follow, 
not before (as Augustine, etc.) the Sec. Advent, but after the same, and after the gathering 
of Antichrist’s forces against Jerusalem. 

5 Barnes (Com.), and others, make the only fulfilment of Mal. 4 : 5; 6, that can be ex- 
pected, to be realized in John. But they make no effort to meet the difficulties of their 
interpretation by informing us how the original prophecy is fulfilled in John. If they 
are correct, then it follows that the inspired prediction has failed to find its mate. This 
we cannot receive. Fairbairn (Typology, vol. 1, p. 333-4) makes Elias a type of John, 
and refuses credence to a future coming. All that need to be said in reply is this: 
taking his own affirmed position, that the antitype must always be more significant and 
higher than the type, we find that John (the alleged antitype) sinks beneath Elias (the 
supposed type), simply because what is ascribed to Elias was not realized in John, Be- 
sides this: prophecy and its fulfilment is not dependent upon our faith or lack of it, 
Barbour (Three Worlds, p. 121) makes Elijah a type of Christ and His res. saints 
(others refer it to Christ alone), and presents some fanciful applications of it to the 
Church. But Jesus speaks of Elias as being another person, and the prophecy gives him 
a distinctive personality not only by name but by designating him ‘the prophet.” The 
stress laid on the phrase, ‘‘he will restore all things,” as only applicable to Jesus, over- 
looks the usage of Scripture, which attributes to instrumentalities that which is done by 
God, as e.g. the apostles are ‘‘the salt of the earth,” ‘‘the light of the world,”’ etc., 
which, as other Scriptures show, they only are through Christ. Some enthusiasts, like 
the leader of ‘‘The White Brethren” (Art. on, Appletons’ Cyclop.), and others, have 
claimed to be this coming Elijah, but instead of observing that his mission was one of 
mercy and reformation to the Jews, they denounced vengeance and the destruction of 
the world. Such claimants require no refutation. A few writers make this Elijah to 
be simply a representative man who will come like John the Baptist, i.e. in his spirit, 
etc. But the reasons already assigned forbid our rejection of that Elijah whose person- 
ality is described by the office he held, ‘‘the prophet.’? Rev. Andrews (Bib. Sacra, No. 
96, Ap., 1866, p. 254), in behalf of ‘‘the Catholic Apostolic Church’’ (which professes to 
have, by divine direction, restored the ministry of the apostles), says : ‘‘ They believe 
that the restoration of apostles is the fulfilment of the promise to send Elijah the prophet 
before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord,” ‘Without pressing the 


568 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 153. 


plain grammatical sense as utterly opposed to this sef-appropriation (just as they appro- 
priate to themselves the sealing process, the 144,000 of Rev.) of the passage; without — 
laying stress on this mission of Elijah being exclusively promised to the Jewish nation 
and not to Gentiles ; without calling into question, and rejecting as untenable, their 
claim of authoritative revelation under the plea of special divine illumination, it is 
amply sufficient to say, that the assumed end contemplated. by their Elijah-mission is 
wholly at variance with the plain teachings of the Word. They ascribe to this apostolic 
restoration the success of Elijah’s mission in reuniting men, and developing, to a 
remarkable extent, the faith and strength of the Church before the Sec. Advent, which, as 
is shown under various Propositions (on Unbelief, Antichrist, etc.), contradicts the 
portraiture of the Church as given by inspiration. Admitting that they include learned 
(Kurtz's Ch. His.) and pious men, and that they are aiding in gathering out a people for 
His name, yet the smallness of their numbers and evident lack of success, should cause 
them to feel some doubt respecting the soundness of their conclusions, based on affirmed 
inspirations, seeing that Elijah’s predicted success does not result from their doctrine 
and labors. We only add: the view of a still future coming of Elijah is not merely held 
by Pre-Millenarians, but, as already seen from our quotations, by others. It was 
strongly rooted in ancient writers, so that Theodoret, Theophylact, Cyril, and even such 
as Origen, Chrysostom, and Jerome entertained it. It is of interest to notice a singular © 
parallel, viz., that the first forerunner was provided by special supernatural means 
(Luke 1:18, being conceived after the ordinary course of nature), the second will also 
come through the supernatural. 


Obs. 7. This distinction existing in the coming Kingdom (as intimated 
e.g. under Props. 86, 114, 118, 124, 180, etc.) and evidenced in the King, 
the glorified saints, the converted and believing Jews, and the accepted 
Gentiles, is even presented to us in the tabernacle and temple. While it is 
true (so Kurtz, Ch. His., vol. 2, p. 411) that the typical interpretation of 
the tabernacle can easily become absurd when pressed (as in the case of 
parables) to every minute particular, yet it is also true, as the Apostle 
declares (Heb. 8 : 5), that the tabernacle was made according to a pattern 
furnished, and that there is deep significance in it, being ‘‘a shadow of 
good things to come”’ (Heb. 10: 1). Now, aside from the ceremonial and 
sacrificial aspects, the reader is reminded that the Tabernacle was Theo- 
cratically associated, and therefore relates to the Theocratic ordering. It— 
was (Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 96) *‘ partly to be a palace uf His Presence 
(God’s) as King of Israel, Ex. 40 : 34, 35.”’ As “‘ the tent of assembling,” 
‘the habitation’ of the King, etc., it foreshadows the future, especially 
in its three grand divisions: (1) the habitation proper consisting of the 
sanctuary and the holy of holies or holiest of all (the partition between 
which is abrogated for the priesthood in the Christ); (2) the outer court 
for the Jewish nation to assemble ; (3) the external space for Gentiles. If 
at all typical of the future Theocratic ordering, it certainly refers to the 
threefold nearness to the King as exemplified in the glorified kings and 
priests who are associated with Him, in the Jewish nation which is His 
special inheritance, and in the Gentiles who joyfully acknowledge this 
Theocratic supremacy. 

_ Goodwin (The Israelite Indeed, Vol. 9, p. 31, etc.) makes numerous typical applica- 
tions. Fairbairn (Typology, Vol. 2, Ch. 3, Sec. 2) refers in detail to numerous typical 
interpretations, and gives his own conclusion that it applies to Christ and His people, 
etc. While a descending to the minutie may lead to the conjectural and fanciful, it 
seems that a reference to the future Theocratic ordering in some of its aspects, is legit- 
imate. The personal dwelling of God there, the manifestation of His glory, His en- 
thronement as the earthly Ruler, the patterning after the heavenlies, the place of meet- 
ing and witness, the divine superintendence and devising, the exhibition of beauty and 


splendor, ‘‘ the seat of the divine kingdom on earth,’’ the accessibility to the King, the 
holiness belonging to it, the special consecration pertaining to it, the priesthood con- 


PRop. 158, | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 569 


nected with it, the worship and homage tendered, the honorable and dignified service 
attached to it, the removal of the one class from all servile employment and their exclu- 
sive possession by God, the intermediatory service between the King and the subjects, 
the personal purity and adornment required, the clear and unmistakable revelation of 
the divine will—ali typify a similar condition and aspect in the restored Theocracy. 
It is only typical (comp. e.g. Jer. 3 : 16, 17; Zech. 14 : 20, 21, etc.) of a corresponding 
exhibition, on a grander scaie, of ‘‘the Glory of the Lord,” of Theocratic rule, of special 
nearness to the King, of required consecration and holiness, of participation in the favor 
and blessing of God. 


570 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, — 


Proposition 154. Vhis Theocratic LKingdom includes the visi- 
ble reign of the risen and glorified saints here on the earth, 


This subject, necessarily alluded to in many places, is worthy of 
separate consideration. It is foreshadowed in the ancient The- 
ocracy ; for, while the supreme legislative power was vested in 
God, other rulers or judges (see e.g. Horne’s /ntrod., vol. 2, p. 42) 
were appointed under His direction, by whom the laws were 
administered, etc. Let the Davidic Kingdom be restored as pre- — 
dicted, and, in the very nature of the case, to verify the promises, 
the Theocratic king will also have fis associated rulers assuring 
the most perfect administration of the laws, and securing the most 
perfect government, productive of peace, prosperity, and happi- 
ness, such as the world has never yet witnessed. The Word 
emphatically teaches that those thus chosen, accounted worthy of 
this rulership, are the saints. They are ‘‘ joint heirs’? (Rom. 
8:17) with the Christ, who graciously divides, without marring 
His own superiority and supremacy (but rather exalts it thereby), 
His own inheritance with them. What Jesus, the Christ, inherits, 
has been abundantly shown, viz., this Theocratic-Davidie King- 
dom, in which His exalted Rulership is to be manifested. Hence, 
to inherit with the Christ, has a@ most deep and precious signifi- 
cancy, indicative of joint rulership with Him in His coming King- 
dom. ‘To be inheritors with Christ in His Kingdom evinces the 
astonishing wisdom of God in the Plan of Redemption, that 
without doing violence either to His moral government or to the 
free agency of fallen man, He raises up and purifies a material 
which, when the time comes, 7s employed in perpetuating the 
purity, holiness, etc., of a Divine-Human government again re- — 
stored with untold grandeur to a needy, groaning world. 

As we have before intimated, such a powerful Theocratic Kingdom as will be exhibited 
under the mighty Messiah, David’s Son, is necessitated to counteract the fearful in- _ 
roads of human depravity. A glance over the divine Record shows, that at the close of 
every age or dispensation, the depravity of man was in the ascendency. ‘Thus it was at 
the Deluge, at the deliverance of the Jewish nation, at the First Advent. ete. ; and thus, 
it is specially predicted, will it be at the end of this age. Hence, God having patiently 
waited, tested and tried human nature, and during the triai gathered out the material 
suitable for His purpose, will suddenly and irresistibly manifest His Theoeratic order, 


originally designed, now made so overwhelmingly strong by the addition of this previously 
prepared element of destined power that its supremacy is forever insured, 


Obs. 1. Before assigning the Scripture bearing on the subject, Jet us 
caution the reader, whatever his views may be relating to it, not to dis- 
parage our doctrine concerning it, lest peradventure he be found detracting — 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. o7v1 


from the honor promised to the righteous. We have been deeply pained 
to find, even among eminent men, such language held respecting this doc- 
trine of the joint rulership of the saints with Jesus Christ on earth, that is 
simply presumptpous, designating it as ‘* degrading,”’ etc., and as far less 
honorable and desirable than the indefinite, unexplained reign assigned by 
themselves, and which they suppose God will bestow in some spiritual 
Kingdom in heaven or in the universe. This reigning, whatever it is, is 
the Lord’s appointment and not ours; and hence to ascertain its true 
meaning, that which God has said concerning it ought to be diligentl 
compared. And when the plain grammatical meaning undoubtedly teaches 
just such a reign as we advocate, it ill becomes the believer in the Word, 
even if he rejects the teaching, to speak or write disrespectfully of it.? 
Surely the position in which we place the saints (reigning jointly with 
Christ), and the design of such a reign (the delivering of the world from 
all the.results of sin, and filling it with blessing and glory), should protect 
our doctrine from extreme charges, which tend to materially lessen the 
promises of God, and virtually to reject—as unworthy of credence—the 
honor of the Messianic Kingdom. ‘Taking for our guidance the principle 
of interpretation thus far adopted, we firmly hold that God’s promises are 
to be fulfilled ust as they read ; that He means what He says through the 
Spirit, and intends to fulfilit ; and that such meaning is ascertained, not 
by engrafting another upon it, but, by that which the words in their plain 
grammatical connection indicate. ‘Taking such a position, 7¢ follows, of 
necessity, that a veritable kingship or rulership must be received. How 
else can we explain the phrases to “‘ reign with Him,’ ‘‘to sit on His 
throne,’ ‘‘to be ruler over His goods,’’ *‘ ruler over many things,’’ *‘ to 
have power over and rule nations,’’ to be ** crowned,” to be ‘‘ Kings’ and 
“* Judges” and ** Princes,’’ ‘to inherit and possess a Kingdom,’’ etc. It 
these do not denote a real, substantial elevation to rulership, great exalted 
honor and authority in the Coming Kingdom, then language itself has no 
precise, adequate meaning. ‘This the words plainly denote, and, however 
much we may feel that such a position is far above our deserts, the aston- 
ishing grace of God will bestow it. Grace adopts us as sons, and as such 
we become ‘‘ heirs of God,’’ and consequently ‘‘ yornt heirs with Christ,”’ 
and then, as an ancient writer (Sel. from the Prop. Scriptures, Anti-Nicene 
Iib., sec. 44) expressed it, ‘‘ all the. faithful are called kings, brought to 
royalty through inheritance.”’ In the Frag. of Cassiodorus (Anti-Nicene 
Inb.), com. on First Epis. of Peter, ch. 2: 9, we have, in accord with this 
idea: ** That we are a chosen race by the election of God is abundantly 
clear. He says royal, because we are called ¢o sovereignty, and belong to 
Christ,’’ ete. The faith of the primitive Church in an actual reign of the 
saints, derived from the grammatical sense of the Word, is so well known, 
that it needs no special illustration.’ 


1 Jn looking over the works of opponents, it will be found that not one of them denies 
the grammatical sense, but upon this sense fasten another to suit their theory. Unbelief 
in God’s promise of such dominion is characteristic of multitudes, and they ridicule 
those who cleave to the grammatical sense. Some scoff and sneer at the idea that a poor 
saint, perhaps now a day laborer,’ a mechanic, or farmer, should years after this be 
raised up and have power as aruler over others. Such a prospect excites their mirth and 
wit ; and they profess to pity the ignorance and weakness of the man who believes in such 
promises. Do such ever pause to reflect, one moment, that if really contained in the 
erammatical sense, it is at least found in God’s Word ; and that all such witticisms only 
become the unbeliever? More than this: do they ever think, that if, after all, this 


572 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


literal sense should be fulfilled, they must, no matter what their professions or piety, in 
so far sustain loss as they have been guilty of disparaging and ridiculing God’s own 
promises ;—the inexcusableness of the conduct being aggravated by the plainness in which 
the promises were given? ‘The objection found in a few authors, ‘‘ How can it be taken 
literally, for where are the subjects over whom they can reign ?” is so,indicative of a lack 
of knowledge of our system of doctrine, of the rudimentary principles of Millenarianism, 
that it deserves no answer, seeing that almost every author on our side distinctly 
announces who these subjects are. Those who cannot tell are to be found among the 
class who deny the perpetuation of the race (Prop. 152) after the Second Advent. 

2 It is also found in the Sibylline Oracles, in the Apocryphal books, as in the ‘‘ Ascension 
of Isaiah,’ ‘* Fourth Book of Esdras,” ‘‘ Book of Enoch,”’ etc. (Comp. e.g. Stuart’s Apoe., 
Vol. i., pp. 42-74.) The entire early Church appreciated the magnificence of these 
promises, and earnestly grasped them by faith. When threatened with death, they in. 
spired the most lively hope, as in»the expressed belief of Ignatius when brought before 
the Emperor Trajan, he declared that the future kingdom of the Lord Jesus should be 
his—‘‘ whose kingdom be my portion.”’ 


Obs. 2. Let us notice next, when this reigning is to take place. It is 
remarkable that we are indebted to the Origenistic opposition to Mille- 
narianism for the introduction of the theory ‘that saints are now reigning 
in the Church—driven to it in the effort to spiritualize away Rev. 20 : 4. 
Augustine has been already quoted (Prop. 90, Obs. 2, and see in same Obs. ; 
by way of contrast, Barnabas) as one of the advocates of the view. ‘This 
is an opinion indorsed by many, and in the past has led even to many a 
deed of violence and blood. For, it is a fact well attested by history, 
that, under the notion that the church is the Kingdom of God, the Rom.- 
ish and other churches, as well as sectaries and heretics, have claimed that 
believers, the saints, are now authorized to reign, bear rule, lay down laws, 
execute them, punish, etc.’ Instead of endeavoring to refute this inter- 
pretation of most precious promises relating to the future and not, as al- 
leged, to the present, let Augustine himself perform this work, when for 
the time he overlooks his own theory of reigning, as follows (City of God, 
B. 20, 8. 17): ‘* Who is so absurd and blinded by contentious opinion- 
ativeness, as to be audacious enough to affirm that in the midst of the ca- 
lanities of this mortal state, God’s people, or even one single saint, does 
live, or has ever lived, or shall ever live, without tears or pain—the fact 
being that the holier a man is, and the fuller of holy desire, so much more 
abundant is the tearfulness of his supplication,’’ etc., quoting as proof a 
number of Scriptures. In another place, he refers to the saints as ‘* pil- 
grims,’ ‘‘ bearing burdens,’’ some ‘‘ feeble minded,’’ others ‘‘ weak,”’ 
some ‘‘ tempted,’’ others ‘‘ overtaken by a fault,’’ all ‘‘ needing grace’’ 
and ‘‘ assistance,’’ being ‘‘ healed while still they sojourn in this earth,”’ 
etc. Now, the condition of the saints, as represented by himself, is utterly 
opposed to the notion of their reigning as promised ; and it is a fact that 
no true believer has ever yet expressed himself as conscious of thus reign- 
ing as predicted. Waving shown the inconsistency of such a notion pre- 
viously (Prop. 90, etc.), it is unnecessary to dwell upon it. The time when 
this reigning 1s to take place is specifically mentioned. Being ‘* joint heurs 
with Christ, ” they ‘‘ inherit the Kingdom’ ‘‘ at His appearing and King- 
dom.”’ Consequently, it occurs at the Second Advent, and after the first 
resurrection. As all these points have been made clear in previous proposi- 
tions, it is only necessary to add that the early Church invariably linked 
the reigning with the resurrection of the saints, as e.g. Polycarp (Zpis., 
ch, 5): ”** He has promised to us that He will raise us again from the dead, 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 573 


and that if we live worthily of Him ‘ we shail also reign together with Him,’ 
provided only that we believe.’’? This is so plain that it is expressly as- 
serted that ‘‘ flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God.’ To in-s 
herit a Kingdom, if it has any propriety of meaning, undoubtedly denotes 
the reception of kingly authority or rulership in the Kingdom—for thus it 
is also explained by parallel passages which follow. But this Kingdom— 
this rulership with Jesus—cannot be inherited by mortal men, it requiring 
immortal beings who resemble the mighty Theocratic King ; for the heir- 
ship with Jesus, the identity of associated rule, the unspeakable honor, 
etc., which can only safely be confided to persons previously prepared for 
it; the duration, the perfection, design, and results of the reizn—all de- 
mand this previous resurrection and glorification.* 


1 The present reigning of the saints in heaven is a cardinal doctrine of the Papacy, and 
in the Creed of Pius IV., Art. 20, is thus referred to: ‘“‘I do likewise believe that the 
saints, reigning together with Christ, are to be honored and invoked ; and that these saints 
offer prayer to God fur us ; and that their relics are to be had in veneration’ (which 
gives rise to Gibbon’s sarcastic remarks, Decl. and Fall., Ch. 28, 8.3). This perversion was 
firmly held by multitudes, illustrated e.g. in The Chron. of Henry of Huntingdon, p. 116, 
where it is said of King Ceadwell in his epitaph : 

‘*“ Sure wise was he to lay his sceptre down, 
And change an earthly for a heavenly crown.” 

And on p. 118, the writer calls the two deceased kings, Ethelred and Kenred, ‘‘ Kings of 
heaven ;' and on page 122 exhorts all to become ‘ Kings of heaven.’’ Many Protestants, 
especially in obituaries, teach the same doctrine of present reigning, having deceased 
saints— over against the most positive teaching to the contrary—already crowned. The 
Anabaptists, Mormons, and others, claim that the title of ‘‘ Kings and Priests” already 
belongs to them; and while this caricaturing of splendid promises may excite pity 
because of delusion, yet it is a fact that many in the church of the past have misapplied 
these promises in the same destructive way. The Papacy may, indeed, have extended 
this to a climax, by the reign of the Virgin Mary, designated ‘‘Queen of Heaven’’ (comp. 
‘ Mariolatry’’ in The North Brit. Review, Feb., 1848, Cumming’s Lects: on ftom., etc.), but 
Protestants have imitated the spirit on a smaller scale ; and both have applied the reign 
of the saints to the Church as now constituted. The plea that the saints were to reign 
on earth, was the plea that Popery often tendered to reconcile its encroachments on the 
civil power, and to apologize for its assumptions of universal power. The most precious 
promises relating to the future were prostituted to cover up its lust after aggrandizement., 
Protestants, too, often imbibed and exhibited the same spirit, not so arrogantly, but 
equally unscriptural. As an illustration, we refer to the speech of Cromwell to the 
‘*Barebone Parliament,’’ which was inspired by the idea that the predicted reign of 
Christ and the saints was to be inaugurated under his auspices: ‘‘Jesus Christ 1s owned 
this day by the call of you, and you own Him by your willingness to appear for Him. 
And you manifest this, as far as poor creatures may do, to be a day of the power of 
Christ. I know you will remember that Scripture, ‘He makes His people willing in the 
day of His power.’ God manifests this to be the day of the power of Christ ; having 
through so much blood and so much trial, as hath been upon these nations, made this to 
be one of the great issues thereof : to have His people called to the supreme authority.’’ 
The speedy overthrow of this alleged supreme authority under Christ did not check the 
misapplication of the Scripture promise. The world is filled with similar assumptions, 
and the present reign of Christ and His saints is taught and enforced by a multitude of 
learned and leading divines. To those who claim a present reign of the saints, the zrony 
(comp. Fausset, Com., 1 Cor. 4 : 8) of the apostle, if nothing else, should prove a profit- 
able study. The Church-Kingdom theory is fruitful of results, and one of the engrafted 
doctrines is this reign. Thus e.g. Brown (Christ's Sec. Coming, p. 477), on Rev. 5 : 10, 
‘‘We shall reign on the earth,” rejects our view, and also its application to reigning’ in 
an eternal state (heaven), and then declares that it applies to ‘‘the Church, as it now 1s, 
upon earth,”’ and represents ‘‘the ultimate triumphs of Christ’s cause upon earth during 
the present state ;’ but how it can do this, when the Church itself at the outcome of this 
dispensation, instead of triumphing, shall be dreadfully persecuted, he fails to inform 
us. All this class, when kings and princes are favorably disposed to their respective 
churches, have much to say about ‘nursing fathers,’’ etc., perverting Mill. predictions. 


574. THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


2 So extensively did this conjunction of the reigning with the period of the resurree- 
tion prevail, and so deeply rooted did it become, that we even find St. Patrick (born 
about a.D. 372, see Neander’s Mem. Ch. Life, p. 433), the apostle to the Irish, after 
alluding to his probable martyrdom, saying: ‘‘ Beyond a doubt we shall rise again in © 
that day with the splendor of the sun, that is with the glory of our Redeemer Jesus 
Christ, who is the Son of the living God, as fellow-heirs with Christ and bearing His im- — 
age ; for we shall reign by Him, and through Him, and with Him.’’ For the saints 
crowned after the resurrection, etc., also see 2 Esdras 2 : 38-43. lLactantius so briefly 
and tersely expresses the general opinion of the early age that we quote it : ‘‘ Those that 
shall be raised from the dead shall rule over them that are alive, in the manner of 
judges.”’ So Irenzus, Justin, Barnabas, and a host of others. ; 

3 As we advance in our argument, we see still more clearly what Jesus meant, Matt. 
21:43, when he said that the Kingdom should be taken from the Jewish nation and 
be given to another, to be gathered out (Prop. 65), i.e. to the saints. This high position 
of inheriting the Kingdom, of becoming kings and priests in a universal Theocracy, was 
tendered to the nation on condition of repentance. The nation rejected the offer ; now 
it is attained by the saints, including the engrafted children of Abraham. This giving of 
the Kingdom denotes the inheriting of it, the actual veal possession of the governing power, 
and this is bestowed upon the faithful. The Jewish nation instead of inheriting the 
Kingdom becomes subject to its dominion. A supremacy is indeed acvorded to it over 
all other nations, owing to its covenanted Theocratic relationship (as we have already ex- — 
plained, Prop. 114), but the saints rule over it. It is the glorified, united to Christ, who 
reign over the unglorified. Tyng (He Will Come, p. 159) correctly observes: ‘‘It is a 
very false representation of Scripture which pictures the Church as subjects of the com- 
ing Kingdom. They shall indeed acknowledge a submission to their Lord, but toward 
the inhabitants of the earth they will assert a majesty. For this they will have been 
qualified by their glorification, and to this they have even now been assigned by prophecy 
and promise.’’ Much is said by mystical writers concerning ‘the mystical body” of 
Christ, Himself being the head and believers His members, the whole forming one body, 
Now without indorsing the mysticism which is so largely fastened on it, yet it is a truth 
—exceedingly precious—that Jesus and His brethren constitute one body, and this union 
is especially made manifestat this glorification and joint-rulership. To the critical stu- 
dent it may be said in this connection, that this ultimate raising up of. Rulers and the 
establishment of a Theocracy answers the objection so often urged by unbelief, viz.:; 
that Revelation, if real, ought to have been given to all nations, and not to have been 
confined to ene, the elect Jewish nation. But such an extension would only have in- 
creased the difficulties of securing the end designed, owing to the perversity—as seen in 
the Jewish nation—of human nature. We are satisfied that the Divine Plan accom- 
plishes the end intended more effectually and speedily—consistent with moral ageney—in 
the way that the Word points out and history unfolds, than if the opposite course, sug- 
gested by unbelief, had been adopted. The mode of procedure adopted by infinite wis- 
dom commends itself even to our short-sightedness, and in the day of the manifestation 
of the sons of God will find no gainsayers, 


Obs. 3. The place where this reign is to be manifested is expressly 
stated : ‘‘We shall reign on (or as Stuart, over) the earth.’? In the very 
nature of the case, if they inherit with David’s Son, the restored Theocrat- 
ic-Davidic Kingdom, 7¢ must be a reign here on and over the earth. Itis 
after the Coming of the Son of man, after the rise and progress of the 
fourth beast, the ten horns and the little horns, and a# the destruction of — 
these Gentile and Antichristian powers (Dan. 7 : 22) that ‘‘ the time came — 
that the saints possessed the Kingdom,’’ and that “‘ the Kingdom, and — 
dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven shall be 
given to the people of the saints of the Most High.’ It is taking an unwar-— 
ranted liberty with covenant, prophecy, and promise to locate this King- 
dom and reign in any other place than this earth ; and yet multitudes vent- 
ure to assume it, believing themselves, under a spiritual interpretation, 
not only justified, but that they are actually exalting the Word by so 
doing. Many who advocate a kind of reign here on the earth in this dis- 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 575 


pensation, also affirm that the ample, complete fulfilment is only realized 
in the third heaven, not seeing that the reigning 7s united with the Second 
Advent, the resurrection of the saints, the setting up of Christ’s Kingdom, 
the renewal of the earth, etc.; and that such a supposed reign is wtterly 
antagonistic to the description given to us of the saints during this inter- 
mediate period, viz., a time of waiting, etc., until the blessed moment 
comes of inheriting, of being crowned, etc., at the Advent.’ The locality of 
reigning is so unmistakably indicated by the Kingdom that Christ reigns 
over (with whom they inherit), by the Pre-Millennial Advent and resurrec- 
tion, by various propositions presented, that a mere mention of the fact is 
sufficient under this heading.’ 


1 To illustrate how interpretations are forced, we append the following: Priest, in his 
View—giving but the expression of many—declares that ‘‘ when Christ has set up His 
Kingdom in the heart of a believer,’’ on account of ‘the victory’’ obtained over sin, 
‘therefore of such an one it may be said, he reigns on the earth.’’ Thus two blunders are 
conjoined to make out a case against us, for he has not attempted to prove that the Mes- 
siah’s Kingdom isin the heart, and that the overcoming of sin by grace in the individual 
man is a ruling on or over the earth. But in the same book the strange anomaly is found 
that he concedes a literal first resurrection, but—like Prof. Stuart and others—places 
these saints and the reigning in-the third heaven and not on the earth. This accounts for 
attempting in some way, even so indirectly, to find a reign on earth to meet a scriptural 
demand. Authors like Butler (Apoc.) have the saints of Rev. 20 : 4, 6, reigning but not 
in their resurrection bodies, but they differ widely respecting the reign. The funda- 
mental mistake of all such is simply the misapprehension of what really and truly con- 
stitutes the covenanted Messianic Kingdom. ‘This point clear and settled, the rest follows 
as a natural sequence, Hence Dr. Bell, and others, pass beyond the record when they 
have this reign over the Universe. What Christ may do in His Divine Sovereignty as God 
is another question, and does not pertain to the covenanted Kingdom, and is not described ; 
but as ‘‘the Christ,’’ the God-man, David’s Son and Lord, His Kingdom and reign and 
that of His associated brethren is on the earth. And this is the Kingdom with which we 
are personally concerned. . : 

? Hence we must object to various views, as e.g. the popular one presented as follows : 

‘With Thee we'll reign, with Thee we’li rise, 
And Kingdoms gain beyond the skies.’’ 
The notions of reigning over the universe, in mid-air, and in heaven, have already been 
adverted to, and shown (Props. 151 and 168) to be opposed to the covenant promises. 
Some able men advocate the same, but they assign no proof in its behalf which can sef 
aside the reign on earth, Irving, and many after him, advocate the removal of the 
saints in mid-air, and reigning from thence. Auberlen makes the saints to return with 
Christ (when no such return is mentioned in the Bible) to heaven, and to rule the unglo- 
rified from thence.. Fausset (Com., Rev. 11:15) says: ‘The glorified Son of Man shall 
rule mankind by His transfigured Church in heaven, and by His people Israel on earth.’’ 
And in an article (Ch. Herald, May 1, 1879) remarks : ‘‘ The transfigured saints will then 
reign over the earth. They will not live upon the earth as theirhome. This was the error 
of the ancient Millenarians, owing to their confounding the glory of the transfigured 
saints with the glory of Israel over the nations, and so in some measure they produced 
the expectation of a carnal Kingdom.’ Now in reference to all such theories, we vastly 
prefer the alleged ‘‘ error” of the ancient Millenarians, as far more in accordance with cove- 
nant and prediction, giving the Patriarchs the land and the meek a real inheriting of 
the earth, planting the inheritance of David’s Son where it geographically belongs. 
Fausset (Rev. 21:10) adds: ‘‘Even in the Millennium the earth will not be a suitable 
abode for transfigured saints, who therefore shall then reign in heaven over the earth. 
But after the renewal of the earth, and at the close of the Millennium and judgment, they 
shall descend on an earth assimilated to heaven itself.” This is based on the mistaken 
idea that there is no New Jerusalem state on earth during the Millennium (comp. Prop. 
151), and is abundantly refuted by the ‘‘ransomed of Zion,’’ the resurrected saints, par- 
ticipating in this glory, as e.g. the apostles ruling over the twelve tribes, etc. We cannot 
disconnect the glory of the saints and that of the Jewish nation during this period, be- 
cause of the intimate relationship existing between the two, the nation itself being identi- 
fied with the Davidic Kingdom. The view of the Seventh-Day Baptists, expressed by 


576 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154. 


, 


Waggoner and others, that the saints are removed to the third heaven during the thou- 
sand years, while the race and the earth is destroyed, belongs to the same category, and 
is amply refuted by their quoting Zech. 14:5 as applicable to the Sec. Advent, the con- 
text of which they cannot reconcile with their theory. Indeed so contradictory and lame 
is the view, that when comparing the New Heaven and New Earth of Isa. 65 and 66 with 
Rey. 21, they are forced logically by their own position to the absurdity that the saints 
glorified (and not mortal men in the flesh) build, plant, etc., as delineated in Isa. 65, 
Their system, of course, makes redemption incomplete, the race as such is never restored 
to Edenic conditions, the covenants as given to Abraham and David are not realized as 
written, and the promises to the Jewish nation remain unfulfilled. 


Obs. 4. As preliminary to the reigning, if it is to take place at the time 
and in the place designated, we ought to expect a definite statement of the 
saints coming at the time, and to the locality specified. 'This is plainly 
given, as e.g. in Zech. 14, at the personal Pre-Millennial Advent, ‘‘ the 
Lord my God shall come, and all the saints with Thee.’? (Comp. Joel 
Sv 11 + Matt. 24 : 30, 31 ; 2Thess. 2:1; 1 Thess.4°: 16. V7, etc) 
significant and in perfect harmony with the requirements of our doctrine, 
that in the delineation of the last events which precede the ushering in of 
the Millennial era, the harvest of the saints is gathered before the fearfal 
vintage (Rev. 14 : 14-16); and when the ‘‘ King of kings”? comes (Rey. 
19 : 11-16) ‘‘ the armies’’ (i.e. the redeemed, so Barnes, etc.) accompany 
Hiim. <A mere statement of the accurate presentation of details requisite 
to complete the account of the commencement of this reign is all that is 
necessary. 


The reader will observe that a personal coming of the saints is a prerequisite, because 
this rule is to be under a real, actual manifested Theocracy, and as such is characterized 
not merely by ‘‘a spiritual rule’’ but a civil or political one, for this rule is conducted in a 
government in which Church and State are one, and, as promised, the saints assist 
in overcoming enemies, subjugating kingdoms, in punishing those that resist its author- 
ity, in protecting and blessing its subjects. Some say that it is a question whether the 
saints reign visibly or invisibly over the nations of the earth. They might just as well 
question the visibility or invisibility of this coming of the saints. The idea of the twelve 
apostles ruling over the twelve tribes of restored Israel invisibly, is utterly opposed to the 
Theocratic ordering. This is no question to those who carefully compare the Scripture 
statements respecting the visibility of the metropolitan city, of rulership and worship, — 
the visibility ascribed to the acts of the King, the homage paid to Him, the accessibility 
of the rulers, etc. This does not, of course, forbid the power—like angels—of rendering 
themselves, at pleasure, invisible to mortal eyes, etc. The latter feature is designed to 
facilitate the power, discrimination, etc., of the glorified ones, Com. Props. 168, 
197, ete. 


Obs. 5. In giving the proofs verifying such a reign of the saints, so 
abundant is the precious material that we find a difficulty in properly ar- 
ranging it. Let the following order suffice. 1. This rulership of the 
saints is contained and promised in the covenant made with Abraham. 
Thus in Gen. 17 : 6 and 35 : 11 the promise is that ‘‘ kings shall come out 
of thee.’’ If this promise is limited to the few past literal kings of the 
Jewish nation, well may the contrast offered by infidels be considered, viz., 
that a promise coming from the Almighty God, which on the face of it in- 
dicated great kingly authority and was only fulfilled in kings who in power 
and dominion were far inferior to the great monarchies surrounding them, 
is scarcely a promise commensurate with the greatness and majesty of 
God. Admitting that the sinfulness of the Jewish nation dwarfed this — 
promise in the past, yet God’s covenanted promises, to which Lis oath is — 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 577 


attached, are not to be defeated by the perversity and sinfulness of man. 
For this would at once argue weakness and imperfection in the Supreme 
Being, viz., that foreseeing the failure of the proportions due to such a 
promise coming from Him, He should affirm it dy oath. The Apostle 
Paul had no idea of such a failure, for from this very promise in the cove- 
nant he declares ‘‘ that the promise to Abraham was, that he should be heir 
of the world’’ (Rom. 4:13). The inheriting of the earth by the meek, 
und the inheriting of the Kingdom, are equivalent phrases designating the 
same destiny, rank, and power. ‘This company of kings are to proceed 
from Abraham, in virtue of his being thus chosen, and hence results the 
imperative necessity, as has been already demonstrated, of our being 
grafted in, adopted, and reckoned the children of Abraham, that we, as 
Gentiles, but now recognized as belonging to the elect nation, may inherit 
with him, or become kings and priests. ‘This promise is repeated in 
another form (Hxodus 19 : 6) and amplified by Peter (1 Peter 2: 5, 9) as 
still future, God being engaged in the process of gathering out the people 
who shall appear as this Kingdom of royal priests, fulfilling the Divine 
purpose (Isa. 43 : 21): ‘* this people have I formed for Myself ; they shall 
show forth My praise.”?* 2. It is in view of this Divine purpose of raising 
up a Kingdom of kings and priests (i.e. a Kingdom unexampled in its 
manifestations of regal splendor and glory), that the most positive declara- 
tions are made. Thus in Rev. 5 : 10, speaking of the redeemed, it 1s 
added : ‘* And hast made us unto our God kings and priests ; and we shall 
reign on the earth.’ 'That this embraces actual, real rulership 1s so appar- 
ent that even those most inclined to spiritualize admit it, as e.g. Barnes 
(Com. loci.), who at least says that ‘‘ the redeemed will be so much in the 
ascendency that the affairs of the nations will be rn their hands,’’ a state of 
affairs that will not, according to Scripture, be found doww to the Second 
Advent. In Rev. 3:21, it is stated: ‘*‘ To him that overcometh will I 
grant to sit with Mein My throne, even as I also overcame and am set down 
in My Lather’s throne.’’? ‘This emphatically teaches that the saints share 
or participate 2 the rule of the Messiah, for in no other way, without 
violence, can the words be apphed. Matt. 24:46, 47, has ‘* Blessed is 
that servant whom his Lord, when He cometh shall find so doing. Verily 
I say unto you, that He shall make him ruler over all his goods.’’ (Com- 
pare the being ‘‘ faithful over a few things’ and becoming ‘‘ ruler over 
many things,’’ Matt. 25:21, the ‘‘ authority over ten cities,’’ etc., Luke 
19 :1%, and ‘‘ if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with Him,’’ 2 
Tim. 2:12). Such language is based on the idea that the reward bestowed 
upon faithfulness is av elevation to a position of superiority evidenced by 
the exercise of authority and rule: Such are (Rey. 1 : 6) ‘‘ made kings and 
priests unto Cod,’’ raised (so Barnes loci), to ** exalted rank and dignity,” 
or (as Prof, Stuart, Apoc. loci) ‘‘ constituted a kingly order, the members 
of which are all like priests, i.e. holy and consecrated to the service of God 
and in the possession of elevated dignity.’’ If we take the rendering 
offered by Bengel (Gnomon) and Stuart of the last named passage, viz., 
that ‘‘the whole body of these priests form a Kingdom,’ and read it 
“made us a Kingdom,”’ it increases, if possible, the force of the expres- 
sion, seeing that the Kingdom is represented as contained, centred wm 
royalty itself, as e.g. Dan. 2:38.23. Saints are ‘‘ the heirs of a King- 
dom,’’ James 2 : 5, which they inherit at the Second Coming of Jesus when 
Ile is revealed as King, ‘‘ in His glory,’’ and ‘‘ shall sit upon the throne of 


578 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


His glory,’’ Matt. 25:34. Reference is again made to this in order that 
the reader may consider that ‘‘ heirship of a Kingdom,” and ‘‘ the inherit- 
ing of a Kingdom’? embraces much more than a mere admittance into 
and enjoyment of the blessings of a Kingdom. It evinces the coming 
into such actual possession of a Kingdom as is alone met by the idea of a 
participancy in government and of regal authority. Thus the language is 
understood when used among men; and the Spirit never would givea — 
promise which, expressed in a definite usual form, denotes this, and yet 
mean that we should regard it as exaggerated, and therefore we should 
soften the implied dignity down into what might suit our humility or — 
fancy. 4. A class of passages which describe the actions of the saints as- 
sociated with Christ, can only be received as indicative of an actual ac- — 
guired rulership. When Jesus the Mighty King comes He is represented 
as commencing His rule by terribly overthrowing His enemies (Prop. 115); 
now the saints come with Him (Obs. 4), and they too are exhibited asen- — 
gaged in and performing the same kingly acts. ‘Thus Rev. 2:26: “And — 
he that overcometh and keepeth My words unto the end, to him will L give 
power over the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of vron, as the 
vessels of a potter shall they be broken in shivers, even as I received from My — 
Father.”’ Our opponents on this passage make all the concessions that our 
argument demands, for they concede (as Barnes, Com. loci), that it means 
that the saints ‘‘ would partake of the final triumph and glory of the Say- 
iour, and be associated with Him,’’ and in reference to the time of fulfil- 
ment: ‘‘ All that is said here would be applicable to that time when the 
Son of God will come to judge the world, and when His saints will be as-— 
sociated with Him in His triumphs.’’ It is true that Barnes, and others, 
endeavor to shift this passage to a rewarding in the third heaven, but the 
futility of it is evident from its describing a scene and events taking place 
upon the earth. So also the Psalmist (Ps. 149 : 5-9) makes “ the saints — 
joyful in glory’ at the appearance of ‘‘ their king” and declares: ** Let” 
the high praises of God bein their mouth and a two-edged sword in their 
hand ; to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments upon the 
people ; to bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of 
tron ; to execute upon them the judgment written:—this honor have all His 
saints. Praise ye the Lord.” Jude (14, 15) likewise invites the King and — 
the saints in their Coming ‘‘ to execute judgment upon all,” ete. Thus the 
Spirit, in attributing to the saints the same irresistible authoritative action 
which belongs to Jesus Christ in His regal character and manifestation, 
certainly teaches that they obtain associated rulership, glimpses of which 
even seem to flash out of the song of Deborah and Barak (Judges 5 : 18, 
31).* 5. Jesus Himself is styled (Rev. 1 : 5) ‘‘ The Prince of the Kings of 
the earth,’’ i.e. as Commentators inform us, ‘‘ the first in rank.”’ So alse 
in Rev. 17 : 14 and 19 : 16, He is called ‘‘ The Lord of lords and the Aing 
of kings.’’ 'The phraseology implies arecognition of this precedency. But 
if applied, as usual, to earthly monarchs in this and former dispensations, 1% 
loses some of its force by the fact that the claim here set up has not been 
acknowledged, for wickedness and rebellion have characterized most of suet 
kings. The language is expressive that those kings over whom He is the 
Prince, the Leader, etc., receive Him as such. This therefore can only be 
referred to the saints who are mentioned in immediate connection with 
those passages, and in one expressly denominated ‘‘ kings,’’ in another des 


ignated His ‘‘ armies,”’ and in the third ‘‘ the called and chosen and fawth 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 579 


ful.” Admit the elevation of the saints to the dignity of kingship, Christ 
being the Mighty Leader and King, and we at once recognize the beauty, 
force, and sublimity of the claim, and how joyfully this will be acknowl- 
edged by the kings themselves. For then the title really assumes its in- 
tended dignatory form, seeing that a body of exalted kings and lords are 
associated with and under Him in His Theocratic government. This is 
strikingly corroborated in Heb. 1 : 9, where, after the direct reference to 
the throne and sceptre of the Son, it is added: ‘‘ Thy God hath anointed 
thee with the ort of gladness above thy fellows’’—that is, above the kings 
who are nearly related to Him. Barnes (Com. loci) comments: ‘‘ Above 
thine associates ; that is, above all who sustain the kingly office,’’ and after 
correctly opposing Doddridge’s supposition that these fellows were 
‘““angels,’’ adds : ‘‘ The more natural construction is, to suppose that it 
refers to kings, and to mean that He was the most exalted of all.’? These 
‘‘ fellows’ are evidently ‘‘ the co heirs with Christ,’’ He being the chief in- | 
heritor, the Sovereign among them. The title given to the Messiah by 
Micah 5 : 2 (see Horne’s Jntrod.,. vol. 2, p. 271) 1s indicative of His being 
the supreme commander as distinguished from subordinates, The Psalm- 
ist expresses his hope (Ps. 94:10) of renewed rulership at the very time 
that the enemies of the Lord shall perish in being then ‘‘ anointed with 
Fresh oil’’—phraseology equivalent to kingship. And when the kings thus 
associated with the Mighty One ‘‘ hear His words” and exercise their rule, 
it will be fulfilled that (Ps. 188 : 4) ‘* all the kings of the earth shall praise 
Thee, O Lord (which is not done down to the Advent, but must be after, as 
seen Rev. 19).”’° 6. It is in view of this promised rulership that so much 
is said concerning the exalting of “‘the horns’’ of the righteous. The 
‘‘horw’’ was extensively used as emblematic of regal power, rule, or domin- 
10n, as e.g. Jer, 48 : 25; Dan. 8: 5. 6, 20-22, etc. It is an apt speaking 
svinbol of power and authority. Now it is repeatedly declared that the 
time is coming when (Ps. 75 : 10) ‘‘ all the horns of the wicked also will I 
cut off, but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted.’’ Hence the promise 
to the righteous one is: “ his horn shall be exalted with honor ;’’ and let 
the reader ponder the words that follow (because the saints when they 
receive this honor come with King Jesus ‘‘ to execute the vengeance writ- 
ten’), ‘* the wicked shall see it and be grieved , he shall gnash with his teeth 
and melt away ; the desire of the wicked shall perish.’’ 'Therefore it 1s 
that in Ps. 89, where the most positive assurance is given that the Davidic 
covenant, long delayed, shall be fulfilled in Davyid’s Son restoring the 
throne and Kingdom, it is appropriately added : ‘‘ in thy favor our horn 
shall be exalted.’’*® '. Another class of passages, in strict accord with this 
idea of acquired authority, tell us that the saints are to be crowned, as in 
1 Cor. 9 : 25; James 1:12; Rev. 2:10, etc. The time of bestowing this 
crown coincides with the time previously stated, ase.g. 1 Pet. 5 : 4, ‘* When 
the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory that fad- 
eth not away.’ So Paul also expected (2 Tim. 4:8), the crown to be 
given only to himself and others at the ‘‘ appearing’’ of the Lord Jesus. 
The emblematic ‘‘ crowns of gold’’ of the Elders (Rev. 4 : 4) are indicative 
of their sustaining a kingly office.’ 8. Hence, we are prepared to find the 
saints even called ‘‘ princes,’’ etc., because of such received honor. This 
has been seen already in the title of ‘‘ kings and priests,’’ but in addition 
to these other expressive names are bestowed. In the 113th Psalm at the 
- time the Barren Woman (Prop. 118) becomes the ‘‘ joyful mother of chil- 


580 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 154, 


dren,’’ God ‘‘ raiseth up the poor out of the dust and lifteth the needy out 
of the dunghill, that He may set him with Princes, even with the Princes of 
His people.’ In the 47th Ps., when ‘‘ the Lord most High’’ is the ‘‘ great 
King over all the earth,’’ and ‘‘ He shall subdue the people under us and 
nations under our feet,’’ then ‘‘ the Princes of the people are gathered 
together, even the people of the God of Abraham: for the Shields (Sep. 
strong ones ; Horseley, protectors; Vulg. strong gods ; meaning, so 
Clarke, kings or rulers), of the earth belong unto God : He is greatly ex- 
alted.’’® Even Ps. 110 : 31s supposed by some (as Dr. Clarke, Com. loc?) 
to bear the rendering: ‘* Thy princely people in the day of thy power,” 
ete. (with which may be compared Justin Martyr’s: ‘* With Thee shall be, 
in the day, the chief of Thy power, in the beauties of the saints,” etc.), 
And various commentators, instead of applying Isa. 32:1 to Hezekiah, 
interpret it (correctly), as referring to the Messiah : ‘‘ Behold, a king shall 
reign‘in righteousness and princes (some read, as to princes) shall rule in 
judgment.”*® 9. The more indirect allusions growing out of the purpose 
intended are numerous. Saints are to occupy the same place, i.e. ‘* the 
heavenlies’’ (see Prop. 107, Obs. 3), now usurped by Satan. Recalling how 
the future, anticipated by hope and most firmly grasped by faith, is spoken 
of as present, ‘‘ the heavenlies in Christ’? (Eph. 1 : 3 and 2 : 7, comp. with 
Eph. 3:10 and 6:12) will be fully realized inthis rulership. In Ps. 72 :3 
in the description of the Messianic reign, ‘‘ the mountains shall bring 
peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness,’’ which some 
commentators (as e.g. Clarke, Com. loci) explain to denote that princes 
and inferior governors or rulers bring peace. Anciently kings or rulers 
were called shepherds, and this is referred to in Isa. 23 : 4 in connection with 
the reign of the Messiah. In Isa, 60:17 that God “ will make ¢hy officers 
(‘‘ who should be appointed to rule,’’ so Barnes, who follows Sep., which 
gives ‘‘ Rulers’’) peace and thine ezactors (magistrates, so Barnes, etc.), 
righteousness.’’ Reference may be made to this feature in Jer. 33 : 26, 
and in Ps. 94: 15, as some render it (as e.g. Clarke Com. loci): ‘* Until 
the Just One shall sit in judgment, and after Him all the upright in 
heart.’’ Receiving what writers on the figurative language of the Bible 
inform us, that ‘‘a star’? denotes a ruler, this idea attached to various 
promises, as e.g. Dan. 12 : 3, would increase the comprehensiveness of the 
same. The most delicate allusions are but too frequently overlooked, 
owing to our keeping this reign of the saints too much in the background. 
Thus, e.g. in Prov. 8 : 14-16, after showing that ‘‘ sound wisdom’’ gives 
‘‘ strength,’’ it is added, *‘ Ly Me (i.e. in possessing Me) kings reign and 
princes decree justice. By Me princes rule, and nobles, even all the judges 
of the earth.’’ ‘This can be only true of the saints, for as the history of the 
world shows, comparatively few such pious kings have existed ; but the 
passage receives due force if we admit that the time is coming when ail 
who have ‘‘ sound wisdom” shall be ‘‘ kings, princes, and nobles.”’ The 
same delicate reference is contained in the saints being then asseciated 
with ‘‘ the hand”? (emblem of power), of the Lord, in their riditg upon 
‘* white horses’ (emblem of victory, used by rulers), in becoming ‘‘ pillars” 
(as used e.g. Rev. 3 :12—emblem of chief supports), in becoming lordly 
‘* cedars,’’ ** trees of righteousness,’’ etc. (emblems of the nodles of a king- 
dom, so Horne’s Jntrod., vol. 2, p. 469), and even in ‘‘ the mounting up 
with wings like eagles,’’ indicative of exaltation.’° 


7 


sen cai: 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 581 


1 For such are ‘the Sons of God,” and declared to be such, as Jesus was (Rom. 1 : 4) 
“by the resurrection from the dead.”” This Sonship, as ‘‘the first-born,’’ already implies 
the rulership. Thus e.g. Knapp (Ch. Theol., p. 182) on the phrase ‘‘Son of God” as 
given to Jesus in Ps. 2:7, says: ‘It is the dignity of this office of King or Messiah, of 
which the Psalmist appears here to speak. The name Son of God was not unfrequently 
given to Kings ; it is not, therefore, nomen essenti, but dignitatis messianw. The passage 
would then mean, Thou art the King of my appointment,” etc. So others (Ency. Relig. 
Knowl., Art. ‘Son of God,’’ etc.) say it was applied to magistrates or rulers. Now, 
aside from a divine relationship, the title evidently is given to include the future relation- 
ship that they sustain to God in the power bestowed upon them and exercised by them. 
As Adam was ‘‘the Son of God,” having dominion accorded to him, which he forfeited, 
this ‘‘image of God’’ lost shall be restored through the second Adam. What this image 
or likeness denotes, we may leave an opponent to inform us. Thus Bush, Com., Gen. 
1 : 26, says: ‘‘But there can be as little doubt that the phrase in this connection de- 
notes primarily the possession of dominion and authority.’’ The ‘‘Sons of God’’ to be 
truly such must be’ restored back to their forfeited dominion. It is this ‘‘ peculiar 
people” that God calls forth in this Messianic ordering. Then Prov. 4:8, 9, will be 
abundantly verified : ‘‘She (Wisdom) shall promote thee ; she shall bring thee to honor, 
when thou dost embrace her. She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace; a 
erown of glory shall she deliver to thee.” 

* We can see then how the time is coming when such passages as Ps, 188 : 4, 5, will 
be literally verified: ‘* All the kings of the earth shall praise Thee, O Lord, when they 
hear the words of thy mouth. Yea, they shail sing in the ways of the Lord: for great is 
the glory of the Lord.” Now but comparatively few kings honor the Lord, then all kings 
shall exult in Him. When these Scriptures are realized in all its fulness, then and then 
only will the title (Rev. 1: 5) of Jesus most significantly and gloriously appear: ‘* Prince 
of the kings of the earth,” whose loyalty to and supreme love for ‘‘the Prince’’ cannot 
be questioned. The New Revision renders Rev. 5:10: ‘‘And madest them to be unto 
our God a kingdom and priests ; and they shall reign upon the earth.’ . Lange’s Com. 
loci: * And didst make them unto our God a kingdom and priests ; and they reign upon 
or over the earth.”” Dr. Craven, in a foot-note (p. 160) opposes the idea of ‘‘ the saints 
reigning as mere subjects (i.e. to be kings without authority over others),’’ on the ground of 
its being ‘‘inconsistent with (1) the essential idea of reigning, which is to exercise authority 
over others) ; (2) the express intimations of the word of God ; comp. Dan. 7 : 22, 27 ; Luke 
22 : 29, 30, etce.’’ ‘If it be asked, Over whom are the Saints to reign? it may be an- 
swered, (1) Some, as superior Rulers, over their brethren (see Luke 22 : 29, 30 etc.); and 
(2) all, as kings, over the human races to be born after the establishment of the Basi- 
leia, and, perchance, over other races throughout the universe. Speculation as to this last 
point, however, not only as to answer, but as to question, should be restrained.’’ 

3 It is a sad fact that these exceeding precious promises are frittered away until they 
become indefinite and lose their designed meaning. To reconcile the inheriting with 
the spiritualistic theory of a Kingdom, it is denied that a Kingdom is really inherited, 
but only ‘‘ the effects” of it. Thus Hodge (Sys. Div., Vol. 2. p. 599) remarks that ‘the 
word Kingdom i3 used metonymically for the effects of the exercise of royal authority.’’ 
In this sense he says ‘‘men are said to inherit the kingdom of God.’’ The figure that 
he refers to is used e.g, in the rendering (2. above) ‘‘made us a kingdom,”’ i.e. metonym- 
ically ; conferred (not the effects but) ‘‘the exercise of royal authority,’ but to ‘‘in- 
herit a Kingdom” the same idea is expressed without figure, if we allow language any 
adequate meaning. This inheriting, as we show by the numerous passages adduced, is 
explained in so many different ways that it cannot, without violence, be resolved into a 
figure of speech. What a relief such a faith in real, substantial regal honor and position 
imparts at the side of the vague mystical, spiritualistic conceptions of mysticism, pan- 
theistic individualism, and of semi-belief in general. Here is something plainly ex- 
pressed in the grammatical sense, for hope to grasp, tangible, readily comprehended, 
transcendently ennobling and glorious. 

4 They will subdue the wicked, verifying such passages as Prov. 14 : 19, ‘‘ The evil bow 
before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous,’’ for (v. 11) ‘‘ The house of 
the wicked shall be overthrown: but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.’’ The 
reader will observe that toward the wicked they bear (just as the Christ at His Coming) an 
‘iron sceptre,’’ ruling ‘‘with arod of iron.” It isdestructive. Against the notion (which 
has resulted in direful persecutions and bloodshed) that this is to be manifested in the 
present Church, Dr. Craven (Lange’s Com., p. 124) remarks: ‘‘The ‘iron sceptre’ was 
not promised to the Church militant as an organism, but to individuals ; ane not to 


582 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154. 


individuals in the present state of conflict, but to those who at ‘the end’ should appear 


as conquerors.’’ That Christianity possesses a power over the heathen world is not “4 


denied ; the power, however, is not that of ‘the iron sceptre,’—the power of govern- 
ment. The adjournment of these promises to the day of the Parousia is in accordance 
with the express language of Christ Himself. 

6 Ingersoll and those like him may make sport of this anointing oil (designating it 
‘hair oil,’’ etc.), but to the believer it has a significant and precious meaning. For when 
it is said Ps. 23: 5 (comp. Ps. 92: 10; 89 : 20; 45: 7, etce.): ‘Thou anointest my head 
with oil,’’ it is indicative of a consecration to Rulership and Priesthood. We only 
now remind the critical student that this union of kings and priests with the Christ is 
essential to the completeness of the Theocratic ordering, is requisite to fill up the measure 
of His own glory and dominion (comp. e.g. Eph. 1 : 23 and the comments of commen- 
tators on the same). The exaltation of Jesus is correspondingly to this associated body 
of kings and priests, glorified and honored, reflecting His redemptive work and personal 
glory. It adds by a visible manifestation to the perfection of the mighty Redeemer and 
Sovereign, especially when it is regarded as founded on grace, and made instrumental 
in extending the praise of God. ‘Fausset (Com., Ps. 45 . 16) makes the following com- 


ment: ‘‘As earthly monarchs govern widely extended empires by viceroys, this glorious 
King is represented as supplying all the principalities of earth with princes of His own 


pumerous progeny.” The Theocratic unity demands this intimate relationship, which — 
brings corresponding exaltation and faithfulness. 

6 Then shall be fulfilled the special promise made to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel 
(Hag. 2: 23), who shall be made ‘‘ asa signet,’ 1.e. occupy a most honorable position, 
and participate in that mighty shaking of kingdoms, etc. (Comp. Prop. 147.) It is in 
view of this power lodged in the saints and their coming with Jesus at the Sec. Advent, 
that they are even implied in the phrase ‘‘ The Son of Man cometh in the clouds of 
heaven with power and glory.” (Comp. the excellent remarks of Olshausen— Com, Vol. 2, 
p, 250—on the word ‘power,’ and its meaning in reference toa host.) We cannot 
separate the Head from His members in this coming ; the Spirit unites them, and this 
union we must respect and observe. 

1 Strange that De Wette (Com., 2 Tim. 4 : 8) should bring the charge of pride against 
Paul in claiming a crown for himself personally, when he distinctly in the Epistle, and 
other places, ascribes his victory and future glory to the marvellous, unmerited grace of God 
extended to him, and declares that ull believers shall share with him in the same glorious 
salvation. The reference to himself personally is precisely what we, who follow his 
teaching, require as evidencing the strength of his faith and hope. 

8 Of this striking passage we give the rendering of Sirr (Hirsi Res.) following, or prob- 
ably is, Horseley’s: ‘‘The willing (or voluntary ones) of the peoples are gathered 
together, a people of the God of Abraham. Because the Protectors of the earth are for God, 
He is greatly exalted.” Justin Martyr renders it: “ The rulers of the nations were assem- 
bled along with the God of Abraham, for the strong ones are greatly exalted on this earth.’ 
These ‘‘ strong ones” reminds us at once of ‘‘the mighty ones,” who came down at the 
gathering of the heathen to the winepress, Joel 3:11. It may be added that the expres- 
sion of Ps, 113 quoted is a reproduction of Hannah’s prayer, 1 Sam. 2 : 8, 9, in which, 
however, we find the most significant explanatory addition, ‘‘to set them (i.e. these poor, 


etc.) among princes, and to make them inherit the throne of glory.’’ Comp. also Ps. 45:7 _ | 


with verse 16. 
* Delitzsch’s translation: ‘‘ Behold, the King will reign according to righteousness ; 
and the princes according to right will they command. And every one will be a shelter 


from the wind and a covert from the storm ; like water brooks in a dry place, like the — 


shadow of a gigantic rock in a languishing land.” Fausset (Com. loci) refers this to the 
future Messianic reign, and ‘‘the princes’ are ‘‘ subordinate, referring to all in 
authority under Christ in the coming Kingdom on earth, e.g. apostles, etc., Luke 22 : 30 ; 
Dare Giseate bin fab ® dey, 2 oe Be OT are een. 

10 Many indirect allusions are only available in the light of direct Scripture. Thus e.g. 
Jesus re-establishes the Davidic house, and the saints gathered out form part (Heb. | 
3:6) of His house, i.e. they are incorporated into the royal house (comp. Obs. 5, 2), 
and with Christ compose its regality. So Rom. 16 : 20, “the God of peace shall bruise 
Satan under your feet shortly,’’ cannot be limited, as many do, to the Church at Rome, 
as if it denoted the gaining of victory over ‘ discord, contentions, and divisions” in the | 
congregation. For in point of historical fact this is not the truth, seeing that Satan, in- 
stead of being bruised at Rome, made that the theatre of miserable retrogressions, — 
hierarchical tendencies, and persecution. It refers to the victory over Satan and the 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 583 


resultant reign as presented in Rev. 20:1-6. The word ‘shortly,’’ which has misled 
so many, is given by the Spirit according to the measure of time that belongs to Him 
(Comp. Prop. 173.) Some writers (as e.g. Proph. Times, Vol. 10, p. 28, etc.) make the 
cherubim foreshadow the reigning saints ; others derive additional confirmation from the 
tabernacle or temple, as typical of a future ordering. Interesting deductions have been 
made by Thomas and others, from Zech. 3 and 4, the ‘‘ men of wonder’ or ‘‘ representative 
men,” ‘‘thy fellows” being regarded as representing these saints or rulers, etc. ; but 
having so many other passages, presenting the doctrine in plain terms, these symbolical 
representations may only require this reference. 


Obs. 6. Another proof is worthy of separate consideration, viz., the pas- 
sages relating to the judging of the saints. Having shown (Prop. 133), 
what the Judgeship of Jesus Christ is, when He comes to judge the world, 
viz., that 1t designates His regal kingly rule, it is corroborative of the cor- 
rectness of our doctrine that the saints are represented as associated with 
the Lord Messiah 12 judging. In Dan. 7 : 22, in connection with the 
Advent of the Ancient of Days, the Coming of the Son of man, the over- 
throw of the enemies of God, ‘‘ judgment was given to the saints of the most 
High ; this itself is explained as possessing the Kingdom, dominion, etc , 
in verses 22 and 27. Having given in detail the Scriptural idea of ‘‘ jadg- 
ang,’ it will suffice to present the opinion of a scholarly opponent. Thus 
Prof. Bush (Ail. p. 129), in interpreting the phrase ‘‘ judgment was given 
to them” (Rev. 20 : 4), advocates by various references the Scriptural usage, 
and then says: ‘‘ Numerous passages to the same effect might be readily 
adduced, from which the inference can scarcely fail to be drawn, that by 
judgments being given to those that sat on the thrones, is meant, that they 
received authority to reign and govern, or the right of exercising judgment 
according to the Hebrew sense of the word ‘ judge, which vs equivalent to 
that of ‘reigning,’ or putting forth the judicial and executive acts of the 
governing power.’’ Fairbairn (On Proph. p. 450), admits that ‘‘ the 
thrones set for judgment’’ and ‘‘ the reigning’’ indicates ‘‘ their (i.e. saints) 
kingly power,’ which is exercised in authority and rulership over the 
nations. Now keeping in view the Jewish idea of a Judge (i.e. a Ruler) 
let us regard 1 Cor. 6 : 2, 3, ‘* Do ye not know that the saints shall judge 
the world? And if the world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to 
judge the smallest matters? Know ye not that ye shail judge angels ?”’ 
The sense of the passage is plain, viz., that if destined to the promised 
kingly rule over the world (as predicted by the prophets, etc.), that if even 
angels shail be subjected to that ingly exercise of power (for the angels are 
subjected to ‘‘ The Christ,’’ and being associated rulers, with Jesus, they 
even will willingly yield obedience to the ‘‘ co-heirs’’), they ought to be 
sufficiently worthy to exercise some authority even now in such matters 
pertaining to the saints. It is in view of this determined rulership that 
Jesus (Matt. 19 : 28; Luke 22 : 29, 30) promises specially to the apostles : 
* Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed Me, in the regeneration 
when the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of His glory, ye shall also sit on 
twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” Here the restoration of 
the Theocratic order is not only intimated, and the Messianic reign stated, 
but the apostles are to be elevated to regai position of ‘‘ Judges’’ or Rulers. 
It is in opposition to the spirit of the passage, parallel Scripture, and 
usage, to explain this (so Priest in View of Mill.), as fulfilled on the day 
of Pentecost, or (so Prof. Bush, Mill.), as verified by the ‘* Christian 
Church in the midst of which the apostles are to be conceived as enthroned, 


584 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. _ [Prop. 154, 


and continually exercising judyment by means of their writings embodied — 
in the sacred canon,”’ or (so Lightfoot), as exlibited in ¢he ministerial 
authority with which tho apostles were invested. (See Prop. 145, on Re- 
generation.) Such interpretations are rejected as untrustworthy and a 
lowering of the promise by those who have no doctrinal sympathy with us, 
Thus e.g. Bloomfield (Com. doci) refers the fulfilment ¢o the Second Ad- 
vent after the resurrection of the saints. and supposes that the high exalta- 
tion”? of the apostles is denoted. Barnes (Com. loci) locates the realiza- 
tion of the promise aé the same period, and after stating that ‘* to judge de- 
notes rank, authority, power,’ as evidenced in ‘* the ancient judges of 
Israel,’’ adds: ‘‘ And as earthly kings have those around them dignified 
with honors and office, counsellors and judges, so Christ savs [is apostles 
shall occupy the same relative station in the great day.’’ Comment on such 
concessions 1s unnecessary ; but it may be interesting to notice how those 
who reject our doctrine find it difficult to retain an inter pretation without 
inconsistency and even contradictions. ‘Taking one of the most guarded 
writers, Neander (Life of Christ), he informs us (sec. 76) that the apostles 

‘were to lead the Kingdom (i.e. the Church) as His organs,’’ and as con- 
firmatory of this mission quotes in a footnote Matt. 19 : 28, ‘and Luke 22 : 
30, “‘ ye shall also sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.” 
He here, as also in Sec. 51, applies this judging to the present dispensation. 
Lut when he comes to Sec. 228 he then interprets it (correctly), as referring 
to the period ‘‘ when the Son of man should appear with dominion corre- 
sponding to His glory in the renewed and glorified wor ld 5 saying that 
‘the word ‘judging’ includes the idea of * governing according to its 
ancient acceptation ;’’ for ‘‘ the idea of a participation of believers with 
Christ in the g government and judgment of the future world is bound up 
with the whole mode of representing the Kingdom of Cod in the New Testa- 
ment.’’? With all his efforts to make something ‘‘ svmbolical’’ out of if, 
he gives us all the admissions that we desire, even in the sentence: 
‘‘ There are to be ‘judges’ and ‘ judged,’ ‘rulers’ and ‘ ruled,’ but in 
an exalted sense—in the new form of the Theocracy as well as in the old.” 
Such is our doctrine.’ 


1 See the just criticism of Bloomfield, loci, against the constrained interpretation that 
this judging is fulfilled in this life ‘‘by judging heathen,” i.e. detecting their errors, or 
by ‘‘judging or condemning the world by their preaching,” or ‘‘ by condemning others 
by comparison,” etc. He justly shows (and so Barnes, loci) how contradictory all this is 
to the scope and argument, and retains the common view held by Luther, Calvin, 
Erasmus, and many others, that they actually and truly participate in judgment at the 
Advent of Christ. This brings it nearer to the idea of rulership, for some of these simply _ 
embrace the idea of judicial investigation, or even of mere concurrence in judicial — 
sentence, strangely overlooking the scriptural usage of the word judge. ‘This passage is 
by some supposed to indicate Christian magistracy and rulership but in this dispen- 
_ sation. This retains the sense of rulership, but isa violation of the time of destined — 
ruling, asis even evidenced by the promised judging of angels. Some confine the judging 
of angels to that of 2 Pet. 2:4;Jude6. Now, whatever is connected with the action of 
these associated kings in this direction, it certainly does not meet the full requirements 
of the word ‘‘judge,” or the actual exaltation of the saints, so great in virtue of their — 
union and glorification with Christ that angels even will be subjected to their commands. 
That our position is not an extreme one is evident from the Supremacy of Jesus Christ 
over all angels, in which Supremacy the saints by virtue of joint heirship participate. — 
Even Prof. Stuart (Barnes, loci) says : ‘‘ This may mean that the saints shall in the future 
world be raised to a rank in some respects more elevated than even the angels in 
heaven.’’ The reader, perhaps, will be pleased to notice how the Jews understood this 
judging at the last time. We append an illustrative extract taken from the Book of 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 585 


Wisdom, Ch. 2 : 7, 8, which, speaking of the return of the dead, says: ‘‘In the time of 
their visitation they shall shine, and run to and fro like sparks among the stubble; they 
shall judge the nations, and have dominion over the peoples ( Vatlg.), and their Lord shall 
reign forever.’ To here rule over angels! What honor, dignity, and glory ! (Comp. 
eet Cor. 2:9, 10.) Fausset (Com: 1 Cor. 6 ey 3) properly says: ‘‘‘Lhere is a dis- 
tinction drawn by able Expositors, between the saints who judge or rule, and the world 
which is ruled by them.” ‘To reign and to be saved are not necessarily synonymous. 

*Some endeavor to make an unnecessary difficulty in the statement that the twelve 
apostles are only promised a rulership, and that in Rev. 21 : 14 the twelve foundations 
are only inscribed with the names of twelve apostles, from which it is argued that Paul is 
excluded (some even going so far, that this exclusion indicates the superior position of 
the twelve and the inferiority of Paul, notwithstanding his protestations of being at 
least also an apostle), and that Revelation is Anti-Pauline. But all such inferences are 
beyond our province. Paul is definitely promised a crown or rulership, 2 ‘Tim. 4 : 8, and 
for aught we know the Lord, in view of his abundant labors, etc., may have a better 
thing —a special ye eae reserve for him. Weneed not trouble ourselves about the 
crown that Paul will receive, for it will be commensurate with his apostleship. Eecause 
God has not seen proper to particularize his position, it is simply folly to conclude that 
it must necessarily be lower than that of the rest. ‘Therefore, we need not resort to 
the explanation of Hengstenberg (loci), who supposes that Mathias’s appointment was only 
provisional, and that when the Lord Himself made choice to fill the vacancy Paul becan:e 
the true twelfth apostle ; or, to that of Reuss that Paul did not call himself a thiiteenth 
apostle but simply an apostle, all believers being apostles (which does not meet the 
difficulty, and is opposed to Paul’s own definition of an apostle and of what constitutes 
one). In conversation with a friend, Rev. Rogers, who takes Hengstenberg’s view, he 
pointed out the fact that Mathias was chosen without God’s direction at the expressed 
opinion of the other apostles, and that Paul was the one whom God had chosen to take 
Judas’s place. ‘The apostles correctly reasoned that the original number should again be 
filled; but instead of waiting, and leaving God to take ‘the initiative, they prematurely 
undertook the work of supply, too much pe God's place and call, and leaving it 
to an election when it was God’s part to do the choosing. There is force and pro- 
priety in this, seeing that this important event transpired ‘before the day of Peutecost, 
and that this election is all that we hear of Mathias. If this is to be received, then Paul’s 
name will be with the rest, Rev. 21:14. It also then shows the exceeding delicacy of 
the New Test., in simply recording the fact without note or comment, or afterward re- 
ferring to it. Augustine (City of God,’ B. 20, Ch. 5) makes the number ‘‘twelve” to 
signify ‘‘ the completeness of the multitude of those who shall judge,” so that it would 
include Paul, who, he says, in 1 Cor. 6 : 3, unmistakably considers himself included in the 
number of judges.’’ We prefer the definite number of twelve as more agreeable to the 
analogy of Scripture on the subject. So Dr. Schaff (iis. Apos. Ch., p. 512) rejects the 
election of Mathias on the ground that Peter was ‘‘ precipitate,’’ and ‘‘thought that the 
vacancy in the sacred number of twelve, occasioned by the crime of Judas, must forth. 
with be filled, without waiting for the promised ee of the Holy Ghost.’’ <‘* There 
seems to be no alternative, but to pronounce the election of Mathias a well- meant yet 
hasty and invalid act, and to substitute Paul for him, as the legitimate apostle.” Steir 
(Discourses of the Aposties, 2d ed.) takes the same view; others maintain the validity of 
the election. Whatever may be the truth in the matter, one thing is conclusive, viz. : 
that Paul will receive his exalted position as Judge, Ruler, King, and Priest. 


Obs. %. The witticisms that some eminent men have attempted to pass at 
the expense of ‘‘ the mother of Zebedee’s children’’ (Matt. 20 : 20-29) 
recoil upon themselves, inasmuch that in denying that there are positions 
of honor and rulership in the Messianic Kingdom, they evince far less 
knowledge of the subject than she possessed. Instead of this mother enter- 
taining low and grovelling views respecting the Kingdom, she evidenced 
her appreciation of its glory and her understanding of the predicted ruler- 
ship in it by making her request. Making due allowance for her motherly 
feelings, yet we can “accord no sympathy to her apparently selfish purpose 
of securing the elevation of James and John to a position superior to that 
of the others. The narrative, as recorded, confirms in the strongest manner 


586 . THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [|Prop. 154. 


that while incorrect and blamable in preferring the request in behalf of her 

children, she was not wrong in supposing that the Messianic Kingdom, 
when erected, shall contain various stations of honor or degrees of ruler- 
ship. Let the reader consider the following particulars, and such a confir- 
mation will inevitably appear. (1) The time when this request was made 
is but a short time before the death of Jesus, and, consequently, after He 
had frequently spoken of the Kingdom. (2) This mother made the request 
through (evidently Mark 10 : 35) the solicitation of James and John, the — 
latter having not ouly had the Kingdom explained to them by Jesus, but 
had even gone out and preached it to the nation ; hence they ought to hare 
known something concerning it. (3) James and John had just previously 
heard from the lips of the Saviour (Matt. 19: 28) that the apostles would 
be rewarded in the Kingdom with a rulership on twelve thrones ; hence the 
request itself is indicative of this acquired knowledge of rulership and of 
their faith in its ultimate attainment. (4) James and John had also wit- 
~ nessed the transfiguration, and, therefore, had more exalted views respecting _ 

the Messianic glory (see Prop. 153, on Transfiguration). (5) Jesus, instead 
of denying that such gradations of rulership will exist in His Kingdom, ea- 
pressly announces that thev will be manifested, (a) by making them de- 
pendent upon suffering in His behalf, and (0) by asserting ‘‘ but to sit on 
My right hand, and on My left, is not Mine to give, but (or, except to 
those) for whom it 1s prepared of my F[ather,’’ thus showing that such 
posts of honor shall exist, but will be awarded to those accounted worthy of 
them.* What follows is better illustrated by Luke 22 : 24-30, when they 
(disciples) had ‘‘ a strife among them, which of them should be accounted 
the greatest.”? Now, corroborative of our doctrine we have those points 
presented : (1) This strife indicated (while exhibiting a wrong spirit in the 
apostles) what views they held concerning a future rulership in the King- 
dom. (2) Referring to Gentile rulers, Jesus tells them (because they antici- 
pated the speedy setting up of the Kingdom and did not recognize its 
postponement, etc.) that instead of becoming such rulers now they must 
be servants. They were to be only the heirs of a Kingdom. (8) He does 
not rebuke the views of rulership held, but confirms them by these partieu- 
lars: (a) By showing how one could become ‘‘ the greatest’? and “the ~ 
chief ’’—viz., by serving; (0) by referring to Himself, who, although the — 
King—the Mighty Chief—of the Coming, still future Kingdom, now also — 
served ; (c) by then specifically, in view of the foreseen service they would — 
render, telling them, ‘‘ J appoint wnto you a Kingdom,’ i.e., you shall in- — 
herit a Kingdom, receive power of rulership ; (d) ‘‘ as My Father hath ap- — 
pointed unto Me,’’ i.e., it will be as real, substantial an exercise of power, 
although subordinated to mine; (e) ‘‘ that ye may eat and drink at My 
table in My Kingdom,’’ i.e., you will be so exalted 22 special honor as to — 
occupy, because of your stations, places of dignity near Me; (/) “‘ and sit 

on thrones,’’ i.e., elevated to Kingship ; (9) ‘‘ sudging the twelve tribes of — 
Israel,’ thus explaining why they are to be enthroned, viz., to govern the ~ 
restored Jewish nation, which will again be manifested in its tribal diyi-— 
sions (comp. e.g. Isa. 1 : 26, 27). It is impossible, taking these state- 
ments entire, and comparing them with the general analogy of the Word 
and with the Messianic Kingdom, as it must appear in its covenanted form, — 
to form any other just conclusion than the one we are advocating. We — 
may rest assured that “‘ the saints of the Most High’ (marg. “‘ of the high | 
' places’ or ‘‘ things,”’ i.e., to which they are destined and which they shall | 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 587 


occupy) “* shall take the Kingdom and possess it forever, even forever and 
ever,’ Dan. 7:18. (Some, however, read ‘* the supreme holy ones,’’ and in 
verse 22 “‘ the supereminent saints.’’) Isa. 49 : 7 will yet be verified in a 
high sense “‘ kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship, because 
of the Lord that is faithful and the Holy One of Lsrael.’”? 


! The English version, as many critics have pointed out, is very unfortunate in the in- 
troduction of the italicized words: ‘it shall be given to them.” The rendering as given 
in effect limits the power of the Saviour and contradicts other statements (Matt. 25 : 31- 
40) ; Luke 19: 11-27 ; Jno. 5 : 22, 27, etc.), respecting His rewarding the saints at His Com- 
ing. It limits His power over against Luke 22 : 29, Hence Prof. Bush (Introd. Genesis, p. 
29) omits italics and gives: ‘To sit, etc., is not mine to give, except to those,” etc. So 
Barnes, Com. loci, gives as ‘‘the correct translation” ‘‘ except to those,” and Lange, Com., 
‘‘put it is for those,” with which Clarke, Com. loci, and cthers agree. The Revis. has: 
“but itis for them.” The Father gives (Prop. 83) the Kingdom to the Son and the po- 
sition of the co-heirs is also bestowed by Him, and the stations of these heirs are depen- 
dent upon the character formed, When the time comes for awarding, this will be done 
by King Jesus according to the purpose of the Father. The order laid down by the Father 
will be followed ; and hence before the development of the specific character, etc., and 
even the time for the Kingdom to be established, it is premature, it is not in the prov- 
ince of Jesus to bestow such specific individual honors. Indeed we suspect more ;—as 
Jesus had intimated, the honors that would be given to the twelve apostles, this special 
one—even higher—being reserved for others (e.g. Paul, David or Abraham, etc.), Jesus 
delicately and in accordance with a general principle (from which the only deviation was 
that in favor of the apostles as a body, owing to their being chosen, etc.), gives James and 
John a refusal, indirectly intimating that such an award would not be in accord with 
the Father's will, being held in abeyance for some others. We confess to amazement at 
Lange’s view (Com., loci) that if the request had been acceded to, they would have occu- 
pied the place of the two malefactors! Meyer’s (Com., loci) view is more consistent : ‘‘ Ye 
know not that the highest posts in my Kingdom cannot be obtained without sufferings 
such as I have to endure,”—thus admitting the distinctions of honor, position, etc. 

2 To indicate how oppositely our opponents treat these passages an illustration is in 
place. Scott (Com.), Bh. Hall quoted by Scott, and others, apply Matt. 19 : 28, Luke 22, 
30, concerning the apostles, judging the twelve tribes, to their being ‘‘ assessors in judg- 
ment” (the Popish idea of judgment being understood), i.e. acting judicially in the great 
final general judgment, or ‘‘in that great day to judge the quick and dead ;” ‘‘to sit upon 
several thrones to second and assist this awful act of final judgment on.the rebellious 
Israel.”” They thus limit the scriptural idea of judgment to judicial investigation and 
sentence, and the Theocratic idea is entirely overlooked. Now, on the other hand, one 
leading opposer, Dr. Brown (e.g. Com., Mark 10 : 35-45) concedes our reasoning to be cor- 
rect when he presents the following comment: ‘‘ But to sit on my right hand and on my 
left hand is not mine to give, save to them for whom it is prepared,” i.e. the stations will 
not be assigned ‘‘on a principle of favoritism ;’’ and then justly observes: ‘* Our Lord, it 
will be observed, does not deny the petition of James and John, or say they shall not occupy 
the place in His Kingdom which they now improperly sought ;--for aught we know, that 
may be their true place.’’ In Dan. 7, instead of reading ‘ the saints of the Most High,” 
many able critics read ‘the saints of the most high (places) shall take the Kingdom and 
possess the Kingdom, even for ever and ever” (so e.g. Tregelles, etc.) ; and this accords 
best with the analogy of Scripture, indicating the blessed truth that the saints are ap- 
pointed to ‘“‘most high places,” and, in consequence of this ordering, they take and pos- 
sess the Kingdom, i.e. exercise lordship in and over it, associated with the Son of Man 
as Supreme Ruler. This isareturn to the ancient application as given e.g. by Justin 
Martyr, who freely renders verse 27: ‘And the great places of the kingdoms under the 
heavens were given to the holy people of the Most High, to reign in an everlasting King- 
dom, and all powers shall be subject to Him and shall obey Him.” To the critical reader, 
it may here be said, that in view of the supremacy of the Jewish nation being connected 
with this rule of the Saints, able writers, as Tregelles, Fausset, and others, distinguish be- 
tween the ‘ Saints’? and ‘the people of the saints or holy ones” as given by Daniel ; the 
former being the glorified rulers, the latter the Jewish nation to whom the former sustain, 
as we have explained, a peculiar relationship by engrafting. 


Obs. 8. The wonderful Plan’ of God is shown in gathering cut an_ elect 
body which shall, in the Coming Theocracy, be associated with the Christ 


588 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


in rulership in order to promote the redemptive process of the race, and to 
fill the earth with the praises and glory of the Lord. Instead of being de- 
feated in His Theocratic purpose, God has been steadily making prepara- 
tion for its sudden and overwhelming appearance. Bh. Newton well re- 
marked concerning these risen and glorified saints that they ‘* have the 
principal share in the felicities of Christ’s Kingdom upon earth.”’ They 
form a chosen body, a pecuhar distinctive people who alone inherit the 
Kingdom (for flesh and blood cannot inherit), while the Jewish and 
spared Gentile nations form the willing subjects of the Kingdom. Being 
thus a select corporate body to whom the Kingdom is given (Props. 60-65 
and 90, 124, ete.), who alone are crowned as the kings and priests of the 
restored 'heocracy, we find deep reasons for the astonishing expressions 
recorded of the wnton, oneness, and fellowship with the Father and Son. 
The taunt employed in the early Church (evidently derived from this doctri- 
nal feature) that Christians were a ‘‘ genus tertium,”’ a class elevated aboye 
others, is, after all, but sober truth. Those royal prerogatives, belonging 
exclusively to them, are sometimes presented in phraseology which requires a 
little reflection to apprehend. Thus e.g. in Eph. 1:23 the Church is 
‘“< His body, the fulness of Him,’’ etc., which, as many interpreters have 
stated, is expressive of the fact that in some way the Church is ¢o fill up or 
complete the dominion of Jesus Christ ; He being the Head and the saints 
the Body (thus forming a perfected dominion), @ close and vital union sub-— 
sisting between them. Calvin on this passage remavks: ‘‘ This is the high- 
est honor of the Church, that the Son of God regards Himself as in a cer- 
tain sense imperfect unless He is jgotned to us.’’ This is only consistently 
explained by the doctrine of this co-heirship in dominion, by which the 
saints form with Christ the perfected Theocratic order of inaugurated 
rulership. The preceding context corroborates this interpretation, because 
the apostle had just referred to the calling of the saints, their redemption, 
the dispensation when all things should be gathered together in one, the 
inheritance, the redemption of the purchased possession, saying: ‘* That 
we should be to the praise of His glory who first trusted in Christ,’ and 
‘“ that ye may know what is the hope of His calling and what the riches of 
the glory of Tis inheritance in the saints.’’ Thus intimating not only the 
elect condition of believers and that they should in @ special manner pro- 
mote ‘‘ the praise of His glory,’’ but that the glory obtained by them by 
heirship would augment the glory of the Christ. ‘Lhe filling up or com- 
pleteness of Jesus Christ mentioned here, and alluded to in other places, 
can only receive its due force and full meaning when regarded in the light 
of this doctrine ; it then obtains a richness and propriety that must bring 
admiration and joy to the heart of the believer. ‘This reign of a corporate 
body of rulers, with the engrafted Gentiles as fellow-heirs, is the finishing 
of the mystery (Eph. 3) mentioned by Paul. Therefore, it is that the 
lengthening out of this dispensation is represented as so gracious and meret- 
ful in God, in order that these destined rulers may be duly gathered even 
from among the Gentiles. And an amazing feature in the Divine Plan, 
evincing wnrbounded grace to us Gentiles, here presents itself ; the Jewish 
nation, the elder, having rejected the offer of this Kingdom at the First 
Advent (Prop. 57), the Kingdom, as an inheritance, is to be given to others 
grafted in (Prop. 61, etc.), the younger.’ Hence the distinction between — 
‘‘ the married wife’’ and the restored ‘‘ barren woman’’ (Prop. 118), which 
even the Psalmist alludes to (Ps. 45 : 16) ‘‘ instead of thy fathers shall be 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 589 


thy children, whom thow mayest make princes in all the earth.’? What 
Lamartine says of worldly rulers (Girond., vol. 1, p. 58), viz., that “a 
throne even in fragments will not admit of participation,’’? may be true of 
human nature as at present constituted, but does not apply to these ac- 
counted worthy of co-heirship with Christ, owing both to the infinite su- 
perrority of the Theocratic King and the perfect glorification of these rulers, 
who can never give place to the failings and imperfections of frail human- 
ity.? 

1 Barnabas (Epis.) has been ridiculed because he refers to the children of Rebecca 

_(** The elder shall serve the younger ;’) and to Jacob’s blessing the children of Joseph, 
also giving the preference to the younger, as ‘‘ types of the people to arise afterward,’’ 
and applying it to the saints, viz., that they are represented by the younger. But when we 
come to consider that Jacob would not place his hands, as directed by Joseph, etc., the con- 
clusion certainly is not ridiculous, that some typical meaning is attached to these things, 
Now the only thing that meets such a typical design is this reign of the saints—a body 
formed chiefly of Gentiles engrafted—who in the Divine order are really and truly to 
bear rule over the elder elect national body, i.e., the Jewish nation, etc. There is deep 
significancy in such allusions. 

2 In this exalted position of the saints, we begin to see what Jesus means in Luke 
12 : 35-46, where He not only pronounces those ‘‘blessed” that are watching, but 
positively declares that ‘‘ He shall gird Himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and 
will come forth to serve them,’’ i.e. He will ina special manner show them honor. His 
glorious destiny as portrayed e.g. in Ps. 8 will be veritied, ‘‘ crowned with glory and 
honor,” for ‘‘the babes and sucklings” receive ‘‘dominion over the works of Thy hands,” 


and (so Luthardt, Bremen Lects., p. 125), ‘‘ Thou hast made him to be but little lower 


than God,” or (as Gesenius in Robinson’s Com.), ‘*Thou hast caused him to lack but 


little of a God.” 


Obs. 9. The Kingdom itself is purposely delayed for thousands of years 
(long to man, but brief to God), in order fo raise up this body of rulers to 
sustain it when manifested with a purity, dignity, power,- stability, and 
glory worthy of a Theocracy. Ifthe question be asked, why did not God 
establish the heocracy in such a form in the time of Moses, or of David, 
or atthe First Advent, the answer, as testified to by history, is apparent, 
viz., that man was not prepared for it. The essential element to sustain 
and give it its immortal, enduring characteristics had not yet been prepared 
and gathered. Looking at the predictions and promises, at the Kingdom 
as it shall appear, we see at once that a Theocracy with such a Ruler—God- 
man—and with such associated kings and priests requires, in view of the 
intelligent freedom of man and his bias to sin, a period of preparation, a 
set time in which an elect, peculiar, royal people may be gathered. God 
could, as asserted, have raised up this body, if necessary, even ‘‘ out of 
stones,’’ but He chooses rather 77 forbearance and wonderful patience to 
raise them up out of depraved man, not by compulsion or a forcing of the 
will, but by the application of His own truth to their self-consciousness 
and free will. Those who accept of this truth and manifest such accept- 
ance by faith and obedience, become “‘ the heirs of the Kingdom,” are 
adopted as members of this body; all others are rejected as unworthy of 
inheriting the Kingdom of God. The Almighty, foreknowing the require- 
ments of the Theocratic, determined order, has also predetermined (hence, 
in some Liturgies the prayer that God would speedily complete the num- 
ber of the elect) the nwmber of those who shall be associated with David’s 
Son in the establishment of this Kingdom ; and until this number (known 
only to God) is completed, the Kingdom itself will not be revealed. Such a 
Theocracy, in the nature of the case, cannot suddenly appear, without pre 


me | 
wa 


a 


590 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


vious preparation, and is not the product of compulsion, but cheerful obe- 
dience to God. But when the last elected one is gathered, when the pre- — 
paratory measures are all completed, then comes the sudden revelation of 
the Majestic King and His associated kings upon an awe-struck world. 
The re-establishment of the Theocracy is no longer left dependent upon 
previously gathered material to establish its efficiency and enhance its 


glory. 


Like the ancient Judges, these are Rulers, holding their office as long as they exist, 
non-conferrable to others ; whom to resist would be treasonable ; whose authority is sub- 
ordinate to the Supreme Will which it enforces ; who are ministers of justice and law, 
defenders of truth, order, virtue, religion, the good of the individual, family, society, and 
state, being pre-eminently the officers of the great king, promoting His pleasure and 
dominion. By such an order, glorified and under the supervision of a mighty infallible 
king, that which is so difficult for an earthly kingdom to attain to will be effectually 
secured, viz., stability and constant progress. No reverses can befall it ; nothing to shake — 
its solidity can possibly arise ; for reason cannot conceive of any power ample enough to _ 
overthrow it, or to impede its glorious mission and destiny. For (taking Gildas’ render- 
ing, a.p. 546, Works, S. 45) «*The Moon shall blush and the Sun be confounded, when 
our Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Sion and in Jerusalem, and be glorified in the — 
sight of His seniors” (for ‘‘seniors” comp. 2 Thess. 1:10). But this high and noble 
calling is elective ; we are now cordially invited to accept this destiny tendered, for the — 
time will come when the door is closed. Fausset (Com. Rev. 20 ; 6) aptly says: ‘* The 
privilege of our ‘high calling in Christ’ is limited to the present time of Satan’s reign ; — 
when he is bound, there will be no scope for suffering, and so afterward reigning with Him 
behwols 2h. -Cor Gi: 2) 


Obs. 10. Should the inquiry be started, by what principle of justice these 
elect saints are so highly honored above the righteous of the Millennial and — 
succeeding ages, the answer is given in the Word in the principles an-— 
nounced, and in the difference of the dispensations, as e.g. Rom. 9:16, 17;_ 
Luke 22 : 28, 29; Rom. 11 : 28, 29, ete. For such extraordinary glory” 
these saints must be trained in obedience and suffering, in temptation and | 
trial, just as the King Himseif has been. The subjects of this restored 
Theocracy, owing to the binding of Satan and the unspeakable blessings of 
the Messianic reign, will not be subjected to the same privations, tempta- 
tions, and crosses that those now are who are schooled for their future ap- 
pointments. The condition of those who succeed these in the Millennial 
age is vastly improved, faith being aided by the sight of grandeur and ~ 
glory, suffering being removed, and aid and strength being imparted by 
this very rulership. This future Kingship is really the secret cause of that 
chastening that oftentimes is now so grievous. God designs that by our 
trials we may become fitted and prepared for the position in the Coming — 
Kingdom, The elementary principles of holiness, wisdom, self-denial, — 
love, zeal, etc., are to be implanted, forming the basis of the elevation in- 
tended, and qualifying us for the high and noble designs of this determined 
rulership. God does not take ‘ the beggar from the dunghill to set him 
with princes,’ until He has passed through a preliminary training, inelud- 
ing, in many instances, this state of poverty itself as part of the discipline 
necessary. When elevated to this kingship, it will be found that the state 
of probation, the constant contact with and conflict against evil, was 
most admirably adapted to qualify these rulers for their stations ; not only 
as to their own personal relationship to each other, but likewise to bring 
them into sympathy with the nations of the earth. The physical and 
moral evil encountered, the valuable experience obtained, the relative 


4 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 591 


change realized, the characteristics developed and confirmed, these, with 
the abundant additions of the Spirit, qualify them for the honor of king- 
ship and priesthood, making them intelligent and wise kings, sympathetic 
and loving priests. Suffering, etc., prepared the blessed Master for His 
Theocratic position, and the disciple is not above the Master in this re- 
spect, but must fill up the measure of His sufferings, inasmuch as he shall 
also be allied with Him in the joy and glory of reigning. While the 
happiness and glory of David’s Son is thus promoted by His obedient 
suffering, the same is also greatly enhanced by another principle, viz., by 
the bestowal of blessings and glory upon: others in virtue of His own exalta- 
tion ; now the same is stated of these rulers, for while obtaining blessed- 
ness and glory in view of their faith and obedience, the same is made an 
instrumentality for communicating happiness to others and promoting 
blessings throughout the world. Whatever of good, etc., may be in self, 
it is also made subservient to the good of others. ‘This principle runs 
through the past dealings of God, is incorporated with His Theocratic 
ordering, and will be, as Millennial predictions abundantly show, mani- 
‘fested in this regal Judgeship. ‘This Theocracy is designed for blessing 
the world, and exhibiting the majesty and glory of God. 


This comforting and delightful subject can readily be extended. We remind the 
-reader that these very preliminary qualifications again indicate, what has been before 
stated, that there are degrees of rankce among these kings. That such degrees exist is 
evident from the terms ‘least’ and ‘‘ greatest” (Matt. 5:19), from the ruling over five 
or ten cities (Luke 19 : 17-19), from the gain or suffering loss (1 Cor. 3 : 14, 15) from the 
simple announcement, so often repeated, of rewarding every man according to his work, 
etc. Salvation is indeed of grace, but the proportionment of stations is dependent upon 
the faith and obedience of the individual. Hence the numerous cautions and exhorta- 
tions to secure not simply admittance to but ‘‘ an abundant entrance’ into, the Kingdom. 
It is not a vain interest, therefore, that John manifests, when he says (2 John 8): ‘ Look 
to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have wrought (or gained), but that 
we receive a full reward.” Error, neglect of duty, wilful sin, etc., may largely detract 
from our future reward. Barnes (Com., 2 John 8) refers to this loss, and adds: ‘* The 
crown which they wear in heaven will be less bright than that which they might have 
worn, and the throne which they will occupy will be less elevated. ‘The rewards of 
heaven will be in accordance with the services rendered to the Redeemer, and it would 
not be right that they who turn aside or falter in their course, should have the same 
exalted honors which they might have received if they had devoted themselves to God 
with ever-increasing fidelity. It is painful to think how many there are who begin the 
Christian career with burning zeal, as if they would strike for the highest rewards in 
heaven, but who soon waver in their course, and fall into some paralyzing errcr, until at 
last they receive, perhaps, not half the reward which they might have obtained.’ A 
consistent, faithful life alone secures ‘‘the full reward,” and such assurances should 
certainly urge every believer to strive to secure for himself a glorious destiny. Such de- 
grees are most reasonable, for a diversity of degrees exists in the whole order of creation, 
in the firmament above us (to which Paul appeals: ‘‘'There is one glory of the Sun and 
another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differeth from 
another star in glory,’’ 1 Cor. 15 : 41); in the world around us ; in the angelic hosts ; in 
the Church as constituted. (Comp. e.g. Lange’s Com., Heb. 4 : 1-10, Doc. 5.) It is per- 
haps in view of this that the inheritance (e.g. Acts 26 : 18 ; Coms. loci) is designated a ‘‘lot’’ 
(e.g. Dan. 12 : 13), and that believers are exhorted (Rev. 3:11) to be careful “that no 
man lake thy crown” (for they are limited in number). Graff (‘‘ Greybeard ”) in his ‘ Lay 
Sermons,” No. 6, truly observes that ‘‘the present or ecclesiastical dispensation may 
therefore be said to be allotted to the development of Christ’s aristocracy, the nobility of 
His Kingdom, the ruling class in the world to come.” After urging that humility pre- 
cedes exaltation, he says: ‘‘ If Christians were not forgetful of the distinguished honors 
which await them in the future, they would be less concerned about the honors and 
emoluments of the present.” Pregnant words; but, alas, how few heed the lesson im- 
parted. In No. 13 he has some thoughtful words on ‘‘ the Reward of Good Works 


592 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 154, 


that is superadded to Salvation,’’ in which occurs the following sentence : “ And although 
the literature of the Church abounds in ‘ crowns for the departed,’ it is not improbable 
that there will be many crownless heads on the day when the Lord shall appear to receive 
them, inasmuch as the three crowns (whatever they may typify) designated in the 
Scriptures, are mentioned in each case as the reward of some special service or merit, 
(The ‘ crown of righteousness ’ to those that ‘love His appearing ;’ the ‘ crown of glory’ to 
those who feed the tiock of Christ willingly, etc. ; the ‘crown of life’ to those who 
endure temptation and persecution.’’) Whatever may be thought of this attempted dis- 
tinction of crowns, the idea of loss, of simple salvation, is a correct one, as e.g. evidenced 
by the apostles’ teaching in 1 Cor. 3: 8-15. The principle of being thus rewarded for 
enduring hardship, self-denial, duty, etc., for Jesus’ sake is distinctly recognized by 
Jesus, e.g. when He addressed His disciples, prefacing the “ And I appoint unto you a 
kingdom,” etc. by the declaration, giving a reason for the same: ‘‘ Ye are they which have 
continued with Me in my (trials) temptations,” Luke 22 : 28, 29. The unspeakable honor 
thus conferred explains why the demands of God in reference to supreme love to Him, 
unreserved surrender to His Will, etc., are, as required in this dispensation, not fanatical 
requirements (as unbelief suggests), but essential in view of qualifying the saints for this 
rulership. Hence the Scriptures inform us that we should receive our trials and even 
tribulation joyfully, because if we endure the testing, these things shall give us a fitness 
for the special honor of kingship and priesthood. 


Obs. 11. This exaltation to a joint Theocratic rulership with David’s 
Son is an honor so wnspeakably great that it should most deeply affect the 
heart of the believer. ‘To be associated with the ‘‘ King of kings,’’ to be 
enthroned with the Mighty One, to be a Ruler with such an august Per- _ 
sonage, this, indeed, is dignity and grandeur far beyond that ever attained | 
by mortal monarch. Made Christ-like through the power of the resurrec- 
tion, with angelic power and more than angelic glory in virtue of relation- 
ship to Jesus, they ‘‘ shall shine as the brightness of the firmament and as 
the stars forever and ever (Dan. 12 : 3), or ‘‘ as the sun in the Kingdom of 
their Father (Matt. 13 : 43). So great is this honor and so productive of 
happiness, that the Spirit employs the most striking figures to indicate the 
same. ‘They are ‘‘ My jewels’’ (Mal. 3 : 17) i.e. God’s own peculiar, prized 
treasure ; they ‘‘come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy’’ (Isa. 35 : 
10) ; they shall *‘ de glad also with exceeding joy’’ (1 Pet. 4:13); they 
shall have ‘‘in Thy presence fulness of joy and at Thy right hand 
(place of authority) pleasures forever more’ (Ps. 16:11). The least in 
this body of kings and priests is far greater than John the Baptist, Matt. 
11:11, for then will be verified the declaration, Ps. 91:11: ‘* J will set 
him on high, because he hath known My name.” It is ‘‘ a manifestation of 
the sons of God,’’ a multitude of royal personages, forming the ruling 
power of an earth-wide dominion ; the very number of them, all arrayed 
in magnificence, swelling the splendor of the court of the great King, thus 
presenting a@ scene of glory that shall be the praise of the world. The very 
services rendered by these kings and priests aid materially to exalt and 
endear them to the nations over whom they rule; for not only their 
authority shall be recognized, but their love, favor, and friendship. — 
Royalty, however splendid, when distant, cold, and heartless, loses its at- 
tractions, but when brought near to the masses for purposes of beneficence, _ 
immensely augments them.’ The results, too, of their rule will augment 
their exaltation in the eyes of the nations. Greatness in Sovereign power 
is measured by the degree of success and the stability attained ; this meas- 
ure applied to the reign of the saints only evinces the more the grandeur of = 
a reign Which fills the nations with peace, plenty, and happiness, and the — 
whole earth with the worship and the glory of the Lord. ach individual — 


Prop. 154. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 593 


king now realizes—whatever his station—that (Prov. 4:8, 9) ‘‘ wisdom 
shall bring thee honor,’ and ‘‘a crown of glory shall she deliver thee.’’ 
And then shall the prediction of Ps. 89:15, 16, 17 be abundantly tul- 
filled, taking Jr. Clarke’s translation : ‘* Oh, the blessedness of that people 
that know the joyful sownd (i.e. the sound of the trumpet on the morning 
of the Jubilee). They shall walk vigorously in the light of Thy counte- 
nance. In Thy name shall they exult all that day (viz., time of jubilee), 
and in Thy righteousness shall they be exalted,’’ etc. (See Ps. 68 : 13.)? 


1 The reader’s attention is directed to several forcibly written discourses by Hon. 
Gerard T. Noel in his Brief Inquiry into the Prospects of the Church of Christ, upon this 
subject. His views are so much in accord with those presented, that an extract or two 
will be acceptable. ‘‘The higher management and control of the world will be in the 
hands, first of Christ Himself, and under Him, in the hands of men—of men, once like 

the mortal sojourners they govern, but now glorified like their Lord, and living amid 
their mortal kindred, as benefactors, princes, and kings. It is not needful to suppose 
their presence to be always apparent to their happy subjects ; but still their visible 
manifestations to be sufficiently frequent, to sustain the mutual allegiance and concord 
of mankind ; to cheer the intercourse of life ; and to perpetuate an abiding recognition 
of their intense benevolence and their sovereign authority,” (ch. 8). He makes (ch. 9) 
a beautiful suggestion : ‘‘Is it not a reasonable anticipation, that in the future scenes of 
predicted glory it may be within the power of the glorified saints still to mingle invisibly 
amid the mortal sojourners of earth ; sometimes to veil the radiance with which they 
will be clothed ? And thus when the earth shall be at rest, the voice of men be silent, 
and strife be hushed in the land, it may be permitted to these beneficent immortals, 
though reigning in the world, to lay aside their ensign of power, and to cheer some 
peaceful home of virtue and of loveliness with the intercourse of a kindness that shall 
only seem kindred to its own.” Let the reader compare our doctrine of this reign, thus 
making the saints, while highly exalted, engaged in the most noble work in behalf of the 
race, with that shadowy, intangible, ethereal theory now so prevailing in the church. Or, 
if he pleases, in view of our being called ‘‘so credulous,” let him compare it with 
Figuier’s ‘‘ Quintessential Sun Beings’’ and such expressions as ‘‘a throne of fire must 
be the throne of souls,” etc., alluding to their floating in the sun’s fiery element, and 

see who is the most credulous. Dr. J. G. Schmucker (Expos. Rev.), on Rev. 20 : 4-6, 
makes the saints have ‘‘a familiar and perhaps daily intercourse’ with mortal men, as 
‘the Lord’s ministers and agents in the administration of His government’’—so many 
others. 

‘ * Let the reader contrast the sublime destiny of the believer, as given by unlettered 
prophets and fishermen, with that presented by unbelieving learned men of the past 
and present day. Thus e.g. ponder this exalted position of kingship and priesthood, so 
correspondent with what the heart and reason desires, with the conclusions of Prof. 
Tyndall’s Inaugural Address, which, cleaving to a gross materialistic religion, expresses 
the hope that ‘‘you and I, like streaks of morning cloud, shall have melted into the: 
infinite azure of the past.’’ What a contrast! So, also, compare our view with the 
vague, indefinite, spiritualistic views so prevalent and see the great difference. Here we 
have something substantial, real, for faith to see and hope to grasp, founded, not on the 
vain conjectures of man, but on the oath-bound covenants of God and His precious promises, 
which are <* Yea and Amen.” Our doctrine does not present the saint in his future in- 
heritance as subject to a blind fate, or the unswerving forces of nature, or resolving back 
into original elements through natural causes, or uniting with the Suprems in some 
Pantheistic union, or taken away from his forfeited inheritance to unknown regions, or 
being enshrouded in a mystical grandeur and glory that no one can comprehend, etc., 
but it presents him in a definite inheritance, in a well-known Kingdom, in a position so 
accurately described, that we behold him sustaining an intelligent, religious, social, and 
civil relationship with the Supreme Intelligence and Ruler, being evermore a blessed, 
exalted co-worker with God and His Christ. 


Obs. 12. As charged by Jesus Himself, who saw the destined honor of 
His brethren, we should despise none of God’s little ones. very believer, 
who runs the race successfully, is heiv to a kingdom, heir to a substantial 


594 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154." 


kingship. He is a prince in his minority, although perhaps struggling 
with poverty and without owning a foot of land, or house to shelter himself 
and family. He may be despised and overlooked by the rich, or by his © 
neighbors, and yet he is destined to a position far higher and more honor- 
able than that occupied by the proudest, richest, greatest monarch that — 

ever lived. This is sober truth based upon precious promises that God in- 
tends to fulfil. That God now regards the poor Christian as far superior 

to a wicked king, however great and noble of birth, is apparent from Keel. — 
4:13,14. This passage cannot be appreciated unless we understand “ the — 
prison’’ alluded to as referring to the grave (shown to be a scriptural usage 
in Props. on the Resurrection). ‘‘ Better is a poor and a wise child 
(being pious) than an old and foolish king who will no more be admonished 
(i.e. remains wicked). Sor out of prison (i.e. the grave) He cometh to 
reign (according to promise) ; whereas also he that is born in His King- 
dom becometh poor.’’ At least, the pious, although not born to an earthly 
Kingdom, shall, by virtue of their union with Christ, inherit a Kingdom 
after the resurrection, while a wicked king, born to a kingdom, shall lose — 
his crown ; for, rejecting the one tendered to him, he shall never obtain 
another. From the testimony of the Word we learn that God will gather — 
these princes and kings more from the ranks of the poor and the ignorant* 
than from those of the rich, mighty, and worldly wise, simply because the | 
former are more disposed to receive and obey the truth than the latter. — 
All are equally invited, and many rich, learned, etc., have gladly availed 
themselves of the distinguishing privilege thus accorded to us, above those 
who shall follow us, in succeeding dispensations, of becoming heirs of such 
an inheritance. 

Some, who would be unwilling to express language indicative of the spirit which 
actuates them, almost act like the Sumatrian (Marsden’s His. of Sumatra, p. 289) who 
observed that the poor could not expect immortal life, ‘that only great men went to the 
skies ; how should poor men find admittance there ?’’ According to Miller and others, 
some nations assign the condition of man in the future to his rank here and not to his 
conduct. The old anecdote of the Spanish grandee who expected to enter heaven on 
account of the merit of birth, has really had its counterparts. These priests and kings 
are not merely taken from the earthly kings of the past, however lauded and eulogized — 
by State churches and court preachers (comp. Thackeray’s scathing and merited remarks 
respecting the pulpit flatteries on George the Second), but from believers, whatever their 
station. Dr. Macleod (Memoirs, vol. 1, p. 329) well appreciated this distinction when 
beholding Christ and heirship in the believing poor, he expressed himself ‘‘ to see kings — 
and queens shining through their poor raiment.” We are reminded of some of the last 
utterances, as given in his “‘ Ecclesiastes,” as follows: ‘‘ Know then, O Christian! thy 
true dignity, not acquired by merit, but given thee from heaven. I am speaking to thee, 
whether thou art @ man or a woman, young or old, rich or poor, noble or ignoble, @ 
king, a peasant, or a weaver ; and I tell thee, whoever thou art, if thou art born again in 
Christ, thou art aking! thou art a priest! thou art a saint! thou art the temple of the living 
God! Dost thou gaze in wonder at a temple of marble shining with gems and gold as 
Thou art a temple more precious than this! Dost thou regard as sacred the temple that 
Bishops have consecrated! Thou art more sacred still.”’ 


Obs. 13. The wicked shall see the glory and feel the authority of these 
saints. ‘This is abundantly evident from the action of these saints at the 
Second Advent, ruling the nations with a rod of iron, etc. It is unneces- 
sary to repeat what has been made clear under other propositions, and we 
only refer to this again to call the reader’s attention to the effect that it will 
produce upon the wicked. Thus, e.g. in Ps. 112 : 9, 10, when the horn ot 
the righteous is exalted with honor, ‘‘ the wicked shall see it and be grieved, 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 595 


he shall gnash with his teeth,’’ etc. ‘The wicked shall see this at the begin- 
ning of the Millennial era and again at its close. It will be a dreadful 
sight to them Zo see the saints thus honored with power, riches, dominion, 
and glory—triumphant heirs with Christ—and themselves defeated in their 
wickedness, fallen under Almighty power, trembling at the outpouring of 
the long-delayed wrath of the Lamb, and filled with forebodings of an im- 

ending and inevitable doom. No wonder the Spirit, all-foreknowing, 
tells us that they will “‘ gnash with their teeth,’’ for agony and despair 
with deep, untold remorse must be theirs when they contrast the exaltation 
of saints with their own unhappy one, and then remember that just such 
honor and blessedness and rank was freely, lovingly, and most urgently 
pressed upon them, but they—loving evil rather than good—foolishly and 
even contemptuously refused it. | 

It is hard to bear the contempt, scorn, and derision so lavishly heaped upon Christian- 
ity, and which shall finally culminate in another dreadful persecution of believers. But 
the time is coming when all this will be changed. When the stations are assigned, and 
the saints ‘‘ execute the judgment written,’’ then will appear God’s estimate of men and the 
world’s estimate of the followers of Jesus. Now the world, irrespective of religion, or 
even moral character, exalts, in view simply of great talent or intellect, a Goethe or 
Byron, and a host of others, including military chieftains, statesmen, etc., far above the 
Christian. But then the weakest believer, brother to Jesus, having not been ashamed to 
confess and obey Him, shall stand immensely higher ; for the King of kings will acknowl- 
edge and honor them, while those immoral, irreligious, unbelieving favorites of the 
world will be rejected as utterly unworthy of favor and blessing. Men shall and must 
reap as they have sowed, and the harvest will bring either blessing or wrath. 


Obs. 14. One grand cause of the amazing power of these kings and 
priests has already been explained under our repeated references to the 
supernatural. ‘They shall receive the promised Baptism of the Holy Ghost 
and Fire (Prop. 171). It is for this reason that Jesus promised His dis- 
ciples that they should perform greater works than He bad done while on 
earth ; and that all things that they would ask for would be granted, etc. 
This has never yet been realized. There was a partial fulfilment in the 
case of the apostles and their contemporaries, but even then their works 
did not exceed the miraculous power exerted by the Master. It is a mere 
begging of the question to say that, although miraculous power has ceased, 
greater power is really given, because charity, etc., is rather to be chosen, 
according to the apostles, as a more excellent gift. For, if the greater gifts 
are thus given, as alleged, why should not the lesser be witnessed? ‘The 
truth is, that the more excellent gifts are such because they relate to, and 
are an indication of, moral character, while miraculous power, intrusted to 
believers, is not exclusively dependent upon spiritual attainments, but can 
be conferred independently of them. The weakest as well as the strongest 
can exert the power, if communicated. But the time is coming when this 
same miraculous power shall be given to those who have made themselves 
worthy of it in a higher degree than ever yet experienced—those spiritual 
attainments forming the ground of conference—for Christ’s promises are 
all true and will be verified. 'The inchoate fulfilment is evidence of the 
more ample one when the apostles and believers inherit the Kingdom. 
This feature explains, therefore, that matchless and irresistible power with 
which they stand invested at their manifestation. 


This, aside from the supernatural power lodged in the Supreme Ruler, explains the 
triumphant predictions of the prophets respecting the irresistible progress of the King- 


596 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. _{Propr. 1548 


dom in overcoming all enemies, and obtaining universal dominion. Those Kings are 
invulnerable, being immortal, and clothed with such a baptism they can readily execute the 

commands of their King. Having the gift of tongues, they can express the Will of the | 
Majesty, and possessing the requisite power duly enforce the same. The perfection of the 
Rulers, their complete adaptedness to the positions assigned, will be fully recognized. Even 
their personal appearance, fashioned after the Christ, will secure immediate reverence, 
for, Ps. 68: 13, ‘Though ye have lain among the pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of © 
a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold.” Being equal to the © 
angels that ‘‘excelin strength,” a host like Sennacherib’s can offer no resistance of moment, 
These rulers are ‘‘raised in glory and power,” with the likeness of the mighty Elder 
Brother impressed upon each one, so that to behold one of them is to see a representative 
of the glorified King Jesus. The flashing name of the Saviour in their foreheads, the © 
splendor of their raiment, the beauty of their appearance, the multitude of them, the — 
supernatural manifested in action—all glorifies the Head and impresses the nations with 
awe and reverence. 


Obs. 15. God’s equity is vindicated by this reign of the saints. We do. 
not now allude to the restoration of forfeited blessings, for this has been — 
mentioned before, but to the simple fact that the very “place, here on earth, 
which was the scene of the saint’s pilgrimage, the Church’s struggle, the 
martyr’s suffering, the believer’s fight of faith under trial, shall become the — 
witness of the saint’s elevation, the Church’s honor, the martyr’s trinmph, 
the believer’s reign. God’s justice and grace has crowned all with the - 
kingship and priesthood, thus vindicating His assurances of ultimate up- _ 
lifting in the very earth where humiliation was experienced in reliance 
upon “His Word. “It is no small thing that the saints shall be Aings where — 
they once were poor and needy ; that they shall be happy Princes where — 
once they suffered ; that they “shall be rejoicing Nobles where once they 
sorely wept and prayed ; and triumphant Rulers where once they were— 
tempted, tried, persecuted, and afflicted. When this reigning is thus ex- | 
perienced, how will God’s ways be vindicated before the enraptured saints 
and an astonished world. 

Then a thousand promises, but imperfectly realized now, will be most amply verified. | 4 
Having sought and found the Kingdom of God (Matt. 7 : 33), ‘‘all things’ shall be added, — 
being made (Matt, 24:47), ‘ruler over all His goods.’’ Prov.*8: 18-21, ‘ Riches © 
and honor are with me ; yea, durable riches, and righteousness. My fruit is better than — 
gold, yea, than fine gold and my revenue than choice silver. Ilead in the way of right- 
eousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those who love me ~ 
to inherit substance ; and I will fill their treasures.” Prov, 22:4, ‘The reward of hu- 
mility and the fear of the Lord are riches and honor and life.’’ The Saviour’s love and 
joy will be to make His own supremely happy, so that He may be glorified in them. As _ 
earthly courts, with their officials, splendor, and wealth, reflect the greatness and grand: : 
eur of the monarch, so, but far above the power of description, will the court of the 


Messiah, with its associated rulers, its splendor, its riches, reflect the greater glory of | 
“the Prince of the kings of the earth.” 


Obs. 16. Indeed, this subject serves to throw light on the difficult sub-- 
ject of Divine Providence. For it indicates that evil cannot, and will not, 
ultijnately triumph ; its limits are definitely fixed. Owing to the proposed 
Theocracy being postponed until a number of chosen ones are gathered, 
and in view of these elect ones being tested in order to develop the charac- 
ter required by their subsequent Theocratic relationship, evil is allowed to 
the righteous as a source of trial to qualify them for their future positions, 
while prosperity and domination is given to the wicked for a time only, 
and then the triumph of the latter shall forever cease. The believer. amid 
evil is sustained by the consciousness of Divine approval, the adaptation of 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 597 


Divine truth to his moral wants, the habit of devotion and its receptive 
action, the implantation and cultivation of Christian graces, and the well- 
grounded hope, corroborated by experiences, that all things work for his 
ultimate good. The final restoration of the Theocracy with its blessed re- 
sults vindicates the present ordering instituted as a suitable preparatory 
state and discipline. 


Then what new light, what intensity of meaning, will be thrown on numerous en- 
couraging promises of Scripture. When ‘“‘ the exceeding and eternal weight of glory’’ 
is realized, then how vividly will appear such declarations as Peter’s, 1 Pet. 1 : 4-13, or 
Paul’s, Rom. 8 : 17, 18, 23-39 ; 2 Cor. 4:17, 18. The dark Providences of the past will 
shine forth, illuminated by the end purposed. Now much is perplexing and trying to 
our faith, but then the value of this disciplinary dispensation will be clearly, by actual 
experience, appreciated. The divine ordering, in the precious fruitage exhibited, will be 
fully vindicated. 


Obs. 1%. This reign of the saints, with its exalted and unending results, 
in such a Theocratic relationship, affords an additional answer to the as- 
tronomical objection of Paine and others. Aside from the questions of 
moral and civil government, the honor, etc., of God thus upheld, the inter- 
est which He manifests in intelligent creatures (His own workmanship), 
etc., Which it fully meets, the happiness, immortality, employment, and 
Divine union which these kings enjoy—eternally, too—indicates that how- 
ever great the condescension and grace of God in procuring it, this salva- 
tion exemplified in this form is, according to our highest and noblest con- 
ceptions, worthy of the Almighty, redounding to His praise and glory. It 
is a wonderful adaptation to existing circumstances, bringing forth a dis- 
play of Divine attributes and a condescension upon the part of the 
Almighty, which lifts humanity into the sphere of the Divine. 


Again we suggest that glorified saints may visit, owing to their construction (like unto 
angels) and relationship to the Divine (Christlike), other worlds ; this is only repeating 
what many Christian divines have taught, and what many now teach in their progres- 
sive theories. While the special sphere of the ruler is here on the earth, yet we need not 
limit his constant attendance to this planet. He may, for aught we know, tell the 
wondrous story of the Father's mercy and Saviour’s love, of man’g fall and restoration, 
to the inhabitants of other worlds. The relationship that this world, now broken by 
sin, sustains to others will, as the descending and ascending angels show, be restored 
again. Let us not be accused of extravagance, for such a view is sustained by strict 
analogy and intimations. To test the power of credence, let the student endeavor to 
believe what Figuier (ch. 138, The To-morrow of Death) presents under the garb of science, 
viz., that ‘‘the Solar Rays are Emanations of Spiritual Beings who dweil in the Sun.”’ 
It certainly takes faith to accept of these “ Emanations of the Souls of the Sun people,”’ 
and thus virtually return to the ancient Sun reverence. To have beings floating about in 
‘*a gaseous incandescent mass ora globe of matter in a state of fusion, surrounded by an 
atmosphere of burning gas,’’ requires an amount of reasoning and faith which the 
weakness of Biblical faith does not demand at our hands. ‘This reminds us that 
Figuier and others say that Christianity cannot explain what becomes of infants. They 
are mistaken ; for the extreme ultra views of some theologians do not constitute the 
Bible truth. We need not resort to Figuier’s successive re-incarnations. They return 
with the ransomed at the resurrection (Jer. 31 : 15-17), not being condemned on account 
of sin, and being regarded worthy of the Kingdom. Not having sustained a probation 
to develop character, nothing special is said respecting their future position, leaving it 
for the future to determine their position, both in reference to the rulers and the nations 
of the earth. They too will be supremely happy and blessed in Redemption. 


Obs. 18. The notion that the kingly office of Christ is continued and 
perpetuated in the ministry is shown to be erroneous. ‘To make out a ful- 
filment of kingship and priesthood, as promised, and to exalt the ministry, 


598 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154. 


Popery has incorporated this feature, which is also characteristic of some 


portions of Protestanism inclined, more or less, to hierarchical tendencies. 
The doctrine of the Kingdom, of the covenanted Messianic reign and that 
of the saints, is utterly opposed to such unscriptural deductions, making a 
kingly sacerdotal caste in the Church. The early Church, and Millena- 
rians ever since, has been against such extravagant and injurious assump- 
tions. Hence itis that Neander and other Church historians, when trac- 
ing the rise and progress of those lofty sacerdotal claims, this sad change 
from a church equality grounded on a common relation to Christ to a sepa- 
rate distinct mediatory royal priesthood, pass by the advocates of our doc- 
trine, and clearly show that this change arose through the opposers of Chil- 
iasm. In the very nature of the case, our doctrine could not encourage 
such usurpations of position and authority, when it distinctly ascribed the 
fulfilment of all such promises to the Second Advent of Christ in a still 
higher sense.’ On the other hand, this pre-determined rulership indicates 
how we ought to regard the efforts of a class who, to bring about the 
promised Millennial glory, dream of a period of time when all persons shall 
be forced in an equality of position, rank, and possessions. This King- 
dom and reign—the result of God’s wisdom and His choice as the best 
adapted for the world-—show that it is a wild theory of ignorance (although 
presented in attractive garb), arising from an overlooking of the present 
depravity of man and of the ultimate Divine purpose in elevating human- 
ity.’ . 


1 Popery, not satisfied with its claims of kingly priesthood exerted here on earth in the 


present dispensation, even has the absurdity of pretending by acts of canonization to — 


exalt the position of deceased saints, if not in heaven, at least on earth. Looking at the 
life of Ignatius Loyola (Nicolini’s Hist. of the Jesuits, p. 263), we find him represented in such © 
regal style that only Popes like St. Peter, Empresses like the Virgin Mary, and 


Sovereign Monarchs hke God the Father and Jesus Christ, “ enjoyed the bliss of seeing - 


him.’’ Alas, what ignorance of Scripture is thus manifested. 

2 The time of the Second Advent is the period of reigning, and not before. Thus e.g. 
Lange, on the Parable of the Pounds (Com. loci), declares that the faithful ones “ expect 
their sharein the government of the world, not before, but only after the personal return 
of the Lord” (so comp. Lange on Matt. 19 : 28; Matt. 25 : 21, etc.). Bh. Butler (Memoirs, 
p. 298) says : ** Since they (Christians) are not already invested with that degree of glory 
that will be communicated to them, they could not, under the notion of members of that 
kingdom, claim any earthly dominion before the glorious reign of Christ shall commence, 
when they shall indeed reign with Him upon the earth.” 


Obs. 19. It has been supposed (as e.g. Noel in Brief Inquiry, ch. 8) 


that Deut. 32 : 8, 9 (of which the Sep. gives the following: ‘‘ When He 
separated the nations, He set the bounds of the people according to the 
number of the angels’’) compared with Heb. 2:5, and the intimations 
of present angelic rule and interference, as given by Daniel (see Barnes on 
Dan. 10 : 13), ete., is ‘‘a type and model of the sovereignties of the elect 
Church.”’ is idea is, that the world is now in a measure controlled by 
angels, but the world to come is to be controlled by the glorified saints. 
Under such Scripture there may be an allusion to this future rulership of 
the saints, even to the extent intimated, viz., that the stations, ete., were 
determined in the division and settlements of the nations. At least, con- 
sidering the foreknowledge of the Almighty, and that, as in the case of the 
Jewish nation in its tribal divisions and settlement such divisions occurred, 
through His overruling Providence, there is nothing in such a supposition 
but what magnifies God’s knowledge. 


Prop. 154. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 099 


The perpetuity of the reign of the saints is dependent upon the perpetuity of Christ’ s 
reign, which is examined in detail under Prop. 159. Briefly, it may be said that the 
Scriptures are positive in asserting a never-ending reign, for e.g. (Dan. 7) they ‘ shall 
possess the Kingdom forever, even forever and ever,” ‘‘ whose kingdom is an everlasting 
kingdom,” etc. The glory, including associated rank with Jesus, which they receive at 
the Second Advent, is an everlasting glory. It is this eternal nature of their union with 
Jesus in Theocratic ordering, that immeasurably enhances the preciousness, the inestimable 
worth, of this kingship and priesthood. The splendid gifts coming from the loving heart 
of the King of kings will never, no never be withdrawn, for we then enter ‘‘ into the everlasting 
Kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.’’ Prov. 3 : 16 will ever be verified re- 
specting the results of wisdom: “ Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left 
hand riches and honor ;” and therefore, ‘‘ the fulness of joy in His presence and the 
pleasures forever more at His right hand” (Ps. 16 : 11), which Jesus gives to His believing 
brethren, shall never suffer the least diminution, but, on the other hand, expand and en- 
large in proportion as they delight themselves in doing His Will, and in experiencing the 
gratification of seeing “the increase of His government’’ prospering through their instru- 
mentality. 


Obs. 20. It would be exccedingly interesting to give the statements of 
others concerning this Kingship, but, out of the large number, we have only 
space for a few by way of illustration. Rothe (Dogmatic, p. 2, p. 60), refer- 
ring to *“‘ the Chiliastic Kingdom,” says: ‘* Hspecially does Paul describe 
it asa reigning of believers ‘together with Christ.’ The Apoc. exhibits 
this co-regency as the chief element of blessedness in the Chiliastic King- 
dom. The redeemed reign with Christ, sit on His throne, have power over 
the nations, and participate in the destruction of the enemies of their 
Lord. Priests and kings, they receive white robes, garments of light, and 
in these walk about with the Redeemer. They obtain the hidden manna, 

eat of the Tree of Life, wear the crown, and possess the white stone with 

the new name, which none know but they who have it. They are pillars 
in the temple of God to go out no more, and over them the second death 
has no power.”’ Richter’s Hrklarte Haus Bibel, Tom. 6, p. 1184, re- 
marks: ‘* They (of the first resurrection) shall, thereby, at the same time, 
rule as kings with Christ, according to Divine right. But where do they 
dwell, and where do they exercise their office? Not indeed any more se- 
cluded in heaven, and hid in God, but openly manifested, because then, 
for them, heaven ts upon earth and earth is heaven. ‘They are lke the 
Risen and Glorified Saviour, with a spiritual body, no more bound to the 
limits of space. ‘They reign and minister with Christ, because Christ Him- 
self shall then be openly ihe King-Priest over the whole earth (1 Cor. 15 : 24; 
fee Ps, 72; Isa. 65 + 17). "As certainly as Christ, the Risen One, was 
among the not yet risen, during forty days, so certainly shall the many 
who are risen with Him be, like Him, among those who are not raised.”’ 
Birks (Lects. during Lent, p. 187) says: “The scene of the martyr’s 
sufferings shall witness their exaltation. They who have been ejected out- 
casts in a world of rebels shall be crowned with honor and dominion over 
a world redeemed from the fall. The glorious equity of God shall thus be 
no less conspicuous than the triumph of His grace ; and men and angels 
shall join in that adoring song: ‘ Great and marvellous are Thy works, 
Lord God Almighty ; just and true are 'Thy ways, O Thou King of 
Bainits:)””’ 

Hundreds of similar declarations, ancient and modern, could readily be given, expres- 
sive of the same faith and hope. It is gratifying to think that the acquaintance of such, 


whose testimony has been so cheering, shall be formed at this period, and that we shall 
hear from their own lips the praise flowing from actual realization. The history that we 


600 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 154, 


have given of the Pre-Mill. doctrine, sufficiently indicates the abundance of material 
from which we could multiply quotations. We, however, only append a few more, 
interesting on account of the reference to passages of Scripture. Dr. Schmucker (On Rev, 
ch. 20 : 4-6, vol. 2, p. 352) correctly says: ‘‘The Lord here invests those worthy and 
qualified from among His combatants with royal authority to govern the different nations, 
kingdoms, countries, and States as His viceroys, under His superintendence and direction, 
This is indicated by the thrones, upon which they seated themselves to execute krima, 
temporal judgment, against the disobedient,” etc. (Comp. Fausset’s comment on same pas-— 
sage.) We insist upon it that the only correct view in reference to this reign, is that 
which assigns to. it both a religious and civil rule, because in a restored Theocracy the 
religious and the civil, the Church and the State, are united. Able writers, under the 
influence of a spiritual Church-Kingdom theory, that warps their interpretation, fall into 
mistakes, showing that they do not correctly apprehend the covenanted and predicted 
Kingdom that is to take the place and sway of the preceding world empires. ‘hus e.g. 
so excellent an author as Olshausen, yet more or less under a mystical influence, falls into 
an error while in the act.of an attempted correction of Hase (in his Life of Jesus, p. 84 
seq.). The latter correctly applies the promise of reigning (however he fails to locate 
the fulfilment) to a political or civil rule as entertained by the Jews (in a lower sense than _ 
that given by the prophets) in reference to the Messiah’s Kingdom. Olshausen remarks — 
(foot-note, Com. vol. 2, p. 117, Matt. 19 : 28—with which compare his concessions on ch, 
20: 20, 21): ** The rule of the apostles is no political one, but purely spiritual ; the receiy- 
ing of earthly blessings is not external, but the possession of them in Christian love, in- 
-asmuch as the very peculiarity of the Kingdom of God consists in the abolition of all — 
exclusive possessions on the part of the individual, and the giving of the whole to each.” 
While insisting upon the spirituality and blessing to all connected with this Kingdom, 
yet the fallacy of such a one-sided view is easily set aside by a few considerations. Did 
not the ancient Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom include political rulership, and, if restored, 
as covenanted and predicted, must it not embrace the same? Will not the restored Jewish 
nation and spared Gentile nations be, of necessity, in order to meet the requirements 
of prediction, under political rule? If the dominion and sovereignty of the world, 
over all people, is given to the saints, must it not include the civil? Does the Kingdom 
of God abolish individual exclusive possession, even in crown, station, reward, and glo- 
rification received? Must not each one receive and retain the allotted position and 
honor, however it may be employed for the benefit of the whole? If ‘‘the receiving of 
earthly blessings is not external,’’ how do we know that they are received, for life, health, 
riches, honor—ten thousand things—consecrated as they may be by Christian Jove, are 
real, external? Our argument, under numerous propositions, meets such applications and 
enforces our position, which is sustained by the expressed opinions of numerous able 
Pre-Mill. writers, 


Prop. 155. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 601 


Proposition 155. Lhis Kingdom exhibits Jesus, not only as 
the King, but as “ the Priest.” 


A Theocracy, in the very nature of its government, requires a 
priesthood to minister in sacred things. It is a Kingdom in which 
the Church and the State are united, and hence doth are represented 
in the officials. In the restored Theocracy this priesthood is rep- 
resented differently from that one once connected with it. The 
High-Priest and the king were separate personages, but to preserve 
unity in the coming Theocracy, the priesthood and kingship are 
united in the same Person. Hence, the Messiah is designated a 
Priest as well as a King in His official relationship as the The- 
ocratic Head. 


Obs. 1. The High-Priest was God’s representative on earth. If any 
grave question affecting the interest of the heocracy was to be decided, he 
was the one who obtained an immediate decision from Jehovah. In the 
restored Theocracy as Priest and King, Sun of David and Son of God, are the 
same person, all important questions, requiring an answer, are decided by 
Himself. God and man are in union, and represented by this High-Priest, 
(Comp. Props. 81, 199, 200.) 


Obs. 2. The Scriptures, when speaking of the priesthood of the Messiah, 
makes it something that shall evermore continue. Thus in Heb. 7 : 21-25 
we read: ‘‘ The Lord sware and will not repent, Thou art a priest forever 
after the order of Melchisedec.”’ ‘‘ But this (Priest), because He continu- 
eth forever, hath an unchangeable priesthood. Wherefore, He is able also to 
save them to the uttermost (marg. read evermore ; some critics, forever) 
that come unto God by Him, seeing that He ever liveth to make intercession 
for them’’ (comp. ch. 5: 6,10 and 6:10; Ps. 110:4). Here the Priest- 
hood of Jesus is inseparably connected with the continuance of Jesus Him- 
self, just as our whole argument demands. | 


Our opponents endeavor to limit this priesthood to the present dispensation in order 
to avoid our Pre-Millennial doctrine of the continuance of the saving work of the Christ 
after His Sec. Advent. They persistently cling to the Popish view of limiting the capability 
of receiving salvation to this dispensation alone (hence confining salvation exclusively to 
those of this and former ones), asserting in the most positive terms that the priesthood of 
Jesus will come to an end at the close of this age when the harvest and vintage occur. A 
glance at the works opposed to us shows that this is a favorite and oft-repeated assertion. 
The chapters most misleading and sophistical in the work of Rev. Dr. D. Brown (Christ's 
Sec. Coming), most eminently calculated to darken the truth,and produce the predicted faith- 
less state in discerning the Divine Purpose, are those relating to the completeness of the 
Church at the Sec. Advent, the ending of the work of the Holy Spirit, the cessation of 
the priesthood or intercession of Jesus for saving purposes, and the declaration that the 
object of the Scriptures is exhausted by the Coming of Christ. How these propositions 
are based on mere inferences has been shown by various writers (Lord and others), and 
it is not necessary to repeat the answers thus given, seeing that each objection is fairly 
and adequately met in the present work under appropriate headings, Our argument con- 


602 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 155. 


tends for the completeness of the church (forming ‘‘the married wife” in contrast to ‘‘ the 
barren women,’ comp. Prop. 118), but proves that this very Church, thus completed and 
perfected, is employed in Saving work in the age to come ; for a vast host, including the 
restored Jewish nation and spared Gentile nations, are also to be redeemed, etc. The 
Church of ‘‘the first-born,’’ ‘* the first-fruits,” implies this distinctive feature, and by no 
means excludes salvation from others who may follow, because two classes of passages 
have to be considered ; first, those relating to completeness, and second, what this body, 
after being made complete, is to perform. ‘The ceasing of the work of the Spirit, of in- 
tercession for saving purposes, is refuted by the extraordinary Baptism of the Spirit then 
(Prop. 171) to be experienced, and by ‘‘the unchangeable priesthood’’ of Jesus, while 
the extraordinary statement that ‘‘Christ’s Sec. Coming will exhaust the object of the 
Scriptures’’ is utterly unworthy of serious refutation in the light of covenant, prophecy 
and promise. His Coming again is to amply fulfil and not exhaust the Scriptures, to 
bring in and perpetuate the everlasting Kingdom as revealed in them. 


Obs. 3. This Priesthood is a royal one, i.e. it is firmly, inseparably 
united to His royalty. Hence Zech. 6:13 says of the Messiah: ‘* He 
shall sit and rule upon His throne, and He shall be a Priest upon His — 
throne.’?’ When this Messianic throne is established, has been abundantly 
shown and proven under various Propositions (comp e.g. Prop. 83, 122, 
131, etc.). lis covenanted (Prop. 49) throne is established at His See. 
Advent, at which time He sits on His throne, bears rule, and exhibits 
Himself on that throne as the ‘‘ great High-Priest.’’ Therefore in Ps. 110, 
when ‘‘ the rod of His strength shall come out of Zion,’’ He shall ** rule in 
the midst of His enemies,’’ ‘‘ strike through kings in the day of His 
wrath,” “‘ judge among the heathen,’’ ‘‘ wound the heads over many 
countries,’ have a ‘‘ willing” and ‘‘ holy people’’ ‘‘in the day of His 
power,”’ and in the morning (all of which is distinctively related to His 
Sec. Advent), then, at that time, the priesthood is also manifested, for — 
then is to be fully verified : *‘ The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, 
Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec,”’ or, as some render 
it, ‘* A priest for the ages (to come) after the order (manner) of Melchise- 
dec,’’ i.e. a king-priest. 

The pregnant words of Fairbairn (Typol., vol. 1, p. 264) are worthy of notice: ‘*‘ Melchis- 
edec already, in a measure, possessed what Abraham still hoped for—he reigned where 
Abraham’s seed were destined to reign, and exercised a priesthood, which in future gen- 
erations was to be committed to them.” Now, apply this to the distinguished ‘‘Seed,’’ as 
Scripture does, and Melchisedec becomes highly typical of Christ’s reigning and 
priesthood united in the same person and the same capitol. Therefore, Kurtz’s (Sac. His., 
p. 75) remarks are better ; after referring to Jesus as ‘‘a priest forever after the order of 
Melchisedec,” and calling Him, therefore, ‘‘ the eternal Priest-King in the city of the 
great King,’’ adds: ‘‘When the priesthood of Abraham shall have been manifested in 
Aaron and his royal rank in David, and when both features, in union, shall have been man- 
ifested in their most complete form in Christ, the future will be seen to be infinitely 
more glorious and perfect than the present time.” It is strange that, notwithstanding 
the plain declarations that we hold to an eternal priesthood of the Christ, and our quo- 
tations favoring the same, a writer in the Princeton Repertory, January, 1853, has the un- 
fairness to say that we only make Jesus a king after His Sec. Advent and no priest, de- 
claring that we teach ‘‘ that the present is the priestly age of Christ, the age yet to come, 
before entering upon which He will have finished the work of intercession, is His kingly 
age.” See the scathing and well-merited rebuke that the article received from D. N. Lord 
in the Lit. and Theol. Journal. The writer foists upon us a doctrine that we reject, and 
which forms animportant element (comp. Dr. Brown’s Christ's Sec. Com.) of his own sys- 
tem, and is partially (at least ) held by some followers of Miller, the Seventh-Day Adven- 
tists, and others. 


Obs. 4. Now, He isa Priest (Heb. 8:1) on the Father’s throne, and 
when He is on His own throne (as Dayid’s Son, Rey. 3 : 21) He continues 


PROP. 155.| . THE THEOORATIC KINGDOM. 603 


Priest, simply because His great sacrificial act, performed once for all, 
ever stamps Him as a Priest—a successful and acknowledged High-Priest. 
Gratitude, love, reverence, honor, blessing, salvation—all regard Him as 
the Priest, and so long as these endure the priesthood of Jesus remains a 
reality. When He tendered His priceless offering, when He ascended to 
heaven and interceded for man, this only indicates that He is the worthy 
Priest who shall come again—for His work as Priest ever remains, and is 
inseparably connected with His official station. As Priest He secures for 
us (Heb. 9 : 12) “eternal redemption’’ and not a mere temporary deliver- 
ance, and, therefore, it becomes this Priest, as such, and thus recognized, 
ever to remain in immediate relationship with this redemption. 

The peculiar views of the Seventh-Day Adventists and a few others, respecting the 
cleansing of the sanctuary after 2300 years (which they make the heavenly, and now in 
progress), we have met in another place. Asidefrom the representations (Heb. 8: 2;9: 
11-14 ; 10 : 12-14, 19, 20 ; etc.) that an atonement has been made and perfected, that Je- 
sus has already entered the most holy place for us, etc., it is sufficient to point out the in- 
correctness of sucha view, from the fact that it incorporates, as an essential factor to sus- 
tain it, the notion that when this alleged act of atonement is finished, then also the priest- 
ly office of Jesus ceases. This, as we show, is opposed to the most express declarations of 
an ever-abiding priesthood. So also the peculiar views incorporated with the above re- 
specting the Ark of the Covenant or Testimony, are abundantly met and answered by con- 
sidering the typical nature of the same, and its contents, and how they are fully matedin 
Jesus, in the divine-human, pardon in Him, ‘‘the end of the law,” magnifying the law, 
the righteousness of God in Him, etc., without taking from Him one of the most honor- 
able and distinguishing offices pertaining to Him personally. 


Obs. 5. Therefore, the continuity of His priesthood is identified with the 
perpetuity of His own existence (Heb. 7 : 24, 25): ‘‘ But this man (Jesus) 
because He continueth ever (Gr. remains forever) hath an unchangeable priest- 
hood.” ‘* He ever liveth to make intercession.”’ It cannot be taken from 
Him and given to others, but as long as He exists, so long does the priest- 
hood pertain to Him. He alone stands forth in all succeeding ages as the 
High-Priest. In an epistle specially devoted to exhibit ‘‘ the unchangeable 
priesthood’’ of Jesus, it is expressly declared (Heb. 13 :8): ‘* Jesus Christ, 
the same yesterday, and to-day, and forever.” 

This permanency of Jesus is exceedingly precious to the believer, opening up before 
him an eternal inheritance secured by co-heirship with Him. He changes not ; this is the 
uniform teaching of Scripture on the subject. Ages may pass, changes may be intro- 
duced, revelations may be given and extended, etc., but Jesus will ever remain the same 


Prophet, Priest, and King; and this unchangeableness presents the assurance that the 
kingship and priesthood inherited through Him are also ever enduring. 


Obs. 6. This blessed truth is reiterated in such a way as if purposely to 
meet the unbelief respecting it. Thus (Heb. 7 : 15, 16) it is positively an- 
nounced, ‘‘ that after the similitude of Melchisedec there ariseth another 
priest, who is made, not after the law of a carnal commandment, but after 
the power of an endless life.’”? Barnes himself (Com. loci.) has to admit, 
over against his own theory, that this means: ‘‘ By an authority of endless 
duration,’”’ that it denotes a priesthood ‘‘ unchanging in its character,”’ ** it 
was enduring and perpetual as a priesthood,”’ but, after all, makes it such 
only to fit into his Post-Millennial scheme for this dispensation. 

Dr. Brown, in the last ed. (1879) of Christ’s Sec Coming., waives (in foot-note) the argu- 


ment drawn from the locality of intercession as not necessary; and then as to the contin- 
ued priesthood of Christ has the following: ‘‘Nor dol enter into the questions which 


604 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 155. 


have been raised about the continuance of Christ’s intercession, and in what sense, after 
the whole Church has been gathered and perfected. J will not be drawn into such matters.” 
Of course not ; for, if drawn in, he would have to contradict himself. 


Obs. %. This priesthood, being after the similitude of Melchisedec, is 
exhibited in its completeness with His kingship. Now, at His Sec. Ad- 
vent He comes as King, and reigns as King ; it follows, therefore, that He 
is also revealed as Priest. The two offices are wazted in the same person, 
and so long as the one endures the other must also remain. His Kingship 
is eternal (comp. Prop. 159), so likewise must be the priesthood. 

Some few endeavor to date the priesthood of Jesus from His ascension to heaven, but 
this is incorrect, as abundantly shown in the reasoning of Hebrews, etc. For He was call- 
ed before His death, He was to tender a sacrifice which was Himself, etc., so that in view 
of His appointment and His sacrifice for sin, He was received by the Father as a worthy, 
acceptable High Priest. While on earth He was Priest and King, but His priesthood and 
kingship were both veiled. The latter was, owing to the unrepentant state of the nation, 
held in abeyance ; the former was only indirectly presented until the tragedy of the cross, — 
under the enlightening interpretation of the Holy Spirit, shed a flood of light on the 
subject. The sacrifice was one act of this Priest ; the presentation and acceptance of that 
sacrifice in heaven was another act ; the intercession and advocacy is still another contin- 
uous one ; the public exhibition of the results of His ministry is another ; and the symmet- 
rical union of all His offices publicly manifested is still another. 


Obs. 8. If the saints are to be “‘ kings and priests’’ in the future King- 
dom (Props. 118, 153, 154), ¢hen it follows that the Elder Brother is also 
the same. ‘This necessarily follows, because His brethren are co-heirs with 
Him to the same inheritance, honor, and glory. He is the great High- 
Priest, they are associated with Him as Priests. (Comp. Prop. 156.) 


Obs. 9. Jesus, the Christ, ever remains “‘ an High-Priest of good things 
to come’’ (Heb. 9 : 11), inasmuch as the Redemptive work, of which He is 
the Priestly-Head, shall continue after the Sec. Advent. ‘This is seen in the 
finished Redemption of His brethren and in the blessings enjoyed by them ; 
in the conversion of the Jewish nation, which obtains repentance and 
grace though Ilis blood and intercession, after His Coming ; in the mercy 
and happiness bestowed upon the spared Gentile nations aiter His Advent 
and conflict with Antichrist, which can only be predicated of His priestly 
influence ; and in the perpetuation of the human race for saving purposes 
and the glory of God, which results from His continued efficiency as Media- 
tor. He is the Priest of ‘‘ the everlasting covenant,’ and as such He not 
only provides the provision for its realization, but being its ‘* swrety’’ He 
remains personally interested in the same, and secures it for us, 


Obs. 10. The Theocracy is designed to secure for us all the forfeited 


blessings. ‘T'o do this, and bring in the predicted righteousness and glory, 
demands the personal supervision of our High-Priest. Full and complete 
deliverance from sin and evil, so far as this earth and this race is concerned, 
is only promised to exist one thousand years (and a little season, Rev. 20) 
after the Sec. Advent. The priestly office will yet evidence its sufficiency 
in wresting from Satan His victory, and in ultimately crushing out all sin 
and all its sad consequences, 


Obs. 11. Such a continuing High-Priest evidences the spirituality con- 
nected with this Kingdom. Our opponents stigmatize it as ‘* carnal,” 


ROP. -15).)) THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. 605 


etc., but the presence and official station of this Priest sufficiently refutes 
such a charge. He is the great Presider over things relating to the 
Divine ; He is the Head of all religious affairs ; He is the Oracle of God’s 
truth ; He is the final and infallible arbiter in all questions. Through 
Him and in Him, the Father is always approached, and worship, and rever- 
ence, and praise to the Godhead always ascends in His name. 


Obs. 12. When we consider the greatness and majesty of this High- 
Priest, the incomparable and all-sufficient sacrifice offered, the exaltation 
and power, God’s special choice and not man’s, bearing the people on His 
loving breast, His immense superiority over all other priests, His confirma- 
tion by oath and perfection, His Holiness, then we can rest assured that 
His priestly work will be fully accomplished, and that as the priestly agent 
He will ever, as such, rejoice in it. 


This shows us how we thus obtain an infallible Head, not after the vain and sacrilegious 
caricature given to us by human wisdom and craft, but after God’s own wonderful de- 
vising. Such an accessible Head humanity needs, and this need will be most gloriously 
supplied, 


Obs. 13. It is only requisite to remind the reader, that this priesthood 
largely pertains to the humanity of the Christ. While the Divine united 
to Him gives it increased dignity, efficiency, preciousness, etc., yet we are 
told (Heb. 2 : 16, 17) that ‘‘ He took on Him the seed of Abraham, where- 
fore in all things it behoved Him to be made like unto His brethren, that 
He might be a merciful and faithful High-Priest in things pertaining to 
God,”’ etc. (comp. v. 14, etc.), and that ‘‘ He sprang out of Judah’’ 
(Heb. 7:14). This priesthood is part of the exaltation of His Humanity 
—it is inseparably identified with it, and the entire reasoning of Hebrews 
associates the call and perpetuation of that Humanity, as David’s Son—in 
its earthly and glorified condition with the same. Thus united, we dare 
not separate them, Jest we detract from the ever-enduring exaltation of 
Humanity itself, as seen in this High-Priest and His associated priests. 


Obs. 14. The Primitive-Church view confirms our position. For several 
centuries after the First Advent, the ministers clearly taught the Pre-Mill. 
Advent, the conversion of the nations following, etc., thus continuing the 
priestly work of Jesus in mediation, intercession, and saving purposes. 
The present prevailing belief on the subject, founded on a Post-Mill. 
theory, was utterly discarded (comp. Props. 74-76). The teaching of men 
so nearly allied to apostolic instruction, should have some weight in a 
matter so important, especially when we find the same so fully substantiated 
by the present infallible rule of faith, the Scriptures. 


Obs. 15. The views of eminent writers and commentators, corroborating 
this doctrine, tends to show, that in the estimation of such, it is a truth 
clearly taught, which should be unhesitatingly received. We append a few 
utterances. 


Judge Jones (Notes) has two exceedingly interesting comments on Melchisedec (p. 190 
and 233, seq.), and repeatedly, in detail, urges the future and eternal priesthood of Jesus as 
the Son of man. He makes “ His sovereignty, and priesthood commensurate and insep- 
arable,’’ and correctly makes the gathering out of the present elect ‘‘not the whole of our 
Lord’s redemptive work. As the Son of man and the patriarchal King and Priest of the 


606 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 155. 


whole world—the true Melchisedec and King of peace,’’ ete. (comp. Proph. 196), The views 
of Alford, Olshausen, Bengel, Steir, and others are interesting and confirmatory. Even 
such a commentator as Moll (Lange’s Com. Heb.) designates Jesus as ‘‘the promised 
eternal priestly King’’ and writes of Him as ‘‘ The bearer of an eternal and untransferable priest- 
hood.”’ He also carefully distinguishes between His priestly office exhibited in sacrifice 
and entrance into the Holy Place as the antitype of the Aaronic high-priest, and this special © 
priesthood after the order of Melchisedec ; the former being of a propitiatory nature and 
manifested in the offering of Himself and the divine acceptance of the same in His as- 
cension to the Holy of Holies above ; the latter being a royal priesthood, ‘‘a position 
exempted from future sacrifices, and fraught with unlimited homage, honor, and capacity 
for the bestowment of blessings.” Numerous comments from opponents, admitting an 
eternal, unchangeable priesthood, might be quoted, which alone logically fit into our 
system of doctrine. 


Obs. 16. This unchangeabls priesthood, in connection with the ever-en- 
during priesthood of the saints, seems to confirm the opinion of those who 
hold to an endless succession of generations (comp. Prop. 152, on Perp. of 
Race). We would not deny the inference, because it possesses weighty © 
reasons for its entertainment, and such a succession for many ages, at 
least, is clearly taught. But we can easily conceive of a continued priest- 
hood, even if such a perpetuation of the race should cease, on the ground 
that the superior, the ruling power, will always minister in Divine things 
to the inferior, the subjected one. We leave this matter, as stated in 
Prop. 152. 


PROP. 156: ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 607 


Proposition 156. The doctrine of the Kingdom enforces the 
future priesthood of the saints. 


The promise is that the saints shall be both ‘‘ kings and priests”’ 
(Rev. 1: 6, and 5: 10, and 20: 6) in the coming Kingdom. Prop. 
154 shows the civil relationship of the saints, this one relates to 
the religious, for, like Christ, the Theocratic King, they are both 
civil and religious rulers. The nature of a Theocracy demands, 
in view of the inseparable union of State and Church, such a leader- 
ship in order to secure the requisite purity and perfection. 

The doctrine of ‘‘the Universal Priesthood,” as held by many denominations—a 
special favorite of some theologians—and applied to the ministry and laity of the present 
dispensation—all true believers—is only a faint earnest of the future one. Indeed, equal- 


ity of all believers in this respect finds a strong corroborating evidence in the ultimate uni- 
versal priesthood as exhibited in the Theocracy. 


Obs. 1. A Theocracy, to preserve a manifested unity and enforce its 
authority supremely, requires the union of priesthood and rulership in the 
same persons. ‘The inseparable union of Church and State, the Head of 
both Church and State being God Himself, demands doth a religious and 
civil administration, and hence to insure the proper, equitable, and perfect 
combination of authority, and the essential enforcement of law and order, 
it is the highest wisdom to lodge the rulership and priesthood, not in two 
distinct bodies, but in one special raised up body. This wisdom, which 
commends itself to reason, is fully exhibited in the Divine ordering per- 
taining to the restored Theocracy. 

We may well imagine that the Spirit lays stress on the word ‘‘royal’’ in ‘royal 
priesthood ” (1 Pet. 2: 9, called before that, ver. 5, ‘‘an holy priesthood ”), indicative of 
priests possessing the dignity of kings. The palace of the Theocratic ruler was the tem- 
ple, and in view of the presence and majesty of the Sovereign, the pomp and splendor 
of the priesthood in their administrations is readily accounted for, and gives us the idea 
—supported by promise—of the future splendor and giory of the priesthood. 


Obs. 2. Jesus in His Coming Kingdom is doth King and Priest. This 
has been shown in detail, and is one of the most precious of truths relating 
to His future glory, the station of the saints, and the destiny of the race. 
Now, the saints being co-heirs with Him, participants of His honor and 
glory, partake of His Kingship and Priesthood. In this they “ shall be 
like Him,’’ thus fulfilling the promises pertaining to ¢he greatness of their 
joy, honor, and glory. Hence they are distinctively promised, not only the 
exaltation of kingship, but also that of priesthood. And, we may rest as- 
sured, ‘‘ that both will be most amply verified, seeing that it is God who 
gives us the assurance.’’ 

Anciently, as various writers (comp. Fairbairn, Typology, vol. 2, p. 221, who refers 


to Vitringa, Miiller, etc.,) have shown, the kingship and priesthood were united (as e.g. 
in Melchisedec), so that, as Miller expresses it, ‘‘it might be said with just as much truth, 


+ 


608 ; THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 156. 


that the kings were priests, as that the priests were kings.” (This union is also illustrat- 
ed by the Greeks and Romans, as Vitringa has shown in princes, magistrates, heads of 
communities, and even of families.) Now, just as the earlier kings were ‘“ priest-kings,”’ 
forming ‘‘a specially highly privileged nobility,” so these latter kings will be recognized 
as ‘‘ Priest-Kings’”’—a nobility associated with the Theocratic King. 


Obs. 3. A Theocracy being a Divine-Civil Government, God Himself 
being the earthly Ruler, a certain pre-eminence is given to the religious 
above the civil. This is seen in the Theocracy as once existing, in the 
provisions made for its restoration (the religious qualifying for the ultimate 
civil), and in the simple fact that the Divine is fundamental to all other 
relations whatever. Hence we need not be surprised that prominence is 
given to this priesthood, as in Ex. 19 : 6, where God promises to raise up 
unto Himself *‘ a kingdom of priests,’’ and in Rev. 20 : 6, where the being 
‘* priests of God and of Christ’ 1s mentioned as a distinguishing character- 
istic associated with the reign. 

The same prominence is indicated if we take the mss. rendering (Tischendorf’s 
N. Test., the 8. and A.) of Rev. 1 : 6, ‘‘a kingdom, priests,” and Rev. 5 : 10 (the §.), “a 
kingdom and priesthood,” pointing us back to Ex. 19:6. The principle inculcated in 


Proy. 25:5 will be manifested in the highest degree: ‘‘ Take away the wicked from 
before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.” 


Obs. 4. In Hx. 19:5, 6 we have presented God’s desire to exalt the 

Theocratic ordering by making it ‘‘ a Kingdom of priests,” 1.e. a Kingdom 
so permeated by heartfelt allegiance to God, the Ruler, that it would be 
under the permanent authority of a holy priesthood, thus making the — 
Divine a controlling element. A Theocracy in its purity demands holiness, 
an entire consecration to its Ruler. This idea remained unrealized, not- 
withstanding its tender to the Jewish nation, on account of disobedience. 
But this sinfulness of the nation will not prevent God from ultimately 
realizing in ample fulfilment His purpose as indicated. This will be done 
when the Theocracy is restored under David’s Son. In the mean time, to 
insure the complete realization, God is constantly raising up those who are 
destined to officiate as Priests in the coming Kingdom. ‘These are speci- 
fied, and the promise of Ex. 19 : 5, 6 applied ¢o them, by Peter (1 Pet. 2: 9) 
““ But ye are a chosen generation, aroyal priesthood, an holy nation, a 
peculiar people.’’ By the process of engrafting, these priests, being thus 
all the children of Abraham, are fully incorporated with the common- 
wealth of Israel. 

The student must here be cautioned against dogmatically interpreting some Millen- : 
nial predictions. Owing to this engrafting and incorporation of the glorified priests 
with the Jewish nation, it is sometimes difficult to discriminate between what pertains to 
the glorified and what to the unglorified portion. Both are mingled and inseparably | 
united as e.g. in Isa. 60, 45, etc. Jews in the flesh (comp. Obs. following, and the one / 
on order) shall also be priests (as e.g. stated Isa. 66 : 21), but they occupy a subsidiary 
position when contrasted with the glorified. Both the glorified and unglorified (for 
‘‘all shall be righteous,” ete., when once united in the Theocratic ordering) seem to be 
denoted in places as e.g. Isa. 61 : 6, ‘* But ye shall be named the Priests of the Lord ; men 


shall call you the Ministers of our God,” for the context refers both to the saved of this 
dispensation and to the restoration of the nation, 


Obs. 5. ‘‘ The first-born’’ of Israel were regarded as specially belonging to 
the Lord and consecrated to the Priesthood. Writers on the Jewish Laws — 
(as Michaelis, Wines, etc.) have noticed this in detail. Thus Wines 
(Com. on- Laws, ete., B. 2, ch. 8) says: ‘‘ On the departure of the Israel- 


Prop. 156. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 609 


ites from Egypt, all their first-born males were sanctified to the Lord and 
destined to the altar. But the difficulty of obtaining from each family its 
first-born son, the difficulty of detaching them from their private interests, 
as citizens of such a tribe or such a town, rendered this mode impracti- 
cable. Moses, therefore, without in the least changing the original principle, 
substituted for this service the tribe of Levi, in place of all the first-born’’ 
(Ley. 8 : 2-5; Numb. 8 : 5-22, etc.). ‘This substitution is represented as 
‘a gilt,”? and as a constant reminder that the principle remained un- 
changed, that God’s claim still existed, a redemption price for the first- 
born was exacted.’ Owing to human imperfection and weakness, God’s 
just claim could not be carried into practical execution, and He only de- 
signs to teach us by this (1) that on account of dependence upon Him and 
His regal authority, a Divine service tendered to Him is, in virtue of His 
Divinity and Majesty, of the first importance in a Theocratic ordering ; and 
(2) that this should be a sign or type of the realization of the ultimate Pur- 
pose of God, viz., that ‘‘ the first-born’’ of the Church should become 
Priests in the incoming Theocracy.’ 


1 Wairbairn (Typol., vol. 2, p. 221) says that many leading Jewish authorities (Jonathan, 
Onkelos, Saadias, Jarchi, Aben Esra, etc.,) and men of great learning (Grotius, Selden, 
Bochart, etc.,) held, that among the privileges of the first-born was that of the priestly 
function, basing it on Ex. 24:5, Esau’s birthright, and God's special consecration of 
the first-born after their redemption in Egypt. This opinion, he thinks, however, ‘as 
almost universally abandoned,” and says, in view of the special Levitical arrangement 
subsequently made, that the right to the priestly office was not ‘‘reckoned among the 
rights of primogeniture. These rights Scripture itself has plainly restricted to pre- 
eminence in authority among the brethren, and the possession of a double portion in the 
inheritance.” Fairbairn is evidently incorrect, as the references to the Scriptures abun- 
dantly prove. The restriction that he refers to is based upon the simple fact, that, owing 
to the constant redemption of the first-born. and the provision made for others to 
officiate in their place, it is not mentioned as a distinctive privilege which was realized. 
maumpers ch. 3:12, 13, 40, 51; ch. 18: 15; Ex. 18 : 12; 13 and 34: 19, 20; Numb: 8 : I7— 
19 are decisive on the matter, and clearly show the correctness of our position in the 
text, which is corroborated, wonderfully, by the typical nature of the same. Before the 
appointment of Levi's descendants, ‘‘ the first-born of every family, the fathers, the 
princes, and the kings, were priests. Thus Cain and Abel, Noah, Abraham, Melchisedec, 
Job, Isaac, Jacob, offered themselves their own sacrifices” (art. ‘‘ Priests,” Hncy. R. 
Knowl.). This universal principle remained unchanged, although modified to suit the 
special circumstances of the nation. 

2 To indicate how even our opponents concede that this promise of God respecting the 
priesthood, typified by ‘‘the first-born” is verified in the priesthood of the first-born 
of the church, we refer to Prof. Bush, Com. on Genesis, ch. 25 :32. ‘‘ The following are 
usually enumerated as the principal privileges which constituted the distinction of the 
first-born : (1) They were peculiarly given and consecrated to God, Ex. 22 : 29; (2.) they 
stood next in honor to their parents, Gen. 49 : 3 ; (3.) had a double portion in the paternal 
inheritance, Deut. 21 : 17; (4) succeeded in the government of the family or Kingdom, 
2 Chron. 21 : 3 ; and (5) were honored with the office of priesthood and the administration 
of the public worship of God. The phrase ‘ first-born,’ therefore, was used to denote one 
who was peculiarly near and dear to his father, Ex. 4 : 22, and higher than his brethren, 
Ps. 89 : 28, and typically pointed to Christ, and to all true Christians, who are joint- 
heirs with Him, to an eternal inheritance, and constitute the first-born, whose names 
are written in heaven, Heb. 12 : 23.’’ In view of Paul calling Esau ‘‘a profane person,” 
_ he adopts the view of the Pict. Bible that Esau specially ignored and despised the spirit- 
ual or priestly, rather than the temporal, advantages of his birthright. This may be so, 
because the temporal might be retrieved by industry, ete., but the priestly once forfeited 
could not be renewed. Many writers of ability indorse Bush’s position, 


Obs. 6. The priests were specially charged (Deut. 33 : 9,10 and 17 : 9- 
13; Ley. 10:11; Hos. 4:6; Mal. 2: 7%, etc.) to preserve and teach the 


610 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 156, 


laws, Theocratic, that were already given. They could not change them, 
or substitute others, for this would have reflected upon the wisdom, ete., 
of the ''heocratic King, the mighty God, and would have introduced con- 
fusion and anarchy. The purity of a Theocracy demands such a position 
of the priests—a subordination to the Divine Majesty and the upholding of 
His enactments. In the restored Theocracy this again will be the attitude 
of the priesthood. When ‘‘ the law shall go forth of Zion and the Word — 
of the Lord from Jerusalem’’ (Mic. 4:23 Isa. 2: 3, etc.) ; when the in- 
coming dispensation (Props. 140, 141) shall introduce new revelations of 
God’s Will (Prop. 167), a renewed ordering (Props. 131), these priests, the 
first-born of the SGhurent will be the grand medium of communicating the 
same. Then it will be true (Ps. 68 : 11) ‘‘ The Lord gave the word : great 
was the company (army) of those that published it.”’ 


Obs. 7. The priests acted as Judges (Deut. 21 : 5 and 17 : 8-13, etc.), B08 

that with the priestly, there was inseparably associated the civil character. — 
They were by virtue of their priesthood in the service of the State and — 
Church—they were, as a Theocratic ordering necessitates, ministers of 
Church and State. Thus will it be again, but with this vast difference ; 
the priesthood, instead of being deposited in the hands of mortal, weak, and 
fallible men, is then committed to glorified and infallible ones, united by — 
the firmest bonds that grace and salvation can bestow to the mighty — 
Theocratic King. 


1 The ancient priests were distributed through all the territories of Israel, so that they 
could best promote the general interest and welfare. The-High Priest permanently © 
resided at the Capitol, and from this centre the priesthood radiated to the extremities 
of the vation, to exalt law, order, peace, the Theocratic polity. Specially they were 
called to Jerusalem on stated times for purposes of worship, but ordinarily they resided 
among those whom they taught and judged. These priests were inseparably bound to the — 
State, seeing that all their interests, station, and honor were bound up with it. They © 
were not only priests, but, as such, civil magistrates. Thus Wines (Com. on Laws, p. 
612) remarks: ‘The Levites were not a mere spirituality. Certainly they were the — 
ministers of religion and charged with all the functions appertaining to the public — 
worship of Jehovah, But so close was the relation between the law and the religion of | 
the Hebrews, that all ecclesiastical persons were at the same time political persons. The — 
entire tribe of Levi was set apart to God, the King of this Commonwealth. Politically _ 
speaking, they were Jehovah's ministers of state. Hence this tribe, as constituted by — 
Moses, was not only a priesthood appointed to the service of the altar, but also a true 
temporal magistracy, having important and vital civil relations. The burden of govern-_ 
ment was, in a great measure, laid upon its shoulders, Besides performing the cere- 
* monies of public worship, it was destined to preserve in its integrity and to interpret — 
in the seat of justice the text of the fundamental laws ; to teach these laws to Israel ; 
to inspire the people with a love for them ; to oppose all its own authority and influence 
against any and every attempt to overthrow them ; and to bind firmly together all the 
parts of the body politic.” 


Obs. 8. In ancient times there were various orders of the priesthood, the 
high-priests, the priests that officiated at the altar, and the various com- 
panies of assistants. Following analogy, and the hints given respecting 
the variety of station, rank, reward in kingship ; observing the exclusive-— 
ness of the 144,000 and the position of the future martyrs ; considering | 
the possibility asserted in the Scriptures of attaining unto eternal life and 
yet suffering loss, etc., it is reasonable to anticipate “that under the leader- 
ship of the great High- -Priest there will be gradations of rank and order 11 
this priesthood. Not all believers will be kings or priests (Props. 130, 


PRop. 156. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 611 


153), but only those specially cownted worthy of the honor. But such will 
| the honor and delight, the fulness of happiness and the recognition of 
grace, that even the most subsidiary position will be abundantly satisfac- 
tory, as expressed by David, Ps. 84:10. A diversity in unity, a variety of 
gifts and ministrations, a distribution of rank and office, enriches the com- 
munion and intercourse of the saints with each other and with the 
nations ; it serves as the basis of a mutual impartation of benefit and bless- 
ing. 

The twenty-four courses of priests in order to secure a constant attendance and suc- 
cession, the specific appointments to certain performances (as to incense, singing, etc.), 
all may, for aught we know, foreshadow a similar arrangement in the restored Theocra- 
ey with increased splendor and glory commensurate with the renewed and majestically en- 
larged ordering. To enter into details, and endeavor to fix with any degree of exactness, 


what may be in the general dimly typified, would be rashness and presumption. Time, 
with its fulfilment, can alone inform us correctly. 


Obs. 9. These priests tender the sacrifices of heart, lips, and life— 
*“‘ spiritual sacrifices’? (1 Pet. 2:5; Heb. 13 : 15, 16, etce., showing how 
the word ‘‘ sacrifice’ is employed). ‘The offerings that they bring are not 
bloody sacrifices, for these are superseded by the one offering (Heb. 
10 : 12-14, etc.) of Jesus, but offerings indicative of allegiance, friend- 
ship, reverence, gratitude, praise, service. This has been so amply discuss- 
ed that it needs no repetition (see Prop. 172). These priests conduct the 
public worship of God; they show forth His excellencies in Creation and 
Redemption ; they stimulate to gratitude, love, prayer, and praise ; they 
teach, proclaiming the truth as committed to them and exemplified in 
themselves ; they advise and decide questions referred to them ; they en- 
force, by the weight of their relationship to the Christ and by their author- 
ity, the Theocratic constitution and laws. 

Dr. Thomas (Kingd. of God, p. 44), misapprehending the last chs. of Ezekiel (which 
see explained, Prop. 172), makes the glorified priests to be referred to in Ezek. 44: 16, 
as engaged in bloody sacrifices. But that the saints, glorified and exalted, are not de- 
noted is self-evident from the context, which presents things connected with these priests, 
which cannot be applied, without undue violence to Scripture statements, to the immor- 
tal priests, such as e.g. have a reference to the clothing, sweating, polling the hair, 
marrying, mourning for deceased relatives, cleansing, and sin-offering. To apply such 
things to the co-heirs of the Christ. in the Millennial age, is to degradethem to a mortal, 
sinful state utterly inconsistent with the promises. 'To enforce this, Thomas concludes 
because Zadok means ‘“‘ the Just One” that they are ‘‘ resurrected men ;” but these ‘‘ Sons 
of Zadok” may have been thus called because they would have been called in his line, 
or because, if realized, they should be faithful in their duties as Zadok, etc. At least, 
the portraiture as given by Ezekiel does not identify them with ‘resurrected men’’ as 
presented to us e.g. by Jesus and Paul. 


Obs. 10. These glorified priests are an elect, chosen body (Props. 62, 64, 
65) in person and office, representative of the majesty of the ‘Theocratic 
King, raised to their exalted position and nearness officially to Him that 
they may be ‘‘ to the praise of His glory.”’ Their number, rank, duty, 
devotedness, etc., serve to glorify the Messiah (comp. preceding Prop., 
Obs. 8). They are specially designed to exhibit the Theocratic ordering 
—its authority, institutions, laws, privileges, blessings, etc.—forming @ 
medium between its King and its subjects, its magnificent throne and the 
nations. The designation of priests indicates that they are a channel of 
communication between God and the nations, the latter being brought 
largely through their instrumentality into Theocratic order and unity. 


612 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 156, 


God will say of this priesthood : ‘‘ This people have I formed for myself ; they shall show 
forth my praise” (Isa, 45: 21). In view of this, it will be the joy of saints to serve 
the King, to whom they are indebted for all honor and glory. It will be their highest 
desire to do His will. As Lincoln (Lect. on Rev., p. 232) has well said: ‘‘For surely it — 
would be a diminution of heaven’s joy, if, once there, we were no more allowed to serye 
Him whom we love—it our hearts, brimful, had no outlet provided for their relief.” 


Obs. 11, All these priests are Divinely called and commissioned. Now, 
alas ! men may intrude themselves into sacred offices utterly unfitted for 
them. The record of the past presents multitudes of painful instances, 
and infidelity seizes upon them, and the acts attributed to them, as legiti- 
mate results—notwithstanding ‘their positive scriptural condemnation—of , 
religion itself. But no such dishonoring feature can possibly be incorpo- — 
rated with this Theocracy, for every priest will possess undoubted author- — 
ity, vouched for by his glorified condition and his divine relationship to 
Jesus and the New Jerusalem. If any one should even attempt (of which — 
we cannot conceive a probability) to take the position of such a priest, 
Korah’s Theocratic punishment would speedily follow. 


Obs. 12. All these priests are secured by a previous training ; they are 
tested and tried (comp. Props. 86, 135 and Obs. 9 and 10 in preceding 
one). Sufferings, temptation, and trial were essential to the full and per- 
fect development of the great High-Priest Himself (Heb. 5 : 6-10 and © 
2 :9,10, 11 and 4: 15), and such are requisite to form the characters of 
His associated priests. ‘Their love to God and His Christ, devotion to the 
truth, affection for their fellow-men, etc., all the elements of a priestly i 
official are imparted and developed. Hence two things necessarily follow : 
First, these purified ones are, through Redemptive grace and power actu- 
ally experienced, bound to the King. with a love so devoted and intense, so 
supreme and overwhelming that the interests and glory of the Church and 
State united in the Theocracy are perfectly safe in their hands. And ~ 
second, they, like the High-Priest Himself, become sympathethic priests. — 
Their past experience, indebtedness and elevation by grace, completeness | 
in Christ, etc., all tend to make them specially accessible to the nations, | 
and to cause them to manifest a deep interest in the welfare and happiness 
of all. 


In Heb. 12 :1-13; James 1: 2-4, 12; 1 Pet. 1: 6-13; Matt. 5: 12, etc., we are exhort — 
ed to regard our present trials as preparative for the future, and thus even to rejoice inthem — 
in view of the ultimate result. In this discipline God’s love is manifested, but cannot, — 
owing to our weakness, be properly appreciated until we become kings and priests. Then — 
it will be seen what an intimate and linportant relationship existed between our testing — 
and the reward. Our lack of faith, want of confidence, non-appreciation of God’s prom- 
ises, rebellion under trial, yielding to temptation, ought to be rebuked by this positively Ne 
declared connection between probation and exaltation. The example of Jesus ought, in 
this respect, to be all sufficient. Alas! how few, comparatively, endure this testing as — 
they ought. The personal conflicts, the Christian experience, the temptations, the sor- 
rows and afflictions—all, aside from their qualifying and elevating tendency, will be of in- — 
caleulable value in their intercourse with the nations. Now we are styled ‘vessels of 
mercy, afore prepared into glory,” and this should encourage us to endure unto the end. 
The esteem and love of the subjects of such kings and priests will be founded, not simply — 
upon their rank or dignity, but on the character obtaining and sustaining the rank, 


Obs; 13., Thas priesthood is, therefore, destined to be, what those called 
strive after now, ‘‘ a holy priesthood. *? ‘This firmly cements the Theoeratic 
ordering together into an enduring and perpetual Kingdom, seeing that ii 


PROP. 156.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 613 


officials, perfected in holiness, are thus completely consecrated to God and 
His service. Holiness is the distinguishing characteristic of them, and is 
suggested, in view of the promises and duties associated with it, by the 
name. ‘The priesthood is not given to persons liable to pervert or abuse 
the law itself, but to holy ones who honor and exalt the law. 


‘* Without holiness no man shall see the Lord,’’ much less be elevated to an official 
position. The teaching of the Scriptures is plain and decisive. A person who has de- 
veloped a character opposed to holiness is entirely unfitted for kingship and priesthood. 
The purity and intent of the Theocratic government forbids his employment and eleva- 
tion. Hence the most positive statements of complete exclusion. The ‘ treasure” must 
first be deposited in ‘‘ earthen vessels” before it is deemed worthy of being transferred 
to glorified, heavenly ones. The object of the Messiah now is to secure the redemption 
and sanctification of His followers, in order that a true oneness may exist between them, 
‘‘for both He that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one ; for which cause 
He is not ashamed to call them brethren” (Heb. 2: 11). Owing to this requirement, as a 
pre-requisite, there is deep meaning in ‘‘the few,’’ ‘ the litlle flock,” and kindred phrases, 
indicative of ‘‘the many’’ rejecting it and failing in securing “the high calling of God in 
Christ Jesus.’’ What bliss is in store for true ones! The body glorified, the soul sancti- 
fied, love perfected, then no sin will grieve the soul and no yielding to temptation will 
bring remorse to the heart and tears to the eyes, for a sweet self-consciousness of purity 
and nobleness of character will ever be present to the saint. 


Obs. 14. This priesthood elevates humanity. How this is done by the 
High-Priest is shown under Prop. 204. The exaltation of the Redeemed 
to such nearness and association with Him in His offices and authority, 
evinces the highest position to which humanity can attain, and when the 
honors and dignities of kingship and priesthood are once enjoyed this will 
be witnessed and acknowledged. 


God Himself is interested in their honor and glory; He, by virtue of their position, 
blessedness, etc., is glorified and admiredthrough them. It follows that if ‘‘The Christ,” 
having all power and majesty, promises such exaltation at His appearing, it will be ex- 
ceedingly great. Hence in the persons of these priests in view of co-heirship with Jesus 
and participation in His Theocratic rule, we have exhibited the splendid destiny to 
which man can be elevated. 


Obs. 15. These priests are designed fo bless the nations, for this is one of 
the objects of the Theocracy. (Comp. preced. Prop. Obs. 11.) Consider- 
ing the beings to whom this is intrusted, with power to enforce and love to 
extend the same, nothing can be better adapted to secure the grand result 
intended. 


These priests, on the one hand, honor God and His Christ, and, on the other, act in be- 
half of the nations, presiding over things relating to the Divine government both in the 
interest of God and of man. In virtue of their office they are near to God and accessible 
to men, and their influence will be felt in a commanding manner among all nations. 


Obs. 16. These priests, being all ‘‘ baptized with the Holy Ghost and 
with fire’ (See Prop. 171), are endowed with supernatural powers. Hence, 
now enabled to perform ‘‘ the greater works’’ promised, they are admirably 
adapted by sympathy and ample power to minister to the wants, necessi- 
ties, etc., of the nations, and to materially aid their Master in mitigating 
and removing the curse as the Theocratic dominion extends itself. It is 
not mere imagination to suppose that they will visit, and lay hands upon, 
the sick and dying, that they will dry up tears of anguish and grief, that 
they will administer comfort, consolation, mercy, and hope. 


614 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 156. 


, 


Obs. 17. Being glorified, fashioned after Christ, made ‘‘ egual unto the 
angels,’’ neither space nor physical obstructions can prevent their minis- 
trations. Having ‘* spiritual bodies’’ (i.e. bodies subject to the will of 
the Spirit) they can assume visibility or invisibility, they can visit with 
ease and celerity through great distances, at pleasure. Thus endowed, they 
can (as Peter, etc.) discern the very heart, the requirements, the necessi- 
ties of their subjects. ‘Thus pressing want can never be concealed from 
them, worth can never remain unrecognized by them, and deception can 
never be practised upon them. | 


This future Baptism (Prop. 171), with glorification, gives them the power of transport- 
ing themselves at will like Christ and the angels, of assuming different appearances at 
pleasure, of appearing in glory or veiling it, of performing wonderfully, having the ele- 
ments under control, of opening doors or entering without opening as angels and Jesus, 
of eating and drinking with men, of supplying and multiplying food, of healing the sick, 
of supplying food, of protecting from evil, of delivering out of trouble, etc., etc. 


Obs. 18. Hence it follows, that this priesthood, in a glorified condition, 
is entirely free from the trials and difficulties, the weakness and embarrass- 
ments, the temptations and errors incident to a present ministry. Spe- 
cially under the Spirit, it is most reasonable to anticipate it as a@ most elo- 
quent, powerful, and successful priesthood, who, with glorified tongues and 
sanctified hearts, with Christ-like power and authority, and imbued with 
love, wisdom, fervor, faithfulness, and holiness, will so present the will of 
the Father and Son that the hearts of countless multitudes will joyfully re- 
spond to it. 


Obs. 19. This priesthood demands no personal sacrifices. ‘Thanks to 
God, these are only preparatory. The terrible sacrifices, under persecu- 
tion, bigotry, hatred, envy, malice, for the sake of the truth ; the tears, 
the groans, the suffering, the blood, the life offered in behalf of duty and 
the welfare of others, are then things of the past. Blessing, happiness, ful- 
ness of joy, pleasures forevermore, are ever connected with it, and instead 
of being a source of sorrow or a burden, it is a source of never-ending glad- 
ness and an “eternal weight of glory.’’ What an encouragement to our 
weakness and feebleness now ! 


Obs. 20. Writers on the ancient priesthood inform us that they were 
‘* the literati,’’ “* the learned,’’ ‘‘ sages and professors,’’ ‘‘ the chief instru- 
ments of a continuing and progressive mental, moral, and religious cult- 
ure.’ ‘This will be eminently true of these priests, as indicated by intima- 
tions of increased knowledge, by their glorified condition, by their union — 
with the Christ, and by their official station. Through them the nations 
of the earth may anticipate the most wonderful accessions to learning and 
knowledge of all kinds, because specially under the influence and guidance 
of the Spirit of Wisdom. 


Obs. 21. This priesthood, as well as the kingship, shows that God in the 
Coming Kingdom has something for [His saints to perform. Idleness and 
selfishness enfeeble and degrade ; activity and imparting to others are ele- 
vating and joy-producing. It will still, then, be true, that ‘‘ it 7s more 
blessed to give than to receive.’’ To be made instrumental of doing good to — 
others is Christ-like, God-like. And this activity in honor of God, in be- 


Prop. 156. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 615 


half of others, in joyfulness to ourselves, is unceasing. Being glorified, 


there is no need of recuperation to remove fatigue or weakness, and, there- 
fore, as expressive both of a constant activity and a never-decaying vigor, 
they are represented, e.g. as serving God ‘‘day and might’ (Rev. 7: 
15-17). 


Barbour (Three Worlds, p. 44), misapprehending Ps. 149 :5 in the use of the word 
‘‘beds,” makes resting ‘‘a necessity or pleasure.’” He would scarcely, with his Gnostic 
theory of a spiritual body and spiritual kingdom, have fallen into such an incongruity, 
if he had noticed that the original word ‘‘ couches’ is expressive of the couches around 
the divan of an Oriental prince, and hence, according to Oriental usage, indicative of 
honor and exaltation. Comp. e.g. the remarks of Moll (Lange’s Com. Heb., p. 88) on the 
promised Rest combined with activity, and his references to Rothe, Tholuck, ete. 


Obs. 22. These priests have no family connections, no private interests, 
no attachments to tribe or nation, no earthly relations of any nature which 
ean interfere with their official position. Hence an exclusive devotedness 
to the interests of the Theocratic King and Kingdom must be predicated of 
them. 


Obs. 23. This priesthood and their services indicates the spirituality of 
this Kingdom. ‘The spiritual and the temporal, the heavenly and the 
earthly, the glorified and unglorified are combined ina Theocracy. The 
union of Church and State under such a leadership in behalf of the re- 
demption of the race, plainly evidences this feature. The objection, there- 
fore, urged against our view that we ignore the spiritual is easily set aside, 
secing that with a glorified High-Priest and associated Priests the highest 
spirituality must result from the Theocratic ordering. 


In a higher sense than now will it be true that (1 John 1 : 3) *‘ truly our fellowship is 
with the Father and with His Son Jesus the Christ.’’. The earnest of present fellowship 
insures the open, manifested fellowship of the future. The spirituality of the priesthood is 
fully manifested by the constant access that they have to the New Jerusalem and the 
presence of the King, by the worship and service that they tender, by the simple fact 
that the most glorious themes (rendered living and heart-pervading by actual and most 
blessed experience), such as the love of God, the love and mercy of the Saviour, the blood 
shed for the remission of sin, the scenes of Calvary, etc., shall ever flow from their 
joyful lips. 


Obs. 24. This priesthood, elect, tried, holy, etc., form one body with 
Christ. Now there isa lack of unity; diversity, and even antagonism, 
exists. The history of the past ministry records the sad story of divisions, 
proscriptions,, excommunications, etc., among them. But now under this 
arrangement all this ceases, for these priests are all actuated by the same 
spirit, interest, and principle. Zhen the prayer of the Saviour respecting @ 
oneness will be fully and amply realized ; not merely exhibited by frater- 
nal regards, but openly manifested in the one, exclusive T'heocratic order- 
ing. (Comp. Prop. 184.) 

This oneness is the more remarkable since they are gathered out of ‘all nations and 
kindreds, and people, and tongues.”” But the same ‘mind which was in Christ,’’ the same 
redemption and glory, unite them. It is delightful to contemplate this oneness, and the 
persons, from Adam down, who shall compose it ; and it is refreshing to think of the 
time when we shall associate with them and enjoy their acquaintance. Union and. 
exaltation with the Christ, kingship and priesthood, will be a sufficient introduction to 
an eternal fellowship and intimacy. 


616 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 156, 


Obs. 25. This priesthood will undoubtedly exhibit the praises of God and 
His Christ by singing and music. They enter into this Theocratic King- 
dom ‘* with singing’’ (Isa. 35:10), and in it they continue to sing (Rey. 
5 : 8-10) as “‘ kings and priests,’’ and this praise 1s represented as exciting 
that of others (Ps. 66:1, 2, 3, 4). Music accompanies them, as the 
mention of harps suggests. Indeed the sublimest singing 7s exclusive and 
pertains to the 144,000 (Rey. 14 : 3). Music and singing has charmed, 
comforted, cheered, and elevated the soul; in mortal hands it has inspired 
devotion, thrilled the heart, aroused the deepest feelings, ete. What will 
it be in glorified hands, and coming from glorified lips! ‘‘ Having the 
harps of God” (Rev. 15:2) and singing ‘‘ the new song’’ (Rev. 14 : 3), 
“the song of Moses’’ and ‘‘ the song of the Lamb,”’’ indicative of redemp- 
tion and its glories, the highest efforts of the past will be but feeble—mere 
child’s play—in comparison with the exquisite skill, enchanting voices, 
and tender, ennobling, sublime utterances of these harpers and singers. 


We can imagine them, not only leading the praise of Jerusalem and of congregations, 
but on their visits to families and individuals, ravish them with the delightful and 
heavenly melodies of experienced Redemption. The Bible frequently refers to this 
feature, and these references, corroborated by the power of music and song in the past, 
certainly must meet with a fulfilment commensurate with the glory of the occasion, the 
persons, the Theocracy. The vast number thus engaged at times in perfect praise, 
will produce a blended harmony and a grandeur far beyond our present experience and 
conceptions. ‘The emotions of the glorified, the joy, the triumph, the love—all will be 
brought forth in this swelling music and song. Handel, Mozart, Mendelssohn, Jenny 
Lind, and others sought to express feeling ; when these glorified minstrels seek to 
express theirs, music and song will be faultless. 


Obs. 26. The ancient priests were to be free from all bodily blemish. 
Religious purity was allied with physical purity. So it will be again, for 
these priests have their ‘‘ vile body’’ ‘‘ fashioned like unto His glorious 
body’ (Phil. 8:21). Their personal appearance, beautiful and splendid, 
will accord with their official position. Hyen the clothing, the adorn- 
ments, the fine vesture of the ancient priests were significant, and, we can 
readily believe in view of the intimations and promises, that these priests 
will be clad in @ royal, magnificent manner, as evidencing their high sta- 
tion, and as impressing visibly their authority upon thenations. As Jesus 
the Messiah is represented in His glorified condition, so His associated 
priests will likewise appear, even to the raiment. 


Obs. 2%. The vast number of the priests, represented as an immense 
multitude, indicates both the majesty of the Theocratic King and the 
extent of His dominion. The number and splendor of officials, connected 
with earthly courts and surroundings, has much to do to elevate them in 
human estimation. The majesty of the Theocracy, the powerful and ex- 
tensive, world-wide dominion, is exhibited most impressively to the nations 
by the number of the glorified priests. Just as an earthly court of emi- 
nent, wise, talented, and powerful persons aids in glorifying an earthly 
King, so the appearance, ability, character, etc., of @ host of such materi- 
ally assists to conyey an idea of the grandeur of our King. 


Read Thackeray’s Four Georges, the Memoirs of the Court-Life of Louis XIV. and XV., 
and numerous others, and however brilliant the society and distinguished the talents, 
yet the simple truth reveals always among them characters steeped in the lowest vices 
and trampling upon faith, justice, virtue, morality, and religion. Such can find no 


Prop. 156.] THE LHEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 617 


place in this court. Hence to provide the suitable persons for a representation of the 
majesty of the Theocracy, God allows dispensations to pass, selecting those who evince 
purity and holiness. MRulers, like earthly ones, selfish, vicious, etc., can find no station 
in a restored and pure Theocracy. 


Obs. 28. God’s equity is vindicated in that these priests officiate here on 
this earth, where they endured temptation, suffering, and trial. Here 
where they fought the good fight of faith, they become triumphant priests, 
thus following in the Master’s path (comp. Prop. 84). This increases 
their interest in the redemption of the world, when visiting the very places 
where their prayers ascended, their tears fell, and their labors were sus- 
tained. 

Therefore we should encourage our hearts, as Moses did, by contemplating this great 
change, thus increasing love, desire, hope, and joy. Let us endeavor to appreciate its 
excellency, its nearness, its nobility, its spirituality, its blissfulness, and it will enlargé 
our boldness, firmness, patience, cheerfulness, and submission. 


Obs. 29. This priesthood is perpetual. The Kingdom inherited is ever- 
enduring (Prop. 159), the kingship is perpetual, and the priesthood is in- 
separably united to both of these. Again, being co-heirs of Jesus, and His 
priesthood being a continuous one (Prop. 155), the saints necessarily are 
ever priests with Him. The perpetuity of such a high honor and dignity 
is a strong element of happiness ; when once gained, nothing can deprive 
us of it, for it is an eternal possession ; and, as shown already, no pressing 
of feeble old age, or sickness entailed, can cause its being surrendered to 
some youthful or more vigorous successor. 


Obs. 39. The associations of such priests, their loving fellowship, must be 
asource of constant and growing pleasure. Composed of the noblest of 
earth, embracing the most eminent and faithful, intercourse with each 
other in duty or pleasure, in praise or social converse, in study or visitation, 
in public or private, must be, in the nature of the case, a delightful element 
of priestly happiness. Especially ravishing when among them we find 
formerly loved and dear ones, now clad with such dignity. 


Obs. 31. This priesthood corroborates the first dominion, the pre-emi- 
nence, the supremacy of the Jewish nation (Prop. 114). For, being grafted 
in, and become part of, the elect nation, they now, being glorified, raised 
to irresistible power, and exalted with David’s Son “the King of the 
Jews,’’ materially assist in elevating the nation to its predicted position, 
and in bringing to it the glory promised. 


aot 


618 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM.) [PRop. 167. 


Proposition 157. ZUhis doctrine of the Kingdom enforces the 
juture ministration of angels. 


Believers now by faith come ‘‘ to an innumerable company of 
angels’ (Heb. 12 : 22, or “to myriads of angels in an assembly or 
joyful convocation,’’? Barnes, Com. loci). These angels were em- — 
ployed preparatory to the Theocracy, at the introduction of the 
Theocracy, etc., and it is most reasonable to believe, as taught, 
that they will continue to be interested in, and engaged in behalf” of, 
the Theocracy when gloriously restored. iq 


- 


‘9 
2 

ai 
ej 


In ref. to number, names, nature, power, past service, and ministrations of angels, 
see arts. on, in Bib. Dicts. and Cyclops, and in Sys. Divs. Fausset (Com., Heb. 2: 5) 
notices an implication in the words, ‘‘ For unto the angels hath He not put in subjection 
the world to come” viz: ‘‘Implying, He has subjected to angels the existing world 
Old Test. dispensation (then still partly existing as to its framework), v. 2, the poli 
kingdoms of the earth (Dan. 4:13; 10:18, 20, 21; 12:1), and the natural elem 
(Rev. 9:11; 16:4), and even individuals (Matt. 18: 10).” The rule that they may 
exert is then given over to the saints. oe, 


Obs. 1. The supremacy and exaltation of Jesus, the Christ, over all 
angels (Col.1:16; Eph. 1:21; 1 Pet. 3 : 22), their attendance om 
service to Him at the First Advent (Luke 2: 9-14; Matt. 4:11; L 
22 : 48, etc.), their deep interest in things pertaining to Him (e.g. 
8:10, 11; 1 Pet. 1 : 12, etc.), their connection with the events of the 
Advent (Matt. 16 : 21; Luke 12: 8, 9, etc.), their worship of Him (1 
1:6; Rev. 5:11, 12), His power over,them (Matt. 26 : 51, 52% 
1 : 4, etc.)—these, as well as other considerations, show that at the rest 
tion of the Theocracy, the Messiah shall swell His glory by that of 
angelic host. Now let the student but observe the relationship that “ 
first-born,’’ ‘‘ the first-fruits ’’ sustain to Christ, and he will clearly 
that this body obtain, in virtue of their union with Jesus as co-hevrs, 
power over angels. ‘- 

Angel being equivalent to ‘‘ Messenger, ambassador,” and employed to designate x y 
merely angels proper (Heb. 1 : 7, 14), but Christ (Zech. 1 : 12 ; Mal. 3 : 1), gospel ministe 
(Rey. 2:1, 3, 12, 18), and agencies to execute God’s purpose (Rey. 15 : 8 and 14 


9), it is difficult for us in every case to tell who are denoted—whether the unf 


angels or the redeemed from among men. 
* 6 * 


Obs. 2. In the future will be verified Christ’s promise to Nathaniel, Jno. 
1:51, “ Verily, verily [ say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven 
and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man. 
The futurity is evidenced, not simply from the fact that the past has née 
witnessed such a fulfilment, but by the ‘‘ hereafter” and the “ Son 
man ”’ referring to the period of the Sec. Advent, as seen in Luke 22 : 6 
and Matt. 26:64. The evidence of its certainty (to which assurance t 
repeated “ verily ’’ points) is given in the assurance that it shall be oper 


Prop. 157. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 619 


manifested that others shall be witness of it.’ This wonderful commingling 
(foreshadowed by Jacob’s dream, Gen. 28 : 12) of the heavenly host with 
the Son of man and [is associates in their glory, implies a corttinued min- 
istration. It is not reasonable to suppose that angels who ministered to 
Jesus (Matt. 2:13, 19 and 28:2, 5; Acts 1:10, 11, etc.) and saints 
(Heb. 1 : 14; Gen. 24 : 40, etc.) on earth while suffering, who ever ex- 
hibited a deep and abiding interest in their welfare and in the progress of 
redemption, should cease to manifest interest and association when salva- 


tion is completed. We are assured of the contrary, e.g. in Rev. 5 : 11, 12; 


Luke 12 : 8, 9; Rev. 3: 5. Itis this manifestation, openly expressed, 
that forms an important feature in the glory of ‘‘ the Christ ;’’? and hence 
He refers to it as such, Matt. 16:21 and 25: 31, 32; Mark 8: 38; 
Luke 9:26, The Theocratic ordering is not only honored but evidenced 
by such an association. ‘lhe angelic ministration witnesses to the fact 
that ‘* the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell with them.’” 


1 The effort is futile to make this promise to be realized in some unrecorded facts of 
the past in the history of Jesus and Nathaniel. Aside from the reasons assigned against 
it, the importance attached to it by the repeated ‘‘ verily” which would, in case of past 
fulfilment, have led, in honor of Jesus (to establish His veracity, etc.), to a declaration 
of the same, forbids such an interpretation. To make this, as some do, merely symbo- 
listic of Jesus and the divine communications received from heaven through Him, is to 
weaken the force and meaning of the promise, relating to experienced completed 
Redemption, when it is witnessed. The expressions of ‘angels,’ ‘‘seeing’’ ‘*Son of 
man”—all evidence an actual real occurrence in the future, demonstrative of the union 
existing between heaven and earth. Hence we prefer and adopt Ryle’s (Notes) view of 
angelic communication at and after the Sec. Advent. It is not figurative but real. 

2 Tf God, in the person of Jesus, thus again Theocratically dwells with man, it is the 
most reasonable to believe that angels shall be specially present to witness His glory, 
and convey the tidings of Redemption to others. For their employment in the service 
of God is continuous, and their appearance and agency in honoring Him is something to 
be anticipated. Hence the promise of Jesus to Nathaniel will be literally and truly 
verified in the restored Theocracy. What a sublime view this opens before us of the 
future. With this contrast the spiritualizing and dwarfing of the promise, as e.g. by 
Bushnell (Christ and His Salvation, Dis. 21, p. 434), who makes ‘‘a heaven opened in the 
soul itself,” and ‘‘there lives the Son of man, reigning in His heavenly kingdom at the 
soul’s own centre, and from Him go up couriers and ministers of glory, descending also 
pack upon Him there.’’ Comment is unnecessary. A Theocratic ordering, making God 
Himself the earthly Ruler, involves the attendance of angels, as a distinguishing preroga- 
tive pertaining to the Divine. Hence they attended when the Theocracy was first 
instituted, and hence we are informed that when again restored they shall also b 
present and rejoice. 


Obs. 3. Angels represented as the highest and noblest of beings, having 
access to the presence (‘‘ face’’) of God, care for believers (Matt. 18 : 10) 
and, in virtue of the present and future of the repenting one, rejoice at the 
conversion of the sinner (Luke 15 : 10) ; they witness the struggles of our 
pilgrimage (1 Tim. 5 : 21; 1 Cor. 4:9 and 11:10), and they are fellow- 
servants of the prophets and apostles as manifested in their employment 
for the good of God’s people, and in bringing directions and revelations of 
Gods wili(Gen, 19): 15,19 and 22:11; Acts: 19, 20; Dan..8 : 17, 19.5 
Acts 8 : 26 and 10 : 8, etc.). In the very nature of the case, beings so ex- 
alted and personally employed in aiding in the developments of the Divine 
Plan relating to the Theocracy under Jesus and in securing its ultimate 
realization (e.g. Dan. 10 : 11-22; Zech. 1:9, 12, 14,19 and 2 : 3, etc.; 
Acts 7253 ; Gal.i3:19; Heb..2: 23 Rev. 1:1, etc.) must rejoice with 
great joy in the grand result obtained through Jesus’ sufferings, death, res- 


620 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 157, 


urrection, and exaltation. It is then fitting that they should be present at 
Christ’s Coming, and that ascriptions of praise and honor to the King of 

kings should be given by them, seeing rebellion to God crushed, an entailed — 
curse repealed, children of God resurrected, glorified, and exalted, the race 
itself redeemed, and a pure Theocratic government, with its inestimable 
blessings, inaugurated. Their holiness, wisdom, station, love to God and 
Christ—all must thus inspire them—an inspiration continuous and eyer 
present, 


Obs. 4. To be ‘‘ as the angels of God in heaven’’ (Matt. 22 : 30), or to 
be ‘‘ equal unto the angels’? (Luke 20 : 36) may, as the context seems to 
indicate, only refer to the mode of existence (i.e. in reference to marriage, 
happiness, and immortality), but there is one passage which distinctly 
teaches a certain pre-eminency over, at least, some of the angels.’ In 1 Cor. 
6:3 weread: ‘* Anow ye not that we shall judge angels ?’’ which evident 
means ruling over angels, just as ‘‘ Do ye not know. that the saints shall 
judge the world?”’ indicates clearly a ruling over the world. This is seen 
by a reference to Props. 133, 134, and 154, where the meaning of judging 
is given in detail.? Now, such a governing power, bestowed in view of 
associated Rulership or Kingship with Jesus, is undoubtedly exercised in 
behalf of the administrations of the Theocratic Kingdom, and, consequently, 
must minister to the good, directly or indirectly, of its rulers or subjects. — 
_ The realization can alone teach us the extent and the results of such a judg- 

ing. . 

1 We say ‘‘some,’’ because when regarding the vast number, names, and rank of angels, 
it would perhaps be extreme to extend authority over all. While all may adorn the Theo- | 
cratic King, while all may exhibit the deepest interest in, and love for, the glorified — 
saints, yet some may be so exalted in rank and power, that, saving the command of ‘the — 
Christ,’’ no glorified one would presume to exercise authority over them, either by virtue 
of his relationship to Jesus or of his own station. The passage itself, ‘‘ judge angels,” is _ 
indefinite as to the number, station, or rank, and would be realized fully, if ‘‘some” out 
of the ‘“‘innumerable company ”’ (Heb. 12: 22) were thus ‘‘ judged.” 

® To limit this judging of angels to judicial investigation (Barnes, Com. loci) is to over- 
look the meaning (Prop. 132 and 133) of judging as given in the Scriptures. Prefera- 
ble would be Prof. Stuart’s opinion, as quoted by Barnes, and which he does not reject, 
viz.: ‘‘ This may mean that the saints shall in the future world be raised to a rank in some 
respects more elevated than even the angels in heaven.” If they rule over angels, such _ 
an elevation must certainly exist over some, if not over all, and arises from their union with 
the King and participation in His privileges and glory. Being ‘‘joint-heirs” with Him, ~ 
and correspondingly exalted, they receive this honor because of Him, Hence we take _ 
the more comprehensive scriptural meaning of judging, not confining it to simple judi- — 
cial action. Just as Jesus could, if requisite, command legions of angels to appear, so — 
will His co-heirs have power over angels. q 


Obs. 5. In Dan. 10 : 13, 20; Heb. 2:5 it is intimated that angels are 
concerned in the present government of the world. Whatever views (Com- — 
mentaries Joc?) are entertained respecting the exertion of their power, it is 
generally admitted that in some form or other they can exert, as thus — 
taught, an influence favorable or unfavorable to nations as well as to in- 
dividuals. Such a view is in sympathy with the doctrine of the Divine 
Sovereignty, and, so long as the restored Theocratic Kingdom has not ap- 
peared, isin accord with the spirit and intent of the dispensations. But — 
when the restored Theocracy under Jesus and His brethren appears, then 
the complete sovereignty under the whole heaven (Dan. 7 : 27) is given to 
them, and dominion over nations and individuals is exerted by them. 


Prop. 157. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 621 


This the predicted reign of ‘‘ the Christ’’ and saints again and again em- 
phatically declares, so that the angelic agency that may have been exerted 
in the past in national counsels and national movements is superseded 
(Heb. 2 : 5) bya direct visible agency exerted by Jesus and His body. 
But such angelic presiding over nations, even by ‘‘ the chief princes,’ only 
indicates how interested the angelic host must be in the development of the 
ultimate deliverance of the nations from the bondage under which they 
groan. ‘The past agency insures a continued interest, and such sympathy 
and aid as may be in accordance with the Theocratic ordering. 


It is not requisite to enter into a discussion of the agency of evil angels as implied in 
Dan. 10 (comp. Com, loci). For such, in view of the overthrow and binding of Satan, 
and his ultimate complete withdrawal from the race, will be entirely superseded by the 
established Theocracy. Dan. 10 and other passages set aside the opinion of Christa- 
delphians, Universalists, and others, that Satan and his angels only denotes personified 
evil or sin or a principle. The general analogy of Scripture is opposed to it, however, in 
certain instances a figurative or symbolical application is intended. The latter by no 
means remove the former, Indeed, if the Christadelphian view is correct, it would be 
difficult to vindicate the teaching of Jesus and the apostles from the charge of an abject 
accomodation to ignorance, prejudice, and error. The reference accuser, etc. (as ad- 
versary, etc.), that is made to men, to evil, to organized Anti-Christian bodies, etc., does 
not diminish the force of meaning when also applied to fallen angels. When correctly 
regarded, the one—owing to the same spirit, enmity, etc., exhibited—sustains the other. 
That fallen angels exist is unmistakably taught, as in 2 Pet. 2:4;Jude6. It is impossi- 
ble, except by the grossest spiritualizing, to avoid the conclusions of Mark 1: 24; Luke 
4741; James 12: 19; Acts 16 : 16-18 ; and 19: 13, 15,16 ; Luke 10:17 ; Jude9, etc. To 
evidence the absurdity of a total ignoring of fallen spirits, it is only requisite to make evil 
personified, or an evil principle to have gone out of the two possessed and entering the 
swine (Matt. 8 : 28-34). Whatever difficulties may—-owing to the conciseness of state- 
ments, the manner of representation, etc.—be connected with the doctrine of fallen 
angels, one thing is self-evident that immensely greater, so far as the integrity of the 
Word and the testimony of Jesus is concerned, attach themselves to its denial (comp. 
Arts. on in Bib. Dicts., Sys. Divs. etc.). Adopting the principles of our opponents, it 
would be easy, because of the application of the word angel, to deny the existence of 
good angels, making them personified holiness, or a good principle. The ground of de- 
nial is, to say the least, a dangerous one. 


Obs. 6. One of the blessed ingredients of future happiness and glory will 
be the intercourse of the glorified saints with the angelic host. This will 
prove a never-ending source of blissful enjoyment. To converse with those 
who witnessed creation, who have been the trusted messengers of God in 
countless missions of mercy and love, who for ages have had the honor and 
glory of God at heart, who are so exalted in knowledge, wisdom, and power 
—this will be a privilege indeed. To familiarly associate with such 
beings, to visit with them earth or heaven, to be united with them in the 
strongest ties of a common devotion and communion, to interchange ex- 
periences of the past and present, etc., all this is an honor exceedingly 
great—such as never was found in the most splendid of earthly courts. 


622 | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRrop. 


- 


Proposition 158. The doctrine of the Kingdom aids in locating 
the Millennial period. 


The Millennial predictions are descriptions of this restored The- 
ocracy under Davids Son. This has been abundantly shown 
under previous propositions. This Kingdom being overthrown, — 
the throne and Kingdom of David being still desolate, the post- — 
ponement of its restoration being fully stated and witnessed down | 
to the present day, the events immediately connected with its 
restoration not having occurred, for these and other reasons the 
Millennial predictions “necessarily relate to the future. 


The reader will observe that the varied views entertained by our opponents fully : 
meets the objection urged by Waldegrave (New Test. Mill.), on the ground of differences 
and antagonism of interpretations by Mill. writers. He forgets, however, two things : (1.) 
that Pre-Mills. differ among themselves as to the details of their system, but agree in rie 9 
grand outlines (as e.g. ina “Pre- Mill. Advent, a first literal resurrection, the reign of the 
Christ and His saints, the establishment of His Kingdom on earth, the second resurrec-_ 
tion after the thousand years, etc.); (2.) that our opponents have even greater differene 
and antagonisms, not merely in details, but in the outlines (as e.g. in the location of the — 
Millennium, the denial of a Millennium, the resurrection, the reign, the Kingdom, etc.). 
His implied boast of unity falls to the ground, because many of his own party refuse to 
adopt his presented theory of the Millennium. Thus e.g. The Princeton Review, July, 
1856, in an art, on his work, eulogizes his supposed demolition of Millenarianism, b but 
just so soon as the writer comes to the 7th. Lecture, where Waldegrave sets fourth k in 
own doctrine of the Mill., then he enters his dissent and protest. The value of Walde-- 
grave’s critical effort is seen and estimated by his favoring a Mill. that is even now in pra 
ress, if not already past’! having its persecuting powers and its martyrs! Blessed Mil- 
lennium ! 7 


Obs. 1. Hence the doctrine of the Kingdom refutes the theory of those 
who locate the Mill. era in the past. Grotius, Prideaux, Lightfoot, Bright- 
man, Usher, Turretin (the elder), Ewald, Bush, Stuart, Davidson, and 
some others, hold to this theory. It has been so ‘ably refuted by Shimeall 
(I Will Come A gain) and others, including many of those who have writt 
against us (as e.g. Brown, Fairbairn, etc.), that it is unnecessary to repe 
the arguments. “It may, however, be observed that their systems contain- 
ing their views of the ‘Kingdom led to some such departure, owing to the 
impossibility —without gross inconsistency—of reconciling a literal resur- 
rection, the reign, etc., with their notion ot the Kingdom. Surprise, to 0, 
is allowable in seeing able and talented men take a view which, one (Bush) 
of them himself admits, at first appears ‘‘ revolting’ (and hence has b 
but little followed). Telling us that in the plain grammatical sense there 
has been no fulfilment ; that to find a fulfilment the prophecies must be 
spiritualized or curtailed or shorn of their alleged ‘‘ Oriental imagery 5 
that the language and ideas are ‘‘ too Jewish’’ to suit the enlightened con: 
dition and circumstances of a Christian dispensation, and hence must 
be rejected or some other meaning be engrafted thereupon, these J pel 


J 


Prop. 158. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. | 628 


sons take the most exalted Millennial descriptions, and force them, 
against express language and the facts of history, into the past history of 
the Church and as thus already fulfilled. Surely when such violence is 
done, that the mixed, often persecuted, sorely tried, often relapsed and 
struggling condition of the Church can be made to cover Millennial proph- 
ecy ; that a period of time, at the pleasure of the interpreter, can be sepa- 
rated from the Millennial predictions of Daniel, Isaiah, etc.; that an era of 
promised happiness and reigning can be converted into one of severe trial 
to accommodate a theory ; that characters, to say the least, very suspicious 
are elevated (as e.g. Constantine) into the predicted Saviour of the 
Church ; that a period festering with heresies, intolerance, bigotry, super- 
stitions, relic worship, etc., is the blessed Kingdom—these things are 
amply sufficient to evince the utter wntenableness of such a theory. The 
Kingdom predicted by the prophets presents entirely different and most 
glorious aspects from those given to us by Eccl. History. The latter is a 
sad commentary on human frailty and depravity, while the former is a 
triumph of humanity made strong under the supervision and leadership of 
Davyid’s Son and Lord. 


It is sad to witness the legitimate extreme outgrowth of the spiritualizing interpreta- 
tion. Thus e.g. take the ‘‘ Perfectionists ” (see His. American Socialisms, by John Hum- 
phrey Noyes, or art. ‘‘ Amer. Socialisms,’’ Westm. Review, Ap., 1870,), who maintain that 
the Millennial age is past, that the Sec. Advent took place about 90 years after the First, 
that the victory of Christ over sin and the devil is now gradually accomplishing and will, 
in this dispensation, result in abolition of bodily disease, physical death, etc. Entertain- 
ing the view that now they are in the Kingdom of God, they reject the institution of mar- 
riage as not existing in the present Kingdom of heaven, and under the plea of oneness 
with Christ and each other they encourage promiscuous sexual intercourse. Let the stu- 
dent refer to the history of Noyes, as given by himself, and see how men under the in- 
fluence of the teaching of Moses Stuart, Robison, Taylor, and others, are led step by 
step to new notions abhorred and condemned by such instructors, but which are based 
on their doctrines respecting the Kingdom of God and the Millennial era. The primitive 
church view gives no place for such errors, and discourages all tendency tolead to them, 
making the present probationary and preparatory, and fixing its hope on the Second Ad- 
vent and Kingdom. As illustrative what able men will do with their favorite Church- 
Kingdom theory run to an extreme, we instance Lightfoot (Works, vol. 6, p. 255), who 
zommences the thousand years at the time when Paul, Barnabas, and others first 
preached to the Gentiles, and says the devil was bound (?) during this period and got loose 
again (?) afterward. Turretin (Inst. Theol., p. 650) is a little undecided when to date its rise, 
mentioning the incarnation of Christ, His passion and death, the destruction of Jerusa- 
lem, and the accession of Constantine, as points of commencement. So also Mastricht 
(Theol., vol. 1, p. 483), Marck (comp. Theol., p. 631). But all such theories carry such an 
enormous load, that few accept of them. 

We might, perhaps, find some apology for the ignorance of (Annals of Roger De 
Hoveden, vol. 2, p. 521) Pope Innocent III. and others, who held that the thousand 
years ended A.D. 1200 (some before this ended them A.D. 1000 and later), and that Satan 
was then loosed, but with the additional light thrown by history, etc., on prophecy, it 
seems very strange that such a man as Hengstenberg (Apoc., vol. 2, p. 334) should date 
the rise of the Millennium from the erection of the “ Holy Roman Empire” under 
Charlemagne, A.D. 800. What a Millennial period ! darkness, martyrdom, idolatry, infi- 
delity, religious wars, persecutions, revolutions, anarchy, all the evils that could possi- 
bly afflict the Church and the world experienced. The dreadful wickedness, malice, and 
cruelty of the dark ages, show that Satan, instead of being bound, revelled with his 
votaries, and that the saints, instead of reigning, were crushed to the earth, having to seek 
the caves and dens of the mountains to save life. Lange (Apoc., p. 352, as quoted by 
Dr. West) well remarks : “‘ The chaining of Satan ill admits an assignment to the Middle 
Age ; as if Machiavellism, the inquisition, dragonades and the like, belong to the periods 
of the First Resurrection.’’ Auberlen (The Prophet Daniel) presents some good strictures 
on such a perversion, If the past is all the Millennium to be expected (for Satan was, in 
Hengstenberg’s theory, let loose in the French Revolution, and we are now in the time 


624 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 158. 


of “ Gog and Magog’’), then the predictions are a plain failure. The very Empire that 
he so highly exalts is represented in Scripture as a beast, and one to be destroyed before 
the Mill. age begins. In the Niiremberg Bibel, Ed. 1747, in the brief notes attached to 
Rev. 20 : 1-6, the thousand years are dated from the time the Apoc. was written, and 
such a theory with those who adopted the Augustinian view was favorably entertained, 
because they supposed as the Turks came after a thousand years this was a fulfilment of 
the letting loose of Satan, and a sign of the nearness of the Second Advent, not seeing 
that by such a process they made void the predicted Millennial blessings, reversed the 
chronological order of events, and were compelled to spiritualize largely in order to ac- 
commodate Scripture to their position. Compare the views presented by Lange in the 
Introd. and concluding portion of his Com. on Rev. and Dr. Craven’s Excursus. 


Obs. 2. This doctrine also disproves the theory of those (as e.g. some R. 
Cath. Theologians and others, who simply regard the Millennial prophe- 
cies as a portraiture of this dispensation past, present, and future. ‘The 
same reasons alleged against the view under Obs. 1, will apply here ; and 
we may add several more which are opposed to both these opinions, It is 
taken for granted that this dispensation is equivalent to ‘‘ the times of the 
Gentiles.’’ But as many writers have clearly shown, they widely differ, 
seeing that ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles’? extend back into the Mosaic dis- 
pensation from the time of the overthrow of the Kingdom and the captiy- 
ity of the Jews, being a phrase denoting the period of Gentile domination, 
while, on the other hand, this dispensation can only be dated from what 
followed the First Advent. By this identification and union of things that 
differ, they hope to get rid of ‘‘ the Jewish” aspect of the Kingdom and 
show that the Millennial predictions describe ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles,”’ 
when the real truth in the case is, that the Millennial portrayals represent 
the Millennium to commence, the Kingdom to be established, at the very 
time that the ‘* Gentile Times’? come to an end (Prop. 164). Indeed, it 
is impossible for the Kingdom to come so long as Jerusalem is trodden 
down by the Gentiles (Props. 66, 112, 122, etc.). The process in this dispen- 
sation of engrafting Gentiles does not make it a Gentile dispensation, for 
the Jews enjoy precisely the same privileges of the Gospel and Church that 
the Gentiles do; the invitation and blessings are common to all, and it 
becomes a dispensation of grace to us Gentiles in that the adoption of Gen- 
tiles is so accessible under it. Again, it is supposed that this dispensation 
embraces the Millennial era as part of it, on the ground that the Church is 
the Kingdom, and will develop itself into the stage indicated under the 
Millennium. But we have shown at length (Props. 88-102) that the 
Church cannot possibly be the Kingdom, being opposed alike to covenant, 
promises based on the covenant, predictions of the prophets, and by the 
lack of everything that is essential to the promised Theocratic Kingdom. 
Besides this, having proven the undoubted postponement (Props. 57-68 
and 94) of the Kingdom, the mixed condition and continued trial of the 
Church to the end of this age, the fact that the Kingdom as predicted is 
linked with the Second Advent, the ushering in of another era or dispensa- 
tion after the Sec. Coming of Christ distinctively called ‘‘ the Day of the 
Lord Jesus,’’ and numerous other particulars, all showing that this dispen- 
sation is not the predicted one in which Jesus and His saints reign in the 
manner indicated by prophets, it produces an evident antagonism in Script- 
ure to fasten upon it such an opinion, and it leads to many embarrassing and 
.really (under its direction) unanswerable objections from unbelievers, 
which the current apologetics but lamely meets. 


Prop. 158.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 625 


For a spscimen of well-intended spiritualizing, see Cowles on The Minor Prophets, es- 
pecially Zech., ch. 14, where the Origenistic ideas are modernized in a manner that ought 
to accommodate Swedenborgianism, etc. Let the student compare the plain grammatical 
sense and the context in its entire connection, and he must feel that the exposition is 
a complete failure to reconcile the chapter with modern notions of thé Millennium. 


Many, otherwise able, writers evince, in this direction, not only the fault of spiritnalizing 


(in order to force passages into an accommodation with their respective theories), but 
evince a total disregard to the time and order of fulfilment, mingling passages together, as 
if related, which the Spirit has separated by an interval of time and the events of which 
are successive. Gipps (Treatise on the First. Res.) affords another illustration of such spir- 
itualizing application, so that the Millennial era is not to be regarded even as future. The 
extreme is reached when men apply the Millennial predictions to their own Church estab- 
lishments, as Swedenborgians, Shakers, and others, and recently repeated by a Mr. Schroe- 
der (N. Y. Evangelist, Jan. 16th, 1879 ), who has published a prospectus of a new movement 
or religious organization, which he calls ‘‘ The Millennial Church of our Lord.” Catholo- 
cism sees in the Romish Church the Mill. predictions realized, and finds its strong support 
in the perversions of the Augustinean (City of God., 20:7-9) theory, which makes the 
Mill. age the age of the Christian Church. The modified views of Grotius, Hammond, 
Hengstenberg, and others attributing to the Church in the past some such Mill. era, or 
even of Gipps, Waldegrave, etc., as now progressing in the revival of the martyr spirit, 
are, more or less, in. unison with Augustine’s spiritualizing notions. And it isa matter 
of surprise that such writers as Wordsworth and others, misled by a favorite Church- 
Kingdom theory, should revive the unscriptural and unhistorical views of Jerome, 
Eusebius, ete., who lauded and magnified the Church beyond its present design. The 
small following that it has, even among our opponents, indicates that it is deemed unreli- 
able and one-sided. 


Obs. 38. The line of argument already adduced adequately meets all 
other opposing theories respecting the Millennium. ‘Totally to zgnore the 
Millennial era, to pass it by in silence, or to ascribe it to a human origin, 
is either to manifest disrespect to the Spirit, who has so largely dealt in it 
and makes it the culminating point of Redemption, or to deny that the 
Word is given by Divine inspiration. Transplanting the Millennial 
blessedness into the third heaven is so gross a violation of the entire tenor 
of Scripture, which locates it here on the earth, that very few have ventured 
to advocate it. Making some particular Church organization or association 
of belief or form of doctrine the fulfilment of the crowning excellency of 
Millennial prophecy, is so palpable a caricature of them that 1b is a matter 
of amazement that most amiable and learned men have given their influ- 
ence in disseminating it. Ascribing only to Mill. prophecies the inherent 
desires of the soul after deliverance, and which will be realized in the nat- 
ural development of humanity, is both to lower the origin of those prophe- 
cies and to advocate a manner of realization beyond the power of a corrupted 
humanity. Locating the Millennium in the future, but spiritwalizing its 
predictions (i.e. after the grammatical sense is ascertained to add to it 
another and alleged higher sense), is to leave its manner of verification to 
the caprice or imagination of the interpreter ; to destroy the Divine unity 
of the Word by changing, modifying, reconstructing, and adding to cove- 
nant and prophetical phraseology ; to set aside, as unworthy of fulfilment, 
the oath-bound covenant promises of God, and to deny to David’s Son, the 
Son of man, the throne and Kingdom specially and gloriously covenanted 
to Him. Such ‘‘hypotheses’’ respecting the Millennium’ are purely of 
human origin and, according to our detailed argument based step by step 
on Scripture, have no foundation in the Word. ‘They may, therefore, in 
the abundance of proof presented against them in our various: proposi- 
tions, be dismissed with the remark, that such a variety of them and the 


626 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 158: 


prevailing extent to which they are advocated (intrenched in the churches 
with able men as their advocates) is necessary to meet the predictions of 
the times just preceding the ushering in of the Millennial era which are 
characterized (Props. 174, 177, 178) as pervaded with unbelief concerning 
the Coming and Kingdom of the Lord Christ. Jor such a result to be 
produced, to bend the thinking and believing of the multitude into such a 
condition of disbelief, necessarily (unless we greatly underrate the intelli- 
gence of man) requires the aid and labors of sincere, pious, and learned 
men, and the dissemination of various and antagonistic views. Alas! the 
obscuration of truth, the darkening of the most precious covenanted prom- 
ises under the leading influence of ‘‘ philosophy falsely so called,’’ the 
humiliating form in which so many alleged defences of the early Church 
appear, the removal of the ancient landmarks of a grammatical interpreta- 
tion and the substitution of others to suit the Spirit of the age—these 
things surely indicate that we even have been under the shadow of an 
already commenced and continuing eclipse. If wise to enter into and re- 
ceive the spirit of prophecy relating to these things ; if observant of what 
occurs around us just as predicted, we will be slow to receive theories which 
in their very tendency pave the way for men to undergo the severe trial yet 
in store for the Church and world.’ 


1 Some who profess themselves abundantly able to oppose Millenarians and enlighten 
us on prophecy, etc., are still unable (see a specimen criticised in Lord’s Journal, Ap. 1857) 
to decide the simple fact, whether the Millennial age is past, or present, or future ; or, 
whether it will be, if future, a better state than the present, The Shakers with their mis- 
taken present ‘‘ Millennial Church,’’ or the Swedenborgians with their asserted existing 
“¢ New Jerusalen Church,” or the Mormons with their new built ‘‘ Zion,” are far more con- 
sistent and logical than such indefinite, prevaricating writers. Millenarians may differ 
in details, but they do not produce such antagonistic systems. The fact that the spirit- 
ualizing interpretation introduces those widely divergent and hostile views—that even 
the grand outlines are in direct opposition one to another—ought to arrest the student’s at- 
tention. A recent extravagant effort at producing a Millennial theory is that of T. Spence, 
who presents us with ‘‘A Receipt” (recipe, he probably means) ‘‘to make a Millennium, 
or Happy World,”—a kind of easy free-love, communistic Millennium, after the Woodhull 
and Claflin pattern. 

2 When such a man as Hengstenberg dates the 1000 years from a.p. 800 in the erection 
of ‘‘ the Holy Roman Empire’ under Charlemagne (and Rey. informs us that this same 
empire is ‘‘a beast’? to be destroyed); when Bede applies the 1000 years to the 
Christian dispensation, and makes the first resurrection to be equivalent to baptism ; 
when Augustine makes the 1000 years to begin with the earthly life of Jesus, when 
Satan was alleged to be bound, and he was cast out into the abyss, i.e., from Christen- 
dom into the hearts of the wicked, non-Christian nations ; when the Niiremberg Bible 
(ed. 1747) asserts that the 1000 years must have begun when the book (Apoc.) was made, 
since the Turk had appeared at the end of a thousand years, we need not be surprised at 
the various theories which ignore the things predicted of the reign of Christ and His 
saints, and the events which are described as pertaining to the thousand years and fol- 
lowing it. The inferential manner in which many passages of Scripture are adduced in 
support of some of those theories, reminds one strongly of the seven golden candle- 
sticks of the Apoc., the seven-branched candlestick of the Tabernacle, and the seven 
churches of Asia being adduced to prove, against Galileo, that only seven planets were 
possible, or how in Scotland fanning mills were denounced as contrary to the text “the 
wind bloweth where it listeth,’’ etc., because in league with Satan, who is “ prince of the 
powers of the air,’’ raising “ the devil’s wind ’’ (White’s Warfare of Science). The Post- 
Mill. theory, developed by Whitby and advocated by Brown, Barnes, and a host of 
others, is the prevailing view in the Church, leading, through the ability and number of 
its advocates, to the predicted unbelief in the Coming and Kingdom of the Messiah as 
covenanted and prophesied. 


Obs. 4. Our opponents even claim for their denial of a Millennium proper 
that such is ‘‘ the Church doctrine.’’ Thus, e.g. the Princeton Review (Ap. 


Prop. 158. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 627 


1850, p. 330, etc.), in opposing Rev. Imbrie’s Millenarian Sermon, ‘‘ The 
Kingdom of God,” virtually re-adopts the Popish view, viz., that there is no 
Millennium in the future, saying *‘ there is to be no such Millennium as is 
assumed by the advocates of the other thories to be predicted ’’—“‘ it is not 
assumed (i.e. by himself) that there is to be any Millennium strictly speak- 
ing.”’? Butthen the writer explains : ‘* The glowing passages which are re- 
ferred by some to the period of Christ’s personal reign, and by others to a 
spiritual Millennium, are, according to this view, to be understood of the state 
of things after the final consummation’’ (i.e. are to be located to a period 
after the last resurrection, final judgment, etc.). And this he calls ‘‘ the 
Church doctrine,’’ a doctrine utterly unknown to the Primitive Church for 
several centuries, and repudiated by a host of the ablest expositors and 
theologians ; and which in the form given is really held by very few Prot- 
estants. The Princeton Review simply revives Burnet’s ‘‘ Theory,”’’ 
which locates the Millennium—against the express order of the Apoc. and 
the analogy of Scripture—after the general judgment, engrafting the same 
on the Popish view, so that what cannot be appropriated to this dispensa- 
tion is conveniently, without regard to context, turned over to this con- 
summation.’’ 


It would be gratuitous to criticise Berg’s The Stone and the Image: or the American 
Republic, for it is evident that a writer who can make the Fifth Kingdom of Dan. 2 and 7 
to be the American Republic, of which the Messiah is king, can readily see already the 
glorious dawning of the Mill. day—its first rays flashing before the dazzled eyes of 
this enthusiastic divine. ‘‘ The Seventh-day Adventist’’ notion (expressed by Waggoner, 
etc.) that the Millennium is a thousand years, in which the earth is made void and de- 
stroyed, the saints reigning in heaven, is so utterly opposed to the analogy of the Word 
and the doctrine of the early Church, that it needs no special refutation. So Hazard’s 
(Rev. Revealed) idea that ‘‘ Antichrist during this period (i.e. thausand years) reigned 
despotically over the nations,’’ making Christ’s reign a spiritual one in the heart of 
believers, is such a reversal of tre facts of the prediction, that a mere mention is amply 
sufficient. Diisterdieck (Offenb. Johannis, p. 555) mentions ‘‘ Wetstein, who regards the 
thousand years as the times of the Messiah reduced to the period of forty years (!) 
onward from the death of Domitian ; Gog. and Magog being Barcochba.” One wonders. 
whether men are really serious in such perversions. Some few, to get rid of the whole 
matter, speak of the thousand years as “a timeless spiritual condition,” i.e. a repre- 
sentation, spiritual, of the Church in all time, past, present, and future. But such over- 
look its exact historical time, chronological order, with events preceding, containing, and 
following. Some endeavor, in vain, to occupy a neutral position as e.g. a writer in the 
Princeton Review (July, 1856, p. 550) quotes Dr, Alexander as saying, ‘‘ To what period 
the thousand years in the Apoc. refer, we profess that we do not know ; and therefore 
we cannot be sure whether it is past or future. We are, therefore, neither Millenarians 
nor Pre-Millenarians.’’ This profession amounts to nothing, seeing that in his interpre- 
tations of related passages he shows himself to be a decided Post-Millenarian. Beside, 
such professed neutrals are very positive in denying its location in the future as advo- 
cated by us, showing that the profession of non-knowledge does not forbid the assumption 
of being better acquainted with the subject. 


Obs. 5. Against all theories which locate the Mill. age (the thousand 
years) in the past or present, or after the last resurrection, it is sufficient 
to point out, what every able commentator of the Apoc. concedes, viz., 
that the distinctive thousand years of Rev. 20 follow after the seven seals, 
seven trumpets and seven vials ; after a certain harvest and vintage ; after 
a particular Advent and conflict ; after a complete overthrow of Antichris- 
tian enemies ; after a binding of Satan ; and then after the supremacy and 
ruling of saints it is followed by ‘“‘a little season’? witnessing a remarkable 
but futile outburst of enmity ; and then, and only then, after the thousand 
years are ended comes the last resurrection and the entrance into the eter- 


628 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 158. 


nal ages. No such order, no such events have been witnessed in the past 
or present, and by the very nature of the predictions, interposing time and 
events, cannot be transposed to the eternal state. Simple unity, justice to 
the order laid down, demands that Rev. 20 : 1-6 should be regarded as a 
distinctive period, that of the binding of Satan, after which he is released 
and the events follow which precede the consummation of the last resur- 
rection and judgment. No Bible reader who simply follows the order laid 
down can mistake the plainness of prediction. 


It is only a preconceived opinion that violates this order. Thus e.g. the Church- 
Kingdom theory is made the starting-point. Bush, Barnes, and others assume that the 
kingdom of Dan. 7, for instance, was set up in the past (over against the regular series 
of chronological events which precede such an establishment—comp. Prop. 121), and 
consequently Rev. 20 :1-6 is applied to sustain this unfounded assumption, and all 
the Millennial prophecies are perverted to its support. Waldegrave (New Test. Miil., 
8. 7) even advocates a Millennium now in progress, if not entirely past! And he intro- 
duces into it, over against the plainest predictions, persecuting powers, and martyrs! 
The thousand years are a period not, of triumph, but of suffering and martyrdom! in which 
the Church is in sack-cloth and ashes! And such a theory we are to receive as more 
scriptural than the early Church view defended in these pages. As an illustration of the 
popular method of handling this subject, we present the ideas of Rev. Dr. Joel Swartz, 
who, in an art. on *‘ The Millennium” (Luth. Observer, Jan. 17th, 1879), undertakes to tell 
us when and how the Mill. age is to be introduced. After eulogizing the power of 
Christianity overunbelief (keeping in the background the reverses, retrogressions, etc., 
of the Church, and carefully avoiding the predictions of future persecutions from ram- 
pant unbelief), he culminates as follows: ‘‘Shall we say the Millennium is coming? 
Shall we not rather say itis here? I am one who rejoices to believe that the only Mil- 
lennium which this earth is ever to know, is already initiated, and hastening toward its 
glorious completion. Its dawn began already to tip the hill-tops of Judea when the ser- 
vants of Jesus Christ were sent forth.’’ This is the Popish idea revived, making the 
Mill. age equivalent to this dispensation, as e.g. advocated by Wordsworth in his Hulsean 
Lectures. Not satistied with Hengstenberg’s Charlemagne’s ‘‘ Holy Roman Empire” or ° 
Grotius’s and others’ downfall of Paganism in the fourth century, he returns to the 
Augustinean view adopted by the Romish Church. He endeavors to enforce his Millen- 
nial theory by the usual objections (which we repeatedly answer in this work ; and then 
to establish his unscriptural position proceeds to repeat the stale abuse that our 
doctrine is ‘‘ Jewish,” “ a Jewish heresy,’’ ‘‘ hostile to the Gospel,” that it ‘‘ sides with 
infidels in their being no conversion of the world,’' is one of ‘‘ despair and not of hope,” 
‘akin to unbelief and not of faith,” allied with “ extravagance, fanaticism, and infidelity,” 
containing (as in the late Proph. Conference) ‘* Grotesque absurdities,’ ‘* foolish literal- 
isms,’’ “ amusing contradictions,” “large pretensions,’’ and ‘“‘ heresies which it was its 
chief aim to establish.”) On the strength of this, we are to receive his doctrine utterly re- 
pudiated by the early Church for centuries, and flatly condemned by the Scriptures, and 
branded by Luther as “ a doctrine of the devil,” and regarded as entirely unfounded (saving in 
men’s own imaginations) by many of the ablest and most devoted sons of the Church (comp. 
Hist. of Doc., Props. 73-78). West, in his essay on the Idist. of Doctrine, has well remarked 
that no more erroneous and contradictory system of interpretation was ever invented 
than that adopted by the Origenistic school, which makes the conclusion of the Apoe. to 
be its beginning (with which compare Auberlen’s Daniel, p. 322 ; Luthardt’s Lehre, p. 
234; Elliott's Hore Apoc., vol. 4; Bickersteth’s Prom. Glory, p. 177; Birks’s Unful. 
Prophecy, p. 81; Rothe’s Dogmatic, 3, 77 ; Lange’s Apoc., 343 ; Mede’s Works, p. 549 ; 
Diisterdieck Offenbarung Johannis, 32, 48, 225, 541; Kleiforth’s Offenbarung, 3, 247; 
Rierck’s Zeichen, p. 331, and the works of Brookes, Seiss, and Pre-Mill. writers in general 
who advert to the same). An exceedingly arbitrary arrangement is that found in Ralston 
(On the Apoc., p. 167), who introduces into this Millennium four of the trumpets, the two 
witnesses, etc., so that he produces a remarkably diversified Millennium, utterly unrecog- 
nizable from the one given by the Spirit. 


Obs. 6. The Millennial period is inseparably connected with the restoration 
of the Jews (which the restored Theocratic-Davidic Kingdom absolutely de- 
mands—see Props. 111, 112, 113, 114). The prophecies, the covenant, the 


Prop. 158. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 629 


restitution, all require this as a preliminary. Millennial blessedness with- 
out the cessation of Jewish tribulation and the elevation of that nation to 
its predicted supremacy, 1s something wnknown to the Scriptures. Hence 
this simple distinctive point is itself een to crush opposing theories 
which contradict it. 


This restoration and supremacy of the Jewish nation, this union of the nation with 
the restored Davidic throne and kingdom, invariably linked, and implied, with the Millen- 
nium, effectually answers the dating of the Millennium from the birth or ministry, or 
death, or ascension of Christ, or from the day of Pentecost, or from the preaching of 
Paul, or from the giving of the Apocalypse, or from the destruction of Rome, or from the 
victory of Constantine, or from the reign of Charlemagne, or from the Reformation, or from 
the French Revolution, or from the era of Missions, or from any other imaginary date of 
the past. Events, as predicted, unwitnessed and having their fulfilment in the future, are 
utterly antagonistic to them. The past and the present pronounce them visionary and 
misleading. Eloquence may eulogize them, poetry may adorn them, great names may give 
them weight, but, nevertheless, they lead into grave error and to a position opposed to 
that commanded by the Master. 


630 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 159. 


Proposition 159. Zhis Theocratic Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, 
the Christ, will never come to an end. 


It is asserted by some (as e.g. Calvin, /nsti., B. 8, ch. 25) that 
our doctrine limits the reign of Christ on/y to the one thousand 
years. This is incorrect. While some Millenarians explain the 
** delivering up of the Kingdom’’ somewhat similar to our opposers, 
yet even nearly all—if not all—of these, as far as we have any 
knowledge of their writings, affirm that Jesws continues to reign 
in the same Kingdom, subordinately to the Father, after the close 
of the thousand years. The reasons for the perpetuity of the 
Christ’s Kingdom will now be presented, and the only passage 
that seems to militate against it will be examined. 


Richter’s Hrkiarte Haus Bibel, Tom. 6, p. 1134, advocates the perpetuation of the 
Kingdom, and incidentally remarks: ‘ Calvin is zealous against the heretical teachers 
(Anabaptists), who circle off and restrict the duration of Christ’s Kingdom of glory to one 
thousand years, and deny its much greater and everlasting duration after the one 
thousand years expired.” (But Calvin while denouncing one error, fell into another, viz., 
restricting the thousand years to the Militant Church in this dispensation, thus following 
Augustine.) Tyso (Pre-Millenarian) holds that at the end of the thousand years, Christ 
and the saints will leave this earth forever, which has just as little foundation in Scripture, 
as the opposite extreme held by some Seventh-day Adventists that Christ and His saints 
are not on the earth during the thousand years, but come ufter that period. The critical 
student is reminded that the perpetuity of the Kingdom is denied by some (e.g. Koch, 
Dus Tausendjihrige Reich), because, as they suppose, when the thousand years’ reign is 
ended, it will be succeeded by another as portrayed in Rey. 21 and 22, thus making the 
latter to follow the former in chronological order. Thisis a fruitful source of misconcep- 
tion, and has been answered in detail under Prop. 151. The doctrine of the perpetuity 
of the Kingdom, so long as the distinctive covenanted throne and Kingdom is preserved 
intact, does not prevent the idea of changes or additions being produced as circumstances 
or developments require, or as a growth or advance to ultimate perfection (as e.g. in 
the final rooting out after the one thousand yeurs of all evil) demands. We may add 
that many writers of ability (as e.g. Thompson in Theol. of Christ, p. 28) affirm the per- 
petuity of Christ’s Kingdom when established, without explaining or referring to 1 Cor. 
15: 24. So general was this in the past, that Dorner (Person of Christ, vol. 1, p. 409) says : 
‘*It is false to say that any one of the Church writers conceived the one thousand years’ 
Kingdom to be the last. On the contrary, they represent it as a stage of transition to 
eternal life,” etc. This is true—impelled to it by the Scripture affirmations concerning the 
perpetuity of Christ’s reign—of the idea of reigning evermore in some form or other, but 
is incorrect when applied to the distinctive reign of the one thousand years, which some 
supposed to come to an end, 


Obs. 1. While the words ‘‘ eternal,’’ ‘‘ everlasting,’’ ‘‘ forever,’’ are 
sometimes employed to denote limited duration (i.e. duration adapted to 
the nature of the thing of which it is affirmed), yet such words applied to 
the Kingdom of Jesus Christ cannot be thus restricted, because an unend- 
ing duration intended by them is stated in explanatory phraseology (as e.g. 
Luke 1 : 32 ‘‘ of His Kingdom there shall be no end,” etc.). ‘The thousand 
years are specifically mentioned as the period of Satan’s binding and of the 


TROP. 159? | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 631 


time existing Jetween the two resurrections, and of this era it is also asserted 
that Christ and His saints reign. The declaration of their reigning dur- 
ing this period does not limit the reign to it, but is added to indicate that 
the reign is already commenced and extends through this Millenary age. 
Jesus is not merely the king of *‘ an age’”’ but of ‘‘ the ages’? (1 Tim. 1: 17 
Greek), and His Kingdom is united, not merely to ‘‘ an age,’’ but to “ the 
age of ages’ or “ eternal ages,’’ thus indicating its extension onward 
through the vast succession of time in unending series. Hence the per- 
petuity of the Kingdom is freely declared in 2 Sam. 7:16; Heb. 1:8; 
coro, oo; hoy. ll: 15% Isa. 9)::7°s 2 Pet. 1): 11, etc... and: this is 
explained, Dan. 2 : 44, to be *‘a Kingdom that shall never be destroyed,’’ 
and in Dan. 7:14, ‘* His dominion is an everlasting dominion which shail 
not pass away, and His Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.’? ' 
Indeed, so expressive are these and kindred passages that even those who 
advocate a transfer of the Kingdom to the Father and some kind of an 
ending of the Kingdom, are still forced, by their weight and concurrence, 
unhesitatingly to acknowledge, in some form (as Barnes, etc.) ‘‘ the per- 
petuity of Christ’s Kingdom and His eternal reign.’’? Hence this reign, 
beginning at the Millennial era, is not terminated by the close of the thou- 
sand years.* The idea of the perpetuity of Christ’s reign was so generally 
diffused in the early Church, that we even find it in the Sibylline Oracles 
(B. 3) “‘ the Holy King of all the earth shall come, who shall wield the 
sceptre during all the ages of swiftly moving time,’’ etc.? 


1 Daniel also predicts that ‘‘ the saints of the Most High shall receive the Kingdom 
forever, even forever and ever.” Numerous critics have observed that this reduplicated 
form of successive ages must necessarily imply ‘‘ absolute eternity” (so e.g. Lewis, Six 
Days of Creation, p. 372, who, however, thinking it used in relation to the world as to time, 
renders it ‘‘ for the world and the world of worlds:’’ we prefer its direct reference to 
time as related to this world). Jven Barnes (Com., Dan. 7: 14) fully and frankly admits 
that Daniel’s phraseology denotes that the Kingdom thus established *‘ would be perma- 
nent and eternal’’ (and as be applies this prediction to the Church as constituted in this 
dispensation, which in other places he affirms shall cease thus to exist, his concession is 
contradictory to his system of eschatology). 

* Some advocate these thousand years to be literal; others that they are prophetical 
years (making three hundred and sixty thousand) ; others that they are a round number 
for an indefinite period, and a few others the symbol of perfection or eternity. The con- 
nection that these thousand years sustain to the preceding Millenaries, while definitely 
employed to indicate the binding of Satan, to fulfil prophetical announcements, etc., at the 
same time seem to indicate, in view of a separation of time corresponding with each of the 
six preceding—a literal period thus constituting the week with its Sabbath given in a 
distinctive form, preparatory to the ages following. The question, however, is not essen- 
tial. By way of explanation we add: itis a misapprehension of Waggoner and others, 
that we limit ‘‘ the day of the Lord’’—‘‘ the day of the Lord Jesus Christ’’ to these one 
thousand years. Such phraseology extends beyond it, being indefinite and declarative 
of the time when the Lord is specially manifested. The making the one thousand years’ 
reign in heaven and at its close on earth is so opposed by covenant and prophecy, by the 
continuity of fulfilment, by the proper conception of what constitutes Christ’s kingdom, 
by the elect condition of the Jewish nation, by the early preaching and primitive faith, 
etc , etc., that it needs no serious refutation separately, as all the objections alleged are 
fully met under propositions. 

3 The Jewish idea of the perpetuity of the Messianic Kingdom is given by Knapp (Ch. 
Theol., p. 353), who informs us that the Jews ‘‘spake of the eternal King and the eternal King- 
dom of David, Ps. 89; Sam. 7.’’ While some (see Art. ‘‘ Messiah,” Herzog’s Cyclop.) 
differed as to the duration of the Kingdom, yet Knapp’s statement is supported by the 
more general opinion, sustained by an appeal to Scripture. Therefore, Reuss (His. 
Ch. Theol. Apos. Age) affirms that the perpetuity of the Kingdom was held by the Jews, 
saying that, ‘* The idea of cessation or end was incompatible with the very conception of 
the Christ.” Uspecially will this be seen by observing that the doctrine of the resurrec- 


632 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 159. 


tion and immortal blessedness was associated with it. The early Church view has been 
sufficiently stated in various quotations from the Fathers, but as the Kingdom lost its 
distinctive covenanted character and the notion of the Divine Sovereignty was substi- 
tuted in its place, expressions evidencing the change became more and more apparent, 
even while the perpetuity was stillheld. Thus e.g. in the Synodical Letter of the Bishops 
assembled in Council at Sardica (Theodoret’s Eccles. His., p. 78) the orthodoxy of 
Marcellus is declared, because ‘‘ he did not affirm, as they (his enemies) represented that 
His (Christ's) Kingdom would have anend. On the contrary, he wrote that His Kingdom 
had had no beginning and would have no end.’’ But Hagenbach (fis. of Doc., vol. 1, 
Sec. 139) says that Marcellus was one of the first who interpreted 1 Cor. 15 : 25 as indica- 
tive that Christ’s Kingdom will at some future time come to an end. Cyril of Jerusalem 
opposed this notion, appealing to Luke 1: 33; Dan. 7 : 13, 14, etc., and ‘‘ in reference to 
1 Cor. 15 : 25 he asserts that the term ‘ the end’ includes the terminus ad quem.” The 
student only requires to be reminded that the Nicene Constantinopolitan Creed emphati- 
cally teaches of the Messiah’s Kingdom : “ Whose Kingdom shall have no end.” 


Obs. 2. But in the Proposition it is stated that the Theocratic Kingdom 
of Jesus Christ shall not end. This is an important point, and deserves, 
for the sake of the honor and glory pertaining to Jesus, the Christ, careful 
consideration ; especially as we are forced to differ from a multitude of 
expositors on this subject. Let the reader turn to the covenant which 
bestows this Kingdom upon Jesus, to the prophets which describe it, and 
the Bible (unless 1t be one solitary passage which will be duly examined) 
only recognizes one Kingdom, this Theocratic one, which pertains to Jesus, 
the Christ. And what is more to the purpose, the declarations of perpetu- 
ity, of never ending, of never being destroyed, etc, are all predicated of this 
identical Kingdom and not (as some unwarrantably affirm) of another one. 
If there is any force or propriety in language, this is most positively as- 
serted, confirming and enforcing various propositions given relating to this 
Kingdom. It shows that the Kingdom described by Daniel, Isaiah, 
David, John, and others, when ozce established under the Messiah, is @ 
perpetual, ever-enduring one, extending into eternity. Linked and identi- 
fied as it is with restitution, with the new heaven and new earth, with the 
New Jerusalem state, etc., it possesses within itself the elements (saying 
nothing of the immortal King and associated rulers) of perpetuity. It is 
significant that the apostles adopt the Jewish phraseology, speaking of the 
perpetuity of the Messianic reign and Kingdom, without giving the least 
intimation of a change in meaning. The character, person, offices, posi- 
tion, in brief, all pertaining to the Messiah, as David’s Son, once obtained 
by Him are appropriately represented as belonging to Him evermore. The 
inheritance given to Him as David’s Son; the reward bestowed upon 
Him as such is never given up by Him, or withdrawn from Him. To say 
that David’s Son will ever occupy a lower, subsidiary position, or that He 
will yield up His inheritance or dominion given to Him as ‘‘ The Christ,” is 
to contradict numerous prophecies and promises, which, while giving an 
extended detail of the Messianic Kingdom, always describe it as perpetual, 
never-ending. Indeed, it could not be otherwise, for this Theocratic throne 
is declared to de both the throne of the Father and the Son—this has been 
repeatedly noticed—the fundamental idea of a Theocracy embracing the one- 
ness of the Father and David’s Son when acting in the capacity of an 
earthly Ruler. Hence much that has been assumed and written respecting 
the supposed differences of thrones in ‘‘ the delivering up of the King- 
dom,’’ is based on a@ total misapprehension of the facts as they pertain to 
the Messianic throne.’ The prophets and apostles always recognize this 


Prop. 159.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 633 


Theocratic feature, and speak of the throne either as the Messiah’s, or as 
God’s, or as the I’ather’s, or as I'ather’s and Son’s together ; and the con- 
ception of the Theocratic idea in all its comprehensiveness indicates that it 
is the Divine purpose evermore to exercise the Rulership of a God over the 
whole earth in and through the Person, the gloritied humanity, of the Lord 
Jesus and His associated brethren. 'The honor belonging to the distinctive 
Christ is never lessened or altered. Hence, in view of the general state- 
ments of the Word respecting the perpetuity of the Kingdom of the Christ 
and the evermore distinctive inheritance, honor, and glory of the God- 
man, the Theocratic King, it is painful to read the utterances of able and 
eminent men who, hampered by one text, override a multitude of others, and 
persist 72 dethroning “* The Christ,’? as Christ—in having the covenanted 
King David’s Son to yield up His throne and dominion (to the Father, as 
if it were not already the Father’s in the highest sense), and then, on the 
other side, hampered by the texts indicative of the perpetuity of the King- 
dom, they endeavor to reconcile their theory by a still more unwarranted 
procedure, viz., by dividing the Christ, and conjecturing that ‘‘ Christ i 
His Divine nature, as God, shall never cease to reign.’? The humanity is 
thus set aside (see below), and 7 7s not “* The Christ’’—God-man and Theo- 
cratic King—that reigns, but only a part of the Christ—that is, the 
Divine. Now, any theory, no matter from what source, that is driven to 
such @ division of Christ and such a withdrawal from Him of the specifi- 
cally bestowed honors, etc., is most certainly defective. or those nice dis- 
tinctions which theologians have introduced by which the Messiah is made 
td transfer His Kingdom—to abdicate the 'Theocratic throne, i.e. the 
Davidic—and yet, after all, to reserve in some form, with the loss of the 
reign and dominion of the God-man Jesus Christ, a kingly position is wé- 
terly unknown to the Scriptures. It virtually reduces the matter to this : 
That the Messiah yields up His inheritance and Kingdom promised to Him 
forever, and that He rules no longer as Jesus Christ, but only as God. 
Surely a doctrine so pregnant in results, which merges the humanity into 
Deity, takes away from Jesus, David’s Son, that which Holy Writ ascribes 
to Him for all succeeding ages, ought to be well founded, most plainly 
taught.” 


1 Thus e.g. Dr. Hodge (Com. 1 Cor., and Sys. Div.) has much to say respecting the uni- 
versal dominion exercised as God-man (and which the Christ is to yield up at the end), 
but we discriminate between the express covenanted Kingdom (the Theocratic-Davidic) in 
which He openly rules over the earth as Theocratic King in David’s line, and the 
dominion pertaining to Him (Prop. 80) as Divine. He will ever, in virtue of His relation- 
ship to the Father, His oneness with Him, His carrying out His will, be placed at the 
right hand of the Father—a phrase indicative (1) of the power exercised by Him, and 
(2) of a certain subordination to the Father. Our view does not introduce a humiliation 
of Jesus, or a removal of that which is inherent in Him as the Divine ; it preserves to 
Him inviolate that which pertains to Him as David's Son, and that which belongs to Him 
as God-man and the Divine. 

2 To give the reader the idea that we correctly state the opinions of others, we repro- 
duce several taken by random. Dr. Hodge, Sys. Div., vol. 2, p. 637, says in explanation 
that ‘‘absolute dominion is committed to Christ as Mediator.’’ It is for the benefit of 
the Church and to consummate redemption, ‘‘ that as the God-man, He has been thus 
exalted over all created things.” Then, ‘‘ having been committed to Him for a special 
purpose, this universal dominion as Mediator will be relinquished when that purpose Is 
accomplished ”’ and “‘ He will deliver up the Kingdom unto the Father,’’ and yet in some 
way ‘‘ reign forever as King over the redeemed.” Knapp, Theology, Sec. 98, makes “ the 
government” to end, saying: ‘‘ At the end of the world, when the heavenly state com- 
mences, the government which Christ administers as a man will cease,” telling us that 


634 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 159. 


‘¢ thenceforward the Father will no more make use, as before, of the intervention of the 
Messiah to govern and bless men, for now they will be actually blessed.” But, forced 
by Scripture, adds : ‘‘ The glory and majesty of Christ will remain, however, unaltered, — 
and He will still far excel His friends and brethren, who enjoy a happiness similar to 
His own.” These are bold words respecting David’s Son. Barnes, Com. 1 Cor. 15, makes 
Christ ‘‘ rendering back to God that office or authority which He had received at His 
hands ;’ but still has Him, after giving up ‘‘ the dominion which God would exercise 
through the Messiah,’ reigning as God in the Father. Grotius,as quoted by Barnes, 
has a ** delivering up of the Kingdom as the governors of provinces render again or 
deliver up their commission and authority to the Czsars who appointed them.’”’ The 
Christadelphians in Declaration of Principles, p. 15, assert that “ in the end of that period 
(i.e. the thousand years) an entire change will take place in the constitution of things ; 
Christ will surrender His position of supremacy, and become subject to Deity as the Head 
of a complete family,” etc. The Kingdom of Grace, p. 44, affirms the same change, and 
adds: ‘* Then He will be known no more as a Mediator or Saviour, but only as the King 
of kings and Lord of lords, and He shall reign visibly on the throne of the Universe for- — 
ever and ever.’”’ Quotations could be multiplied, some cautiously expressed yet agreeing — 
in the main with the preceding, while others are extravagrant and reckless, making Jesus, 
after the delivering of the Kingdom, a mere cipher. And yet a few seem to draw back, 
without assigning any reasons, from such deductions, as e.g. a writer in the Princeton 
Rep. for Jan., 1853, says: ‘‘ We believe the Scriptures plainly teach that Christ is now 
King in Zion ; that His mediatorial Kingdom has already commenced on earth in the 
hearts of His people and is to be perfected and perpetuated through everlasting ages in 
the world to come.” 


Obs. 3. There is only one passage in Scripture which is supposed to 
teach the yielding up or ending of the distinctive Messianic Kingdom, viz., 
1 Cor. 15 : 27, 28. Whatever view is engrafted upon or derived from these 
verses, nearly all (excepting those which utterly degrade Christ, and hence 
are unworthy of notice) admit, whatever delivering up is intended, that 
Jesus Christ stzll reigns, either as God, the humanity being subordinate, or 
as God-man deprived of His dominion and occupying a lower station, ete. 
Neander (flis. Plant. Ch. Church, vol. 1, p. 529) more cautiously than 
many, says: ‘‘ The Kingdom of Christ in its peculiar’? (i.e. mediatorial) 
‘‘form will come to an end, when it has attained this object, when, 
through the efficiency of the glorified Christ, the Kingdom of God has no 
more opposition to encounter, and will no longer need a Redeemer and 
Mediator.”” “The Mediatorial Kingdom of God will then merge into the — 
lmmediatorial, such is the declaration of Paul in 1 Cor. 15 : 2428.7? 
(Comp., however, his utterance, Prop. 49, Obs. 7, Note 1). Lange (Com. 
Matt. 3 : 1-12, doctrinal), more unguardedly, remarks : ‘‘ At last when the 
Kingdom of God shall have been perfected, it will also have reached its full — 
and final development, and be ripe for self-annihilation which awaits it,” 
thus, as he explains, giving place toa Kingdom of glory. Barnes (Com. 
oct) incautiously says: ‘‘ It means the Incarnate Son, the Mediator, the 
man that was born and that was raised from the dead and to whom this 
wide dominion had been given, should resign that dominion, and that the — 
government should be re-assumed dy the Divinity as God.’’ Stephenson 
(The Atonement) makes Christ reigning first as ‘‘ an independent King” 
and afterward as ‘“‘a subordinate King.’’ Thus David’s Son, who is One 
with the Father, actually as Theocratic King seated on the Davidic throne 
adopted and incorporated by the Father as His throne, is made to yield up 
a throne and dominion which in many other places is pronounced—in view 
of this very relationship to the Father—never ending.’ Can there be a 
contradiction between Scripture such as these interpretations present ? 
After careful consideration of the various passages directly bearing upon 


i ROP. 159.) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 635 


the subject, we unhesitatingly—in the name and for the sake of David’s 
Son—answer, that it does not exist saving in the interpretations thus at- 
tached to it. In giving our reasons for no such antagonism, let the 
reader notice, that we do not present our criticisms, or those of persons 
favorable to Millenarianism, lest we might be chargeable with seeking out 
an accommodation for our doctrinal position. Instead of urging our own 
views of the passage in question, it is sufficient to let others specify them 
and thus indicate the wonderful harmony preserved in Holy Writ. In the 
phrase, ‘‘ then cometh the end,’’ we are not concerned in accepting of the 
interpretation of many critics, who, connecting the word translated ‘‘ end’’ 
with the idea of the order of resurrection, render it ‘‘ the last,’’ viz., the 
last band, i.e. the rest of the dead. If this is discarded as untenable, then 
the idea of Barnes, etc., may be adopted, viz., of consummation, termina- 
tion or limit, or that of Prof. Bush, who says that the true sense is more 
nearly allied to perfection or consummation than termination, imputing 
ultimate issue, perfect accomplisnment. On the next phrase, ‘‘ when He 
shall have delivered up the Kingdom,’’ etc., eminent critics, such as Storr, 
Bush, and others,” have declared that the nominative of the verb trans- 
lated ‘‘ shall have delivered up” ts not Christ, as our translators (Eng. ver- 
sion) supposed, and, therefore, that the Kingdom delivered up is not 
Christ’s. They affirm that this is an instance of a ‘‘ common scriptural 
idiom in which the verb is used without any personal nominative, but has 
reference to the purpose of God elsewhere expressed in His Word,’’ giving 
the rule and adducing examples of this idiom both from the Old and New 
Testaments (see e.g., Bush’s Anatasis, p. 376 and 377). They make the 
following paraphrastic translation: ‘‘'Then cometh the end (the grand 
consummation), when the prophetic announcement of the Scriptures require 
the delivering up (making over) of all adverse dominion into the hands of 
God or the Godhead (the Father and the Son conjointly) to whose unrivalled 
supremacy everything is to be made finally subject.’’ Or, ‘‘'Then cometh 
the end, when by the announced purpose of God tn the Scripture, the King- 
dom or Kingshin, hitherto usurped by the rulers of this world, 1s made over 
to its rightful Divine Proprietor.’’ It would be too lengthy to assign all 
the reasons and the examples assigned for such a rendering, and the reader 
is referred to the works which give them in detail. Barnes, who is inclined 
to the common view, adds it briefly to his comments, and speaks favorably 
of it. The phrase, ‘‘ for He must reign till He hath put all enemies under 
His feet,’’ does not limit—as is shown by examples (Bush, etc.) of Script- 
ure phraseology and the admissions of all that some kind of a reign con- 
tinues—the reign of Christ. The 28th verse, “And when all things shall be 
subdued unto Him, then shall the Son also Himself be subject unto Him that 
put all things under Him, that God may be all in all.”’ In the reasoning 
of the apostle he had just replied to an objection that might be alleged, 
that if Christ has ‘‘ all things’? put under Him, His supremacy might ex- 
ceed that of the Father, by saying that ‘‘ He is excepted which did put alt 
things under Him,’’ and, in consequence, it follows, as an inevitable result, 
that if the Father is excepted and has put all things under the God-man 
Jesus Christ, He will retain His pre-eminence and that Christ is sfzl sab- 
ordinate, even after He has acquired His greatest power and glory in His 
Kingdom. Bush well observes: ‘‘ A delegated authority necessarily im- 
plies a supremacy to him who conferred it. This is undoubtedly the force 
of the original (rére xat) ‘then also’ i.e. then, just as now—which the 


636 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 159, 


rendering of the common translation entirely fails to represent.’’ ‘ As 
Christ, in the great mediatorial scheme, now holds a place inferior to the 
Father, so, notwithstanding all the grandeur and glory that is predicted to 
accrue to Him from the final subjection of His enemies, He is still ordained — 
to occupy that subordinate station.’’ Storr and others explain the 28th 
verse as follows: The adverbs étav and tére being regarded as influenced — 
by the word translated ‘‘ shall be subject’? not as a future of time, but — 
merely as a logical future denoting an inference, the verse is correspond- 
ingly rendered : ‘‘ Since (dzav), therefore, all things have been (by a Divine — 
decree) put under Him, it will follow (767e) that the Son Himself is or is 
to be, subject to Him that put all things under Him, that God may be all 
in all.”’*> Having thus hastily passed over the passage, giving the impar- 
tial, unbiassed views of Post and Anti-Muillenarians, instead of finding if, 
as alleged, teaching the ending of the Kingdom, it stands im harmony with — 
the prophetic announcements proclaiming the perpetuity of the Kingdom. — 
In the language of Van Valkenburg (Bib. Repos., vol. 2, ‘* Hssay on Dura-- 
tion of Christ’s Kingdom’’), ‘‘ As the Father was excepted when all 
things were put under the Son, so also shall He be excepted when all things — 
are subdued unto Him. It appears, then, that this passage does not even ~ 
intimate that there will ever be a termination of Christ’s Kingdom, or that — 
He will ever deliver up His Kingdom to the Father. 'The dominion shall 
indeed be rescued from His enemies, and restored to the Godhead, but not 
in any such sense, but that His dominion is anv everlasting dominion, and 
that of His Kingdom. there shall be no end.’’ Storr (Diss. on Kingdom) 
tukes the ground that ‘‘ the government which it is said, verse 24, He shall 
restore to God, even the Father, must not be supposed to mean Christ’s gov- 
ernment, but that of every opposing power, which is evidently declared to 
be destroyed, that the power may be restored to God’’—adding truly and > 
most forcibly (as our Propositions abundantly prove) ‘‘ the government is 
restored to God when it is restored to Christ.’? Thus-the passage is made 
by them to bein accord with Rev. 11 : 15, ‘‘ The Kingdoms (or Sovereignty) — 
of this world are become the Kingdoms (or Sovereignty) of our Lord and His 
Christ,’ and when this is done, Father and Son wnited in this Theocratie 
ordering and Personage, ‘‘ He shall reign forever and ever.’’* It is the 
fulfilment of Dan. 7 and other predictions, from which we learn that the 
Father gives Him dominion, that He exerts it until all His enemies are sub- 
dued, and reigns with acknowledged supremacy (subordinate as this passage — 
teaches in His God-man rulership to One only) over all the earth. One 
thing must be self evident to the believer, that this passage, so difficult of — 
interpretation (universally so acknowledged), ought not to be pressed 
against the testimony of a multitude of other passages, either to the separa- 
tion of the Christ, or to the removal of His distinctive kingship as the 
Christ, or to the diminishing of any bonor, etc., conferred upon Him.* The 
honor of both the Father and the Son are identified with the perpetuity of 
this Theocratic Kingdom, for it is just as much the Father’s Kingdom as 
it is the Son’s—the most perfect union existing between them constituting © 
a Oneness in rule and dominion.® . 


| 
1 Martensen (Ch. Dog., S. 289) is contradictory, for in one sentence he says, ‘‘ He has 
given up the Kingdom to the Father, laid aside His Mediatorial Office,’’ etc., and then in 
the next sentence affirms that the Kingdom is not ‘‘in every sense terminated,” Jesus 
being still ‘‘ the Head of the blessed Kingdom.” Van Oosterzee says, ‘‘ The Kingdom of . 
Christ can, and of necessity must, be absorbed in the endless blessed Kingdom of God, 


TROP, 159. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 637 


and assigns as a reason: ‘‘He ceases to be the mediate cause of the execution of God’s 
council, which now in its totality is accomplished ” (just as if God’s Kingdom was not the 
Christ’s, and the execution of God’s counsel ceased through Christ). Fuller (The Gospel 
its own Witness, ch. 5)makes Christ’s Kingdom to end, calling it ‘‘a delegated ’’ Kingdom, 
“the delegated authority of Christ,” which is finally yielded up to the Father. This King- 
dom he has in ‘‘the period allotted to this work, which extends from the time of the 
revelation of the promised seed to the day of judgment ;” and he distinctly announces that 
God’s will shall only be done here ‘‘after the general conflagration,” etc., so that the 
same is not verified in Christ’s Kingdom, thus making it a failure. Stanley (The Hpis. to 
the Corinthians, p. 315) says: ‘* Even if, in this world, a distinction must be allowed, the 
Invisible Eternal Father, and Christ, the Lord and Ruler of man, he (the apostle) points 
our thoughts to a time when this distinction will cease ; when the reign of all intermediate 
objects, even of Uhrist Himself, shall cease, and God will fill all the universe, and be Him- 
self present in the hearts and minds of all.’’ (Here we certainly have more than the sub- 
stitution of the Divine Sovereignty, a kind of Spiritualistic Pantheism, which crushes 
the promised eternal reign of Jesus and the distinctive, precious Christ.) Alexander 
(Psalms, vol. 3, p. 103), speaking of Christ’s reign, remarks: ‘‘This session (or 
investiture of supreme dominion) is to last until the subjugation of His enemies, 
that is to say, this special and extraordinary power of the Messiah (as the Son of 
man) is then (when the last enemy is subdued) to terminate,” and as proof refers 
to 1 Cor. 15: 24-28. (So Jesus, after the victory is complete, gives up His ‘su- 
preme dominion” when it is most reasonable to suppose that He would then 
reign the more gloriously with “supreme dominion’’), This limitation of reign 
was also expressed by the fanatical Anabaptists. Thus Luther (Tidings of the Ana- 
baptists) states that John of Leyden (who professed to reign on the throne of David, 


Comp. Michelet’s <‘ Life of Luther,’’ p. 234) had on his crown the inscription, ‘‘A King 


of righteousness over the world,’’ and that the missionaries sent forth by him, among 
other things said: ‘‘ And when the king (John of Leyden) shall have caused righteous- 
ness to be established throughout the world, then will Jesus Christ resign His 
power into the hands of God the Father.” Bloomfield, Com. 1 Cor. 15 : 24, speaks of 
Christ that He ‘shall resign the government of all things to God the Father,” and ap- 
provingly quotes Grotius illustrating the same ‘‘ from the custom of the Presidents sent 
by the Roman Empire to govern provinces ; who, at their return, used formerly to restore 
their authority into the hands of their Sovereign.’ (Surely, we introduce nothing so derog- 
atory to the dignity and honor of Jesus, that He forever yields up His inheritance, pur- 
chased by His obedience and death.) Dr. Brown (Christ's Sec. Coming, p. 160) says that 
the delivering up the Kingdom means ‘‘the Mediator giving an account of His Steward- 
ship ” (as if the Father and the Son were not one, and sucha thing were necessary), and 
that it “‘seems to imply the end of the Kingdom in its present form,” but is continued 
in another, which recognizes Christ’s ‘‘ mediatorial merit and Person,” and this last is 
‘‘the everlasting Kingdom.” Lincoln (Lects. on Rev., vol. 2, p. 167) has Jesus to give up 
the Davidic throne at the end of the thousand years, and to occupy another throne. 
Fausset (Com. 1 Cor. 15 : 24) observes that this statement seems at variance with Dan. 7: 
14, etc., and to rid himself of the difficulty resorts to a ‘‘mediatorial Kingdom ” (which 
was never covenanted to Jesus), and finds simply a change ‘inthe manner of administra- 
tion,’’ and this consists in ‘‘ God shall then come into direct connection with the earth, 
instead of mediatorially.” (But the Messianic Kingdom is the Father’s Kingdom, and this 
‘direct connection with the earth’’ is established at the Sec. Advent and during the 
Mill. age as one of its most distinguishing features—the Father being manifested in the 
Son—as e.g. compare Jno. 14:9 and related passages with Isa. 25, 60, 61, 62, 54, etc.) 
Even so able a writer as Rothe falls into the same mistake, saying (Dog., P. 2, p. 60): 
‘‘The Apoe. fixes the duration of this Kingdom at one thousand years.” Breckenridge 
(Knowledge of God, Subj. Consid., p. 668) makes a somewhat similar statement. So also 
in the “ Declaration of Faith,” adopted by the General Assembly of the Free Italian 
Church (Milan, June, 1870), in the last art. is a declaration of Pre-Millenarian views, and 
in reference to the second resurrection at the end of the thousand years, the clause 


follows : ‘‘ And after His Kingdom all the rest of the dead shall rise to be judged in judg- 


ment.’’ 

But let the student observe that nearly all these writers effectually contradict their 
own statements respecting a limitation of reign, when commenting on the passages where 
the perpetuity is positively asserted. Numerous examples of this might be given, but we 
select one to serve as an illustration. The perpetuity of the Kingdom is expressly 
asserted e.g. in Ps. 45:6 and applied to Jesus in Heb. 1 : 8, concerning which Fausset 


638 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 159. 


(Com. Ps, 45 : 6) justly observes : ‘‘ No lawful construction can be devised to change the 
sense here given and sustained by the ancient versions, and above all by Paul (Heb. 1 : 
8) of the perpetuity of this government (Cf. 2 Sam. 7:13; Ps. 10:16; 72:5; 89:4; 
110: 4; Isa. 9: 7).” The critical reader will not fail to see by the references given that 
it is the restored Davidic-Theocratic Kingdom that is thus perpetuated. So e.g. on Isa. 
9:6 he approvingly quotes Hengstenberg, on the phrase ‘‘ everlasting Father” as 
saying: ‘“‘ Earthly kings leave their people after a short reign ; He will reign over and 
bless them forever.’? When Russell (Our Lord’s Return, p. 31) confines the reign of 
Christ to a thousand years, he must ignore the numerous predictions which declare its 
perpetuity. And in reterence to these thousand years, it is only requisite to quote Win- 
throp (Prem. Essay on Symbols, p. 66): ‘** They lived and reigned with Christ a thou- 
sand years,’ or rather, according to the reading of the best editions, ta chilia etc., § the 
thousand years,’ i.e. those which had been mentioned in v. 3, as indicating the period of 
Satan’s confinement in the abyss.” 

* The works specially quoted under this point are the following: Prof. Bush, 4nas- 
tasis, p. 374 seq. ; Storr’s Opuscula, vol. 1, p. 274-282, and his Dis. on the Kingdom of 
Heaven » Vanvalkenburg’s Lssay on the duration of Christ’s Kingdom, Bib. Repos., vol. 2, 
No. 4, Second Series, p. 404, ete. bib. Repos., vol. 3, p. 748-755, 

8 This subordination of the Theocratic rule, i.e. a special delegated rule through ‘‘ the 
Son of man,’’ necessarily falls below that of the Divine Sovereignty which establishes 
and enforces it. Comp. Props. 79, 80, ete. 

4 We also give Sirr’s (First Res.) rendering: ‘‘ The Worldly Kingdom of our Lord and 
His Christ is come (so Greisbach, etc.), and LHe shall reign for the ages of the ages.” 
This reminds one of the marginal reading of Ps. 145 : 13, ‘‘ Kingdom of all ages.” ‘* The 
times of restitution,” which run into the ages, are always spoken of as Messianic. Comp. 
Props. 140, 144, 148, etc. The Revision has it: ‘‘ The Kingdom of the world is become 
the Kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ, and He shall reign (marg. reading) unto the 
ages of the ages.”’ 

5 May we remind our opponents, who charge us with a lowering, etc., of Christ, when 
we affirm His Coming to reign with His saints here on earth in His covenanted Kingdom, 
as David’s Son and the Christ, renewing the earth, etc., that we certainly are not so 
liable to such an accusation as those are who make this same Christ yield up His Kingdom — 
and inheritance, although the specific promises of perpetuity are given to ‘‘the Son of 
man,” i.e. pertain to, and include the humanity and inheritance of Jesus. 

6 The critical student will observe, that evidently a reason why Paul is so guarded in 
his language arises from his desire to avoid the hatred and persecution of the jealous 
Roman power. For had he plainly stated the hope that Gentile domination must thus 
be subjected, etc., it inevitably would have excited bitter and unrelenting hostility. 
This he avoids by the peculiar construction of the passage, without yielding up the 
truth and evincing the most delicate prudence. Also: the student is reminded that this 
very subordination of Jesus the Christ to the Father results, not from the Divine, but the 
Human nature possessed ; because He continues to be the Son of man this subordina- 
tion ever more continues. The Melchisedecean Priesthood (Prop. 155) supports our 
position, and in the Messianic Kingdom the Kingship and Priesthood are inseparably 
united, the Kingdom being Theocratic, the Civil and Religious, the Church and the 
State, being One, the perpetuity of both is asserted. This perpetuity the Jews affirmed 
when they declared of the Messiah that ‘‘ He abideth forever’ (Jno. 12 : 34 ; comp. com- 
ments of the various commentators). Hence we must reject, as utterly untenable, and 
derogatory to the Christ, such declarations (Chr. Sys., p. 153). ** The kingdom which Jesus 
received from His Father, however heavenly, sublime, and glorious it may be regarded, ~ 
is only temporal ;” for over against this, it is affirmed to be perpetual, ever-enduring, 
etc. - ; 


PROP, 160. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 639 


Proposition 160. ZLhis Kingdom is set up in the divided state 
of the Roman Hmpire. 


This has already been intimated under Prop. 104, Obs. 2, etc., 
but being an important landmark in the comprehension of 
prophecy, attention is again called to it in this form. The de- 
pressed condition of God’s people, the overthrow or withdrawal of 
the Theocracy is limited by the continuance of the four great 
Gentile monarchies or empires, which run a predetermined period, 
called by way of significance and identity ‘‘ the times of the Gen- 
tiles’ (a phrase which in itself duly considered is hostile to the 
notion of the establishment of the Messianic Kingdom). 


So e.g. Bh. Newton (Diss. on Proph., vol. 2, p. 87) says: “ The times of the Gentiles 
will be fulfilled when the times of the four great kingdoms of the Gentiles, according to 
Daniel’s prophecies, shall be expired, and the Fifth Kingdom, or the Kingdom of Christ, 
shall be set up in their place.” And preceding this he remarks : ‘‘ It (Jerusalem) is still 
trodden down by the Gentiles, and consequently ‘the times of the Gentiles’ are not yet 
fulfilled.” The student will readily see the force of this, and how strongly it con- 
demns the misapplication of Daniel’s Messianic Kingdom to the Church as now con- 
stituted. We may depend upon it, that God’s portrayal of events and their nature is 
far more reliable than the estimates and eulogies of men. The union of these successive 
Empires in one image (Dan. 2) is indicative of a succession of the same pride, spirit, 
motives, ambition, etc., and the separate portrayal (Dan. 7) shows their succession and 
hostility to each other—an ambition that resisted and overcame all opposition. The 
metallic portrayal, evincing the grandeur of rule, is given to a Gentile to accord with 
Gentile ideas ; the bestial is a representation to a believer of the true nature and 
characteristics of the same. The reasons why these four were specially selected (and not 
the Egyptian, Carthaginian, Parthian, etc.) arise from their being the principal ones suc- 
cessively existing, their domination over others, their relation to the destiny of the Jewish 
nation, their accurately measuring the time of God’s judgments on the Jewish nation 
and land, and the connection that the last sustains to the Sec. Advent and Jewish 
restoration. 


Obs. 1. Without repeating the reasoning elsewhere given, it is sufficient 
to say that this Kingdom, according to Daniel 7, is received by the Son of 
man after the Fourth Beast or Roman Empire is divided ; after the rise of 
the ten horns and little horn, and a¢ the very time that the judgments of 
God are to be poured out upon the divided Empire. The First Advent 
took place when the Empire was consolidated, the Second will occur when 
it is divided into its ten-toed form ; for the smiting is upon the feet of the 
image, the reception and inheriting of the Kingdom is after the saints have 
long suffered from the arrogance, etc., of the powers arising out of this 
Empire, and these powers are to meet an awful infliction of tribulation. 

Tt has often been noticed that one of the fundamental eschatological ideas of the 
early Church, always attached to the division of Rome and the closing of the Empire the 
consummation. The Antichristian persecution, the Sec. Advent with its results were 


invariably linked with the Empire, which was unquestionably regarded as the fourth. 
Thus e.g. Lactantius and many others, which was more or less adopted and urged by 


640 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160, 


Cyprian, Gregory the Great, etc. So prevailing was the primitive view in its relation to © 
the Empire that, as Gibbon (Decl. and Fall, vol. 2, p. 80) intimates, it was one cause of 
the hostile spirit and persecution of the emperors, although mentioned with caution and 
reserve it became known, and (Mosheim, vol. 1, p. 413) the Montanists were censured 
because they disclosed it so freely and prominently. Pre-Millenarians, almost univer- 
sally, hold to the same view, and as it is incorporated and upheld in this work, our argu- | 
ment would be incomplete, if we did not trace the Roman Empire and show how the © 
Sec. Advent is linked with it. ‘To indicate to the student how delicately this was 
anciently handled, we refer e.g. to Josephus (Ant. 10, 10, 4), who relates Daniel’s dream _ 
(Dan. 2), and vaguely refers to the interpretation of it. After intimating that the fourth © 
kingdom is the Roman, he, in view of the action of the Stone, to avoid giving offence, 
says: “ Daniel did also declare the meaning of the Stone to the king; but Ido not 
think proper to relate it, since I have only undertaken to describe things past or things 
present, but not things that are future.’’ Compare for Jewish idea Prayer 12 of the © 
Nineteen Prayers, Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 107; for the Fathers’ views, Bh. Newton’s 
Diss., p. 192, ete., where he gives Jerome’s adherence to it and apology for the same, 
Mede (Works, B. 4, Epis. 6), therefore, says: “ The Roman Empire to be the fourth 
kingdom of Daniel, was believed by the Church of Israel both before and in our Saviour’s” 
time ; received by the disciples of the apostles and the whole Christian Church for the 
first 300 years, without any known contradiction. And, I confess, having so good — 
ground in Scripture it is with me tantum non articulus fidei,’ little less than an article of 

faith.’’ 


Obs. 2. Hence, it is a matter of importance to trace the Roman history as 
a confirmation of our faith. Generally it is supposed, with the exception of — 
a few scholars, that the Roman HKmpire is something that existed long ago © 
and with whose history—saving as it may illustrate the past and afford les- _ 
sons for the future, we have 2o personal interest. This is a mistake, as © 
prophecy itself indicates. Let us receive the impartial teachings of histo- | 
rians and writers, who had no reference to prophecy when giving their his- 
torical statements, and see how wonderfully the Spirit foresaw and 
described the course of events long before Romulus was in existence. ‘The 
Roman Empire when divided into its Hastern and Western divisions, and — 
when ruled over by several emperors conjointly, was still regarded as one — 
great whole. Many writers have taken it for granted that when the West- 
ern head fell in the person of Augustulus (deposed about A.p.476), the 
Roman Empire became entirely extinct in the West. But history rejects 
such a conclusion, seeing that the Roman Senate acknowledged the em- 
perorship of Zeno at Constantinople, declaring that “‘ the Majesty of a sole 
monarch vs sufficient to pervade and to protect at the same time both the — 
Hast and the West,’ etc. (Gibbon’s Decl. and Fall, ch. 37). The West ~ 
on various occasions, in the most public manner, received the decrees, — 
etc., of the emperor at Constantinople, as those of their lawful ruler. 
Having consented (so Gibbon) ‘‘ in their own name (i.e. the Senate’s) and 
in the name of the people, that the seat of universal empire shall be trans- 
ferred from home to Constantinople.’’ It is unnecessary to add proof to- 
that which history has made so plain. Attention is called to two facts— 
that, as predicted, the Empire, regarded (as Faber has so well established 
asa@unit in law, but beginning to feel the weight of its greatness and — 
extension, was ruled over by several emperors at the same time ; and that 
the privileges of Rome had been extended over the whole Empire, so that 
Paul, though a native of Tarsus, was born a Roman. Another fact must 
also be noticed, viz., that to constitute a person a Roman emperor it was” 
not requisite that he should have the seat of power at Rome. This was 
abundantly shown in the emperors ruling at Constantinople, Antioch, 
etc., and especially in Diocletian making Nicomedia his Capitol. It has 


Prop. 160. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 641 


been supposed, and to some extent correctly, that a connection in some 
form or other (publicly or privately, i.e.” acknowledged or allowed) with 
- Rome is requisite to form a Roman emperorship, but this even was not an 
_ indispensable requirement, as 1s seen in the case of the Kastern emperors, 
who finally lost all jurisdiction over Rome, and in that of some of the as- 
sociated emperors who had no power or control at Rome. Prophecy itself 
intimates as much by assuring us that the Empire, once consolidated, shall 
become internally, politically, divided, losing much of its cohesion and 
strength. Before the Eastern emperorship fell (1453) the Western was 
revived in the person of Charlemagne (800), so that for a number of cen- 
turies two emperors of the Roman Empire existed, one in the Kast and the 
other in the West. As this is a matter of importance in tracing the fulfil- 
ment of prophecy and in evidencing our prophetical position, some 
remarks, for the general reader, are appropriate to show that Charlemagne 
was regarded a Roman emperor. So fully is this exhibited in history that 
we find it stated by numerous writers. Thus e.g. Machiavelli (His. of 
Florence, B. 1., ch. 3) has, speaking of Charlemagne, ‘‘ the Pope and the 
people of Rome made him emperor, and thus Rome began to have an Em- 
peror of the West.’’ Ordericus Vitalis (#ccl. His., B. 1, ch. 24) says: 
‘Thus, in the fifth year of Pope Leo, which corresponds with the year 
808 of the incarnation of our Lord, King Charlemagne became the eighty- 
third emperor from Augustus, and the Romans proclaimed him by that 
august name.’’ James (His. of Charlemague, p. 362, 3) remarks that he 
was crowned and saluted with the imperial salutations: “* Long life and 
victory to Charles Augustus, crowned by God great and pacific Lmperor of 
the Romans,’’ that he was adored by the Pope ‘‘ according to the forms 
employed toward the Cesars (attested by Kginhard, Annalles and all the 
other Annals). From that hour the titles both of king and of patrician 
were laid aside, and the monarch of the I’ranks became the Emperor of the 
Romans. Thenceforward his coins were inscribed with his new dignity, 
and his acts weré dated from the years of his Empire.’’ Representations 
of those medals are given by various writers with the legend ‘‘ Renovatio 
Imperii,’’ ‘‘ the revival of the Empire.’’ Bower (fits. of the Popes, Leo 
II1.) gives a very clear statement of the transaction drawn from the Annal- 
ists, who, as also Sigonius, etc., call it a@ revival of the Western emperor- 
ship. Baronius, Bellarmine, and others, have noticed this bestowal of the 
emperorship upon Charlemagne by the Pope as an instance of the supreme 
power vested in the Pope over all kingdoms, alleging that this was a 
translation or transferring of the Imperial dignity from the East to the 
West, but this assumption, made only to exalt the Papacy, is disproven by 
all history. For there was no deposition of Irene (who then ruled in the 
Kast) ; the people and senate of Rome participated in the bestowal of the 
dignity (a number of writers, twenty, according to Du Pin, Bower’s His. of 
the Popes, vol. 2, p. 179, do not even mention the Pope); and the subjec- 
tion of the Pope, and acknowledgments made of the same, to the empe- 
rors, evidence the contrary. Indeed, ample proof is found in the embassies 
and communications which passed between the Western and Hastern Em- 
perors that no such translation was intended, but that the Imperial dig- 
mity was allowed to both divisions. Gibbon (Decl. and Fall, ch. 49) 
relates the coronation scene ; describes the extent of Charlemagne’s do- 
minions ; informs us how he was styled ‘‘ the sole and supreme Hmperor of 
the West ;’’ how he called the emperor at Constantinople by the “ familiar 


\ 


642 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 160. 


appellation of brother ;’? how a treaty of peace and alliance was con- 


ciuded between the East and West, the Hust acknowledging ‘‘ the august 
Charlemagne’ to be **‘ the Basileus and Emperor of the Romans.’’ It is 
sufficient, for our argument, that the acknowledgment was thus made, the 
insolence, pride, claims, concessions, etc., of after history amounting to 
nothing, being only what ought to be expected from the weakened and 
divided state of the Empire. Eginhard (quoted by Bowers, vol. 2, p. 187) 
asserts that one of the articles of peace included ‘* that the Greeks should 
acknowledge Charlemagne for Hmperor of the West,and allow him that 
title.’? Thus we have the Western Emperorship revived in the person of 
Charlemagne. In the division of the dominions of Charlemagne, history 
declares that this Zmperial dignity was held by the Chief of Germany, 
haying also sway over Rome, whose title was that of ‘‘ Hmperor of the 
Romans” (designated ‘‘ Kaiser’ or ‘‘ Cesar’), and whose Empire was 
officially styled ‘‘ the Holy Roman Empire.’’ The coronation of some of 
those emperors at Rome (as e.g. Otho, A.D. 962), the allegiance of Italy 
and Rome (Gibbon, vol. 5, p. 56 and 58), the letters addressed by these 
Roman emperors to others, the official acts as *‘ Hmperor of the Romans,” 
prove that it was regarded as a real, vital succession. The incidental 
references (as e.g. in Luther’s celebrated Appeal to his Imperial Majesty, 
etc., see D’ Aubigne’s. His. Ref., vol. 2, p. 93, in Dante’s Inferno, in the 
Vision of Charles the Bald in Chron. of St. Denis, etc.) of the universal 
feeling on the subject are multitudinous, and the self-identification of these 
Emperors as the actual successors of the ‘‘ very Augustus’? (employed in 
letters) appears in the most unexpected manner, as e.g. in the remarkable 
letter of ‘‘ Frederick, Emperor of the Romans, to Saladin, ruler of the Sara- 
cens’”’ (Annals of Roger De Hoveden, vol. 2, p. 100-2). Frederick, in his 
capacity of successor, speaks of ‘‘ our dictator, Marcus Crassus.’’ The 
quarrels and struggles between these emperors and the Pope, between 
them and disaffected portions of their dominions, etc., accords with the 
delineations of prophecy, as e.g. Dan. 2 : 41, 22, 43, and does not interfere 
with the fact that the Roman Empire, enfeedled as it was (and sometimes 
faintly manifested by weak monarchs), was still represented by a ‘‘ German 
Cesar,’ chosen by an electoral College (Gibbon, vol. 5, p. 70). Thus, 
when the Eastern part of the Empire was everthrown in 1453, the Western 
still survived and continued down uninterruptedly until 1806, to the abdica- 
tion of Francis II. Francis, forced to it by his disasters, renounced the 
long-held Roman emperorship ; and Alison (His. of Hurope, vol. 5, p. 690) 
gives his language as follows: ‘‘ Being convinced of the impossibility of 
discharging any longer the duties which the Imperial throne imposed upon 
us, we owe it to our principles to abdicate a crown, which could haye no- 
value in our eyes when we were unable to discharge its duties and deserve 
the confidence of the princes, electors of the Empire. Therefore it is, 
that, considering the bonds which unite us to the Hmpire as dissolved by 
the Confederation of the Rhine, we renounce the Jinperial crown, and, by 
these presents, absolve the electors, princes, and States, members of the 
Supreme Tribunal, and other magistrates, from the duties which unite 
them to us as their legal chief.’’ Here, then, we havea continuous headship 
of the Roman Empire existing from the days of Augustus down+to A.D. 
1806, and in connection with it, descended also from the divided state of 
the Empire, the Papacy with its claims Empire derived. The divided 
condition of the Empire has been with prophetical writers the chief object 


Prop. 160.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 643 


of notice—many writers,as Bh. Newton, etc., endeavoring to make out 
precisely the number of ten kingdoms—while the fact that a headship of 
the Empire existing has been too much ignored.’ 


' Corroborative of our position, we quote from Gibbon (vol. 5, p. 78): ‘‘ Nor was the 
supremacy of the emperor confined to Germany alone ; the hereditary monarchs of 
Europe confessed the pre-eminence of his rank and dignity ; he was the first of the Christian 
princes, the temporal head of the great republic of the West ; to his person the title of 
majesty was long appropriated ; and he disputed with the Pope the sublime prerogative 
of creating kings and assembling councils. ‘The oracle of the civil law, the learned 
Bartolus, was a pensioner of Charles the Fourth ; and his school resounded with the 
doctrine, that the Roman Emperor was the rightful sovereign of the earth, from the rising 
to the setting sun. The contrary opinion was condemned, not as an error, but asa 
heresy, since even the gospel had pronounced : ‘ And there went forth a decree from 
Cesar Augustus, that all the world should be taxed.’’’ Zimmerman in his Pop. His. of 
Germany, vol. 2, ch. 6, distinctly shows how Charles became ‘‘ Roman Emperor” by re- 
ceiving ‘the Imperial crown,’’ and remarks: ‘‘ To the Romanic nations Charles now 
appeared in the position of the old Cesars, with divine sanction for universal doninion 
over all that had belonged to the Western Empire.” He also speaks of ‘‘ the Empire of 
the West being restored.’’ Even our school histories state the fact, as e.g. Wilson’s Out- 
lines of History, p. 259, says of Charlemagne crowned “ Emperor and Augustus :’ ‘‘ This 
act was considered as indicating the revival of the Empire of the West, after an interruption 
of about three centuries. Charlemagne, a king of the German Franks, was thus seated 
on the throne of the Cwsars.” Compare arts., ‘‘ Carlovingians,’’ ‘‘ Charles I.,” in Apple- 
ton’s Cyclop., Seebohn’s Era of the Protestant Revolution, p. 28, ete. 

? We are glad to find that the continuity of the Roman Empire is now advocated by 
able scholars, as e.g. Bryce in The Holy Roman Empire, Freeman in Historical Essays, 
Essay VI. (also North Brit. Rev., March, 1865), Palgrave, Finlay, and others. Thus Free- 
man pointedly and justly observes : ‘‘ It may seem a hard saying, but it is one which the 
facts fully bear out, that hardly one student in ten of medieval history really grasps that 
one key to the whole subject without which medieval history is simply an unintelligible 
chaos. That key is no other than the continued existence of the Roman Empire. As long 
as people are taught that the Empire came to an end in the year 476, a true understand- 
ing of the next thousand years becomes utterly impossible. No man can understand 
either the politics or the literature of that whole period, unless he constantly bears in 
mind that, in the ideas of the men of those days, the Roman Empire, the Empire of 
Augustus, Constantine, and Justinian, was not a thing of the past, but a thing of the 
present.” ‘‘ Ina word, as we began by saying, the history of the Empire is the key to 
the whole history of medizval Europe, and it is a key which as yet is found in far fewer 
hands than it ought to be.’’ The student will be interested in the essay and its over- 
whelming proof. The prophetical student, if solicitous to be historically accurate in 
tracing historical prophecy, cannot ignore this valuable key. Its reception and use will 
prevent the adoption of a vast amount of misleading prophetical interpretation. 


Obs. 3. It would be well if the Church, until a better explanation is 
given, would carefully note the interpretation presented by G. 8. Faber in his 
Revival of the French Emperorship. In tracing the Roman emperorship 
from Francis II. he is supported doth by prophecy and historical fact, and 
in continuation of the subject we will incorporate his view for the in- 
formation and consideration of the reader. Turning to Rev. 17 : 9-12 we 
have a delineation of the civil polity (heads) of the same fourth beast (so 
numerous commentators and writers) described by Daniel 7. The Revela- 
tion speaks of seven forms of government that should exist, and as a source 
of identification informs us that five of those heads ‘‘ are fallen,’’? which 
writers agree in deriving from Roman history (Livy, Tacitus, etc.) as_fol- 
lows: (1) Kings, (2) Consuls, (3) Dictators, (4) Decemvirs, (5) Military 
Tribunes. Then John tells us ‘‘one is,’’ i.e., that one form of the govern- 
ment was then existing. Now this sixth head of which the prophet speaks, 
is the Roman emperorship which, as we have seen under Obs. 2, continued 


644 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


uninterruptedly from the time of John down to Francis II. If there is 
force in historical facts and in the revival of the emperorship in the West- 
ern part of the Empire before the Hastern was overthrown, then Faber’s 
position that this emperorship continwously existed down to the abdication 
of Francis Il. is «mpregnable.’’ ‘Therefore the sixth head that John de- 
scribed can only be followed bv the seventh head after the abdication of 
Francis II. In 1804, two years before the sixth head fell, Napoleon pro- 
claimed the emperorship of the French, and annexed Rome ‘and the Roman 
States to his dominions. ‘To confirm his power he was crowned an Impe- 
rial head, not only at Paris, but had the Pope brought to assist at his coro- 

nation. It was this head, in some respects separate and distinct from the 
sixth head, which caused the abdication of Francis II. This influenced 
Faber and others to regard it as the seventh head which was to come after 
the sixth one. The apparent confirmation by its being short lived ‘‘ and 
when he cometh, he must continue but a short time’ (for the Napoleonic 
dynasty in the person of the Tirst Napoleon only lasted about eleven 
vears), and by its being “‘ slain by the sword of military violence’ (so 
Faber explains Rev. 13 : 3 in connection) led Faber in 1818 to suggest 
that the Napoleonic dynasty being the seventh head, Rey. 17:11 plainly 
called for its revival. ‘This opinion was based (1) on the alleged fact of-its 
being the seventh head ; (2) that the beast, employing the necessary figure, 
is represented, being headless for a time, to re-exist, 1.e. receiving a re- 
newed polity ; (8) and this revived polity is to be of the seventh, and yet 
in some respects an eighth, head. 'The revival of the Napoleonic dynasty 
in the person of Napoleon III. was, at least, a remarkable fulfilment of 
Faber’s deductions. It is to be regretted that some persons, with the best 
of intentions overlooking the fact of a head being a dynasty and may thus 
embrace a succession of individuals, persistently applied Faber’s view to 
the individual person Napoleon III., and that Faber’s application of the 
same to the French emperorship was also changed by the American Pub- 
lishers (Appletons) into ‘‘ Napoleon III., the man of Prophecy.’’ This 
and the death of Napoleon III. has caused many persons to discard 
Faber’s theory, forgetting that, as he himself expressly guarded it, the 
head is not necessarily limeted to one person, but may embrace a succession, 
and hence should not thus be limited without express warrant either from 
prophecy or the proper development of the Antichrist in him. We thus 
direct attention to his theory, which seems to be correct down to Francis LH. 
It is asserted three several times, as if calling special attention to it, that 
the beast was to exist, i.e. have a head or political chief, then it was fo 
cease to exist, i.e. have no such a head, and then it was fo again exist, i.e. 
obtain such a head. In Faber’s view, the non-existence of the beast can- 
not beestablished until after the overthrow of the Napoleonic dynasty, 
making the beast twice headless, viz., between Napoleon I. and Napoleon 
III. and since the downfall of the latter. So that the overthrow of the 
dynasty, instead of militating against Faber’s view, really establishes it, 
seeing that our attention is specifically called to this very headless condition 
of the beast as something which we are to expect. But the real question 
to decide, after all, is this : Was the Napoleonic dynasty really a seventh 
head? In some respects it might be deemed such, but in others it seems 
impossible to concede it such a place, for it was regarded by the actors in 
it as a revival or return to Charlemagne’s Imperial state (so Napoleon 
himself speaks of ‘‘ Charlemagne, Emperor of the French and our 


Prop. 160. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 645 


august predecessor’ in the 19th vol. of Cor., Eclectic, vol. 5, No. 1),? and, as 
Faber himself states, it was not a@ violation of unity in law for the Empire 
to have several emperors. Another objection is, that this Napoleonic head 
arose before the other fell, while the impression—not decided, it is true— 
made by the prediction is that these heads are to follow in succession. 
Again, the history of Napoleon III. indicates that he was completely pat- 
terning after Napoleon I., was identically in all respects the same head, and 
hence could not be called an eighth. This is seen in all the official acts, 
and was acknowledged by himself and the nation. Now, both these per- 
sons regarded themselves (and it seems proper that the Spirit of prophecy 
should designate the parties intended according to their own estimation of 
regal position) as regular successors to the Cesars in the line of Charle- 
magne and his successors. Even admitting (which may be true) that 
Napoleon I. was a distinct seventh head, ¢¢ does not follow that Napoleon 
ITl. was the eighth. The prophecy would then only await the revival of 
the French emperorship and its claims to Cesarship, to make it of the 
seventh, and yet some remarkable traits superadded which would so dis- 
tinguish it as to make it an eighth. But if the Napoleonic dynasty is only 
a continuation of the sixth Imperial head with an interval, then this 
seventh head is still future, and from Rey. 17 : 8, 111s identified with a 
period of time (such as now exists) when the beast ts headless, i.e. follows 
at. The student of prophecy is therefore reminded that this very pre- 
dicted headless state of the beast (so discouraging to some) 1s a decided at- 
testation to the truth, and a warning to us that it will result either in the 
rise of the seventh head to which the eighth is attached or to the revival of 
the seventh head with the same result. Prudence dictates that we do not 
dogmatically express ourselves on such points, but that wé seek hight from 
all directions and ponder well the interpretations and hints given, and see 
how they will correspond withthe development of history. [aber’s view 
respecting the sixth head is firmly established down to Ifrancis Il. ; how 
much more we can receive will be determined when the beast again exists 
—for that it will again live is clearly proclaimed.* Because the Empire 
does not now exist with a head, multitudes. suppose that if is entirely 
perished (forgetting the imperial spirit and advocacy within its population 
and the maintenance of its ancient laws, etc.); but the Word informs us 
that we must not allow owrselves to be thus deceived, that headless as it may 
be for some time, yet the elements of the body remain, and that it shall 
again be resuscitated, and in vts final aspect form a fearful and most power- 
ful confederation against the truth." 


1J¢ is impossible to receive, in consistency with the Record, the interpretation of 
writers (revived by a recent one, Barbour in Three Worlds) that one of these heads is 
the Papacy. That any and every enumeration of the seven heads, which includes the 
Papacy as one of them, is most certainly erroneous and misleading, can be proven incontro- 
vertibly by the following reasons : The beast (ch. 17) is distinguished from the woman or 
Papacy—the former supporting the latter, i.e. the seven-headed beast sustains the 
woman ; (2) the beast under its last head crushes and destroys the woman or Papacy ; (3) 
the beast under its last head continues after the Papacy is destroyed (ch. 17 and 19). 
Hence all such theories must be rejected as utterly untenable, being opposed both to 
prophecy and the attested facts of history. Likewise the views which, like Mede’s New- 
ton’s, More’s, Cunningham’s, Elliot’s, Lord’s, etc., overlook the legal unity and uninter- 
rupted historical continuation of the Roman Emperorship, for the Western Emperorship, 
or the professed Christian Emperorship, or the claims of absolute sovereignty, etc., did 
not change the unity or legal status and character of the Emperorship, as Faber has 
historically pointed out. The simplicity and historical accuracy of Faber’s position is 


646 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


thus far incontrovertible. It is indorsed by many able writers, and is incorporated in 
foreign works, as e.g., in Epp’s Die Enisiegelte Weissagung des Prop. Daniel. 

2 Castelar, in art. on ‘‘ The Republican Movement in Europe” (Jlarper’s Mag., Jan, 
1875, p. 260), calls the Napoleonic dynasty a ‘‘ species of Roman or Carlovingian Empire.”’ 
Audigier (Origin of the French, 1676—epitomized by Buckle, His. Civ., vol. 1, p. 566, etc.) 
held that the Antichrist would never appear in the world until the French Empire was 
destroyed. This notion was based on the idea that the French royalty was God-derived, 
through Charlemagne, the Church’s favor and blessing being allied with it. Von Dél- 
linger, Essays on Proph. Spirit, says that the Jesuit Viera, in his His. of the Future, makes 
the Fourth Empire to be the Roman-German—hence a regular continuation of the 
original Roman—and then makes the Fifth (showing that the Church in the past was not 
understood by it) an empire universal, etc., as described by Daniel, to have its centre 
in Portugal. 

3 Without utterly discarding other views, the writer may be allowed to say that Faber’s 
line of argument, whatever defect may be in the latter part of it by premature applica- 
tion, is the best, most consistent, and logical thus far produced. Itis erroneous to make 
the Papacy, as some do, the seventh or eighth head, for it was not short-lived, and the 
same is true of the Christian Constantinian head, which also was a reguiar—as preceding 
* —suecession of the sixth head, and not, as some writers maintain, a seventh head. The 
Empire was not conscious of a change in the emperorship, whatever the changes intro- 
duced by the emperor himself. To make the reigns of Diocletian and his colleagues the 
short-lived seventh head is utterly opposed to the facts of history, which invariably and 
universally recognize them as belonging in regular succession to the sixth head. In brief, 
there is no scheme, so far asthe sixth head is concerned, which meets so well the con- 
ditions of prophecy and history as Faber’s, and the prophetical student, at this period of 
the headless state of the beast, will carefully keep in mind the subject, and await momen- 
tous developments. Let us only suggest as additional, that there are only seven heads, 
and, in all probability, the eighth spoken of is not one of the succession, but an associ- 
ated head, which is of the seven, i.e. in union withit. Sucha conjecture is strength- 
ened by the fact that the last head of the beast is found thus in close union with another 
party, as e.g. Rev. 19:20, etc. Again the student is reminded that the Papacy—a 
favorite view of many—cannot possibly be a head of the beast, seeing that (as asserted in 
a note) the beast itself first supports the Papacy and afterward causes it to be destroyed 
(Rey. ch. 17, etc.). The great defect in all such interpretations is, that they make the 
Papacy to exist down to the very open Advent in its organized form, when this is opposed 
by prophecy (Rev. 17), which declares that shortly before that Advent the Papacy shall 
be overthrown by the ten horns (not past, but still future, under the last head), through 
the leadership of the seven-headed beast. 

4A few additional remarks are in place concerning the present views entertained 
respecting the seven heads, The critical student will see that the importance of a just 
discrimination on this point in view of its vital relationship, is a sufficient apology. We 
select a few leading writers and views now urged, which will, so far as our reply is con- 
cerned, include all others. Faber’s line of argument conclusively shows that Dr. Elliott's 
(Hor. Apoc.) application of the 7th head to Diocletian’s creating a second Augustulus, is 
a violation of consecutive rule, of the unity of the empire (which allowed such an 
increase), and of an unimpaired Imperial rule. This leads necessarily to confusion of 
ideas, as e.g. when to account for the wounding of the seventh head to death, he applies it 
to paganism, thus leaving the civil form of government denoted bya head (his own correct 
representation of heads previously given) and transforming it into a system of false faith 
and worship which happened to be associated with it (and also makes the Popedom to 
be the eighth). The same is true of Lord’s (Apoc.) interpretation, when he makes Con- 
stantine and his successors a seventh head, the same being in regular succession, and so 
recognized by Roman law, and as a result contradicts the alleged wounding of the head, 
etc. It also sets aside. Cressner’s view of the Gothic kings, Mede’s of the Latin 
emperors (after the division of the empire), Cocceius of the sevenfold future religious 
division, being the seventh head and the deductions from the same. In fact, it logically 
and historically disproves all other theories, which do not preserve the unity of the 
empire in law and the regular historical succession. Thus e.g. when Auberlen makes the 
seven heads to be ‘‘ the seven world monarchies—Egypt, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Greece, 
Rome, and the Germanic Empire”—he destroys, not only unity in the symbol, but unity 
in history. The same applies to Wordsworth, who classes the seven heads Babylonian, 
Medo-Persian, Greek, Syrian, Egyptian, Roman Heathen Imperial, Imperial power of 
Germany ; or Glasgow, who gives Egypt, Palestine, Assyria, Babylon, Persia, Yavan or 


Prop. 160. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 647 


Hellas, Rome ; or Alford, who presents in the main Auberlen’s application. It indicates 
the extreme arbitrary interpretation of Prof. Stuart ; and that the expositions of Bh. 
Newton, More, Cunninghame, and others cannot, so far as the seventh head is concerned, 
and the deductions therefrom, be received. There is one feature in the application of 
this prediction, viz., that it must not only be in unity with the symbol and of history in 
fulfilment, but that, at the same time, it must be in unity with other predictions, as e.g. 
Dan. 7and Rev. 17. It is this violation of unity that makes them either in part or in 
whole objectionable. Hence we cannot possibly receive those interpretations which 
include the Papacy as a head, as e.g., Elliott’s, and others. As the latter view is widely 
circulated, a few illustrations are appended. Thuse.g. Barnes (Com. Rev. 17) gives the 
following heads: Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decemvirs, Military Tribunes, Emperors, 
Dukedom of Rome (comp. Bh. Newton), Papacy, which is historically incorrect as 
neither the Dukedom, nor the Papacy ever was a civil head of the empire, the civil power 
being restricted to a small portion of Italy. Bengel (Gnomen, vol. 5, p. 271) makes the 
beast itself to be the Roman Papacy, but this is still a wider departure from the unity of 
symbol, history, and parallel prediction, for the simple fact that the seven-headed beast 
supports the woman (Papacy), and afterward in the ten-horned state persecutes her, 
indicates a separate and distinct power. Baldwin (Armageddon, p. 328, etc.) is even 
more arbitrary and imaginative when he makes the beast ‘‘'The Universal Imperial 
Church” (i.e., the Church organized throughout the Roman Empire) and the seven heads 
to be seven successive empires (Western Empire, Charlemagne’s, Papal, Charles V., 
British, French, and probably Russian), of which the head wounded and healed was the 
Papal head or empire, being open to similar serious objections, and because of its utter 
antagonism to parallel prophecies. Waggoner, Barbour, and others, in their respective 
classification of the heads, also introduce the papacy as one, overlooking the distinctive 
and separate characteristics of the beast and of the woman (Rev. 17) as previously stated 
by us ; for the beast, seven-headed, with the allied horns destroys the papacy and after such 
destruction makes war with the Lamb at the open parousia. The heads enumerated 
are, in some of these schemes, exceedingly fanciful, being e.g. distinguished from the 
horns and then again converted into a horn (the little horn), or elevated to a civil head- 
ship, which history does not accord, orall made future, when John positively (for the sake 
of identification) says ‘‘ five are fallen’’ and “‘ one is.” To confine the heads to the judg- 
ment period destroys a proper continuity and the relationship to other predictions. 

To fortify our position on all sides, the attention of the critical student is directed to 
one feature that requires explanation, lest it mislead. In Rev. we have the beast (Roman 
Empire) having only seven heads, and in Dan. the heads are not given, but only the horns. 
Now, the little horn of Dan. is the Antichrist, and to make Rev. and Dan. to correspond, 
the Spirit in Rev., when giving the ten horns, omits the little horn, because the eighth, 
which is of the seven, is identical with him being the same Antichrist. Hence, in order 
to avoid a discordance, the cautious language of Rev., viz., that this eighth is not really a 
distinctive head, so that eight heads can be enumerated, but it is this little horn that 
arises after the ten horns and revives in himself the power of this seventh head, assumes 
the same Imperial and Absolute rule, and is thus really a prolongation of the seventh, under 
whom the civil life of the beast, after being headless, is restored with great power and 
arrogance. Now, such accuracy of statement to avoid a conflict of statement, and yet to 
give us from different aspects a view of this beast in his last form, can only be predi- 
cated of a divine inspiration. We must not overlook another fact (whatever may be said 
respecting the Napoleonic dynasty as a head by Faber, Frere, Gauntlett, Irving, Keith, 
Garrett, Fausset, Gregory, Purden, Baxter, Wangle, and a number of other writers), viz., 
that admitting it at least to be a continuation of the Imperial sixth (or forming a seventh 
even), the seven-eighth may be found geographically and nationally in another direction, 
as portrayed in Dan. ch. 8, on the territory of one of the four kingdoms established by 
Alexander’s generals, which were absorbed, inherited, and conquered by the Roman, and 
revives with its revival. 


Obs. 4. It is in the divided state of the Roman Empire that we are to 


find it, for a time, headless, i.e. without a leading civil, imperial form of 
government. Jt could not be under the sixth head which, as we have 
seen, was continuous down to 1806, and if, as we suspect, it includes the 
Imperial Napoleonic, down to very recent times. It is headless now, no 
one distinctively claiming to be the Imperial head of the Empire. But 


648 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160, 


this, according to prophecy, cannot remain thus; ahead will be formed 
and be recognized as that associated with and swaying rule over the Empire. 
When the Kingdom of the Messiah is to be manifested, the prophets teach 
that this Roman Empire is to exist in its broken, divided form and yet 
sufficiently united wader the leadership of the last head of the same to form 
a most powerful combination against the true believers. Hence the efforts 
made in some directions to find the Antichrist (i.e. the one who shall wage 
war against the Lamb, Rev. 19) outside of the Roman Hmpire as e.g. 
Russia, Babylon in Asia, Mahommedanism, etc., 7s utterly opposed to the 
fundamental requirements of prophecy. Prophecy describes the Fourth 
Empire ; runs it down consecutively to the time of the end ; portrays its 
commingling of weakness and strength after its division ; informs us that 
out of it shall arise the last confederation against Christ; associates the — 
head of the last combination with this same identical beast or Empire ; and 
thus fixes our attention, not to outside nations or governments, but fo the 
Empire ttself for the rise, progress, and terrible career of the last head. | 
Every effort to call away the attention of believers from the Roman to some 
other power as the head around whom the Antichristian forces shall 
gather, ts in so far a departure from the plain truth, no matter how plausi- — 
bly represented or ingeniously portrayed.’ On this point we must come 
back to the position wniversally occupied by the early Church, viz., that the 
Antichristian power, the last head of the beast, the oppressing power 
which shall culminate just previous to the establishment of Messiah’s 
Kingdom and the ushering in of the Millennial age, mwst arise in, and be 
fully identified with, the Roman Empire. This belief, entertained by the 
churches established by the apostles, has cts firm and immovable basis in 
Dan., chs. 2 and 7—in Rev. 17, etc. ‘This faith, entertained by beliey- 
ing Jew and Gentile, is evidently also one that the inspired apostles fully 
indorsed, as seen in the Revelator John enlarging upon Daniel’s Fourth 
Empire and in the universality of belief which can only be appropriately 
accounted for on the ground that it was sustained by the private (public 
being avoided for prudential reasons) instruction of the apostles and 
elders. Hence correctly, the deduction was made that the Roman Empire 
in some form or other would exist down to the end of this age, and that its 
close would be followed by the universal Empire of the Messiah. So deep 
was this feeling that Tertullian (Apology, Sec. 32) gives as a reason why 
they pray for the stability of the Empire: ‘‘ For we know that a mighty 
shock impending over the whole earth—in fact, the very end of all things, 
threatening dreadful woes—is only retarded by the continued existence of 
the Roman Empire.’’? 


1 Any other outside power, like Russia, etc., could.only become such provided it 
became incorporated with, as an integral part of, the empire, and thus would become its 
acknowledged head. If e.g. Russia would conquer Turkey, fixing its seat at Constan- 
tinople, and then as a master stroke of policy—imitating Charlemagne, the German 
Emperors, and Napoleon—would with its Czarship or Russian Headship incorporate the 
Roman Emperorship, it would then to all intents and purposes become a head of the 
empire. if such should be the case, then prophetical interest would specially centre in its 
development and progress. It is not sufficient to base an opinion on the words ‘* Gog 
and Magog,’’ etc., of Ezekiel, unless it also be shown that Russia is, at the time of the 
end, an essential part of the Roman Empire. It likewise is not sufficient (Wallace’s 
Russia, vol. p. 448, etc.) to show that the grand Prince of Moscow and all Russia is 
(after the fall of Constantinople) the chief Protector of the Greek Orthodox Church (thus 
becoming in one form a sort of successor to the Byzantine Emperors), or that there was 
a marriage with the Imperial family, or that the assumption of the title Czar is conclu- 


Prop. 160. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM, 649 


sive, or that we are to assume the fable (unproven) that the great ancestor Ruik was a 
descendant of Cesar Augustus. For what prophecy in its direct historical development 
demands, is some Roman power, on the territory of the empire, who thus culminates, 
etc. Now, Russia can only become this last head, if directly incorporated, by conquest 
or confederation, as a part of the restored empire. Isolated as at present, with a vast 
territory beyond the limits of the fourth empire, etc., it has, as yet, none of the distin- 
guishing characteristics requisite for a complete identity. Still, if intended, they can be 
speedily developed and openly manifested. 

? Allthe ancient Fathers, so far as we have their testimony, unite in declaring that 
the Antichrist shall arise out of the Roman Empire. Lactantius represents the early 
opinion, when he holds (Div. Inst.,-B. 7, ch. 16, etc.) that the empire should continue in 
a divided form being “ dispersed among many and divided’’ until the final confedera- 
tion. The Jews, from Daniel alone, entertained similar views which were perpetuated. 
In the twelve prayers of the Jews (Horne’s Introd., vol. 2, p. 107) the Jews pray in the 12th 
prayer : ‘‘ And let the kingdom of pride (the Roman Empire) be speedily rooted out and 
broken in our days,’’ thus correctly apprehending that their nation cannot be restored 
until this power is broken. Lactantius also (Div. Insi., B. 7, ch. 15, etc.) refers to the 
Sibylline books as declaring the perpetuity of Roman power until the Advent of the 
King. Vide Victorinus’s Com. on Apoc., about a.p. 290, Hippolytus, Irenzus, etc. It 
would be interesting to notice how deeply rooted was this opinion so that it was perpet- 
uated down through the Middle Ages. See Von Doéllinger’s Prophecies of the Middle Ages, 
in which frequent reference is made to the fact that the present ordering of things, this 
dispensation itself, was thought to be dependent upon the continuance of the Holy 
Roman Empire, saying e.g. on the Cosmopolitical Prophecies, ‘‘ There was but one 
fundamental thought in this and the following time, that the existence and the duration 
of the present order of the world were indissolubly bound up with the continuance of the 
Roman Empire, as this was renewed in, or made over to, the Carlovingian dynasty, and 
after its overthrow to Germany and its kings. It was accordingly styled the Holy Roman 
Empire of the German nation ; for it was held to be the all-supporting key-stone of the 
Christian world, which could not be abandoned until the process of the world’s dissolu- 
tion began. While this kingdom lasted and the people did not desert it, the last day 
was still distant, so they believed and so they spoke.’’ Von Ddllinger illustrates this by 
a number of popular prophecies. The student is requested to notice, asa matter of 
curiosity, that Roger De Hoveden (about a.p. 1190) in his Annals, vol. 2, p. 183, says : 
“Some of our learned men assert that one of the kings of the Franks will hold the 
Roman Empire afresh, and in all its integrity, who will exist at avery late period of 
time, and he himself will be the greatest and the last of all the kings,’’ etc. While the 
true idea of the kingdom was perverted, yet even Popes (as e.g. Gregory the Great, 
Bower’s His., p. 405, etc.) held to the notion that the Roman Empire would endure to 
the end of the world, or age. ‘ 

The reasoning of Olshausen (Com. 2, Thess. 2) against Max Von Schenkendorf, that 
the Roman Empire would not again be revived, is inconclusive, based as it is upon the 
idea that it is impossible to restore the empire to its former condition, owing to political 
changes, etc. (although admitting its continuance, modified, to 1806). In reply, it would 
be sufficient to direct attention to the prediction ; if predicted it will come to pass, as 
God alone foreknows the future. But aside from this, we must not forget that changes 
and modifications are incorporated in the prophecies as characteristics of the latter end, 
so that we are not to look for the empire in precisely the same form as in the Middle 
Ages or in the days of Augustus Cesar ; even the last head is to be so diverse, that he is 
scarcely recognizable as a continuation of the seventh head. Hence we prefer to receive 
the ancient view, which preserves the unity of prediction by making the Roman Empire 
existing down to the Second Advent, the end of the age, the culminated Antichrist, and 
which even such writers as Jerome (Com. on Dan.), Andreas of Cesarea (Apoc., ch. 13), 
Aretas (Apoc, 13), and a host of others admit, 


Obs. 5. To indicate this perpetuation of the Roman Empire, we will 
present, in the briefest manner compatible with clearness, an outline of a 
portion of Daniel, chs. 11 and 12, leaving the reader to supply the details. 
Expositors generally agreeing down to the 31st verse of ch. 11, we will begin’ 
with the same, giving a running commentary. First, however, it may be 
said that the opinion held by some that Antiochus Epiphanes is still the 


650 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


subject of prediction, is, aside from reasons given by Bh. Newton, refuted 
by the simple facts that the power delineated in the following verses endures 
down tothe time of the end, to the period of the restoration of God’s 
people and the resurrection of His saints in which Daniel is promised to 
participate, Prop. 126. In view of the history of the past and the still 
delayed resurrection of the saints, it is easy for us to see that the ancient 
opinion that these verses apply to the power which is ¢o develop the Anti- 
christ is the correct one.t Nearly all admit that in verse 30 the Romans 
are introduced 1 in the phrase ‘‘ Yor the ships of Ohittim shall come against 
him,’’ and the view of Sir lL Newton, Bh. Newton, and many others, that 
in verse 31, the Romans are re-introduced and form the subject of the 
prophecy is evidently the correct interpretation, because in this way a har- 
mony is affected between this and other predictions. The transition from 
the Greeks to the Romans becomes the more apparent by the remarkable 
_ fulfilment of the outlines here given. Without following particularly any 
writer, the interpretation that history affords seems to be something like 
this: v. 81, ‘‘ And after him arms shall stand up’’ (the translation of the 
Newtons, Faber, etc.) ; that is, after Antiochus, a great military power 
shall possess the ascendency, which was the Roman.* ‘“‘ And they shall 
pollute the sanctuary of strength ;” history testifies to such a profaning 
and razing of the temple by them, etc. ‘‘ And they shall take away the 
daily sacr "ifice ; ’? which was done effectually by the destruction of the 
temple. ‘‘ And they shall place the abomination that maketh desolate ;’’ 
now, whatever the meaning to be attached to this disputed phrase, the 
reader is requested to notice that Jesus, Matt. 24 : 15 (against the Antio- 
chian theory), places this ¢o occur after His First Advent, the Spirit thus 
giving us an additional reason for applying it to the Romans. Some refer 
this to the idolatrous Roman ensigns, others to the building of the temple 
to Jupiter Capitolinus, ete.;° but noticing the widely differing renderings 
in versions, etc., the idea conveyed by the phrase seems rather to be, that 
** the bestial’’ power that maketh desolate shall be firmly planted in the 
conquered city and gountry, productive of great misery. V. 82, “ And 
such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall be corrupt by flatteries ;” 
let the reader notice that Jerusalem being now destroyed, etc., the Chris- 
tian Church, God’s people, are now alluded to, and it is a historical fact 
that the Roman emperors in various ways endeavored to seduce believers 
from their faith in the covenant promises of God, and we have reason to 
believe, in too many instances, with success. Newton and others tell us 
that many apostatized. ‘* But the people that do know their God shall be 
strong and do ;’’ that is, such shall perform their allotted work, being 
strong and heroic in faith, unseducible, they shall proclaim the Gospel to 
the saving of them that believe. V. 38, “And they that understand 
among the people shall instruct many ;’ ’ which is fulfilled in the remark- 
able and extensive success of the early preaching of the Gospel in all parts 
of the Empire and even beyond it. ‘‘ Yet they shall fall by the sword, and 
by flame, by captivity, and by spoil many days ;’’ which was fearfully 
verified by passing through repeated persecutions, extending more or less 
over a period of nearly three hundred years, V. 34, “ Now when they 
shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help ;’’ history informs us (1) 
that the Christians were driven to great extremities by the persecutions 
heaped upon them ; (2) that in this crisis help was extended by the acces- 
sion of Constantine, by which the general persecutions ceased ; (3) it was 


Prop. 160. | THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 651 


‘‘ little help,’’ for while stopping the persecutions of paganism, it paved 
the way for others, in his intolerant edicts, perversion of Christianity, in- 
troducing the hierarchy, in the acts of himself and successors. ‘‘ But 
many shall cleave unto them with flatterves ;’’ which was verified in the 
multitudes of Pagans that were brought into nominal Christianity by the 
hope of honor, emoluments, etc., so that some in the Church were alarmed 
at the flood of worldliness poured in upon them. V. 35, ‘‘ And some of 
them of understanding shall fall ;’’ this may denote that some of the 
pious, resisting the introduction of those evils, were persecuted and crushed, 
some even being put to death. Examples of this kind are not of a rare 
occurrence at this period. Or, it may mean that some of the pious shall 
be so deluded by this external prosperity—shall be so controlled by the 
splendor of the civil power professedly enlisted in behalf of Christianity, 
that they shall fall, 1.e. yield up their principles and adopt those intro- 
duced, as witnessed in the pomp of worship, image worship, introduction 
of new doctrines, etc. And, if the reader carefully notices the next verse, 
he will find that the prophet, having directed attention to the times follow- 
ing Constantine, now describes this to be virtually the condition of the 
true Church down ‘‘to the time of the end ;’’ that is, some shall fall, 
either being seduced by prosperity or being perecuted. Jor it is added : 
“To try them, and to purge and to make them white, even to the time of 
the end, because it ts yet for a time appointed ;’? the Church is to be tried 
and tested, is a fighting, struggling Church, down to the time of the end. 
It is the language applied to the saints who endure temptation and fight 
the good fight of faith. Having described the condition of the Church, 
the prophet returns to the Roman power. V. 36, ‘‘ And the king shall 
do according to his will; that is, shall be absolute. ‘“° Avid he shall exalt 
himself,’ in extension of dominion, conduct, etc.; ‘* And magnify him- 
self above every god,’’ if the word ‘‘ god’’ means (so some) king or ruler, 
then he shall magnify himself above all kings, as evinced in the titles and 
conduct of the emperors, or, if it denotes objects of worship, then the ful- 
filment would be found in the control of worship, direction of doctrine (as 
in Imperial decrees of Constantine and successors), assumptions of author- 
ity, and in crushing opposition to ecclesiastical encroachments, ete. 
“And he shall speak marvellous things against the God of gods ;’’ asin 
the amazing assumptions of authority over the consciences of subjects in 
public decrees, in sustaining the pretentions of the papacy, in persecuting 
believers, in ascribing divinity to itself, in doing great wickedness under 
the garb of religion.* ‘‘ And shall prosper until the indignation is accom- 
plished ;’’? that is, this Roman power shall exist more or less flourishing 
during a period of time in which the anger of God is manifested toward a 
people. Now, we learnthat this people upon whom God’s indignation is 
poured out is the Jewish nation—the Theocracy being overthrown and Gen- 
tile domination allowed for a certain period. This elect nation is under 
God’s indignation (Prop. 57, etc.), and here it is said that this Roman 
power shall remain in existence until (Ch. 12 : 7) the time has arrived for 
the withdrawal of the same, thus corresponding with various other predic- 
tions. Hence (1) this power exists so long as the Jewish nation 1s scat- 
tered ; (2) it is instrumental in oppressing Jews ; (3) it will resist Jewish 
restoration under its Theocratic king; (4) when this power is utterly de- 
stroyed the Jews will be completely restored ; (5) in some form or other it 1s 
a leading power in the times of the Gentiles, but its prosperity will sud- 


652 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160, 


denly end when these times are expired. This also shows how mistaken 
those are who find a fulfilment of this prophecy before the Christian era, — 
‘< For that that is determined shall be done.’? V. 37, ‘* Neither shall he 
regard the god of his fathers ;’’ fulfilled in the change of the Empire, 
against the efforts of the Pagans, in its religion—really such a change that 
Paganism—the god of the fathers—was obliterated. ‘‘ Nor the desire of 
woman.’ This last clause is much disputed, and it is difficult indeed to 
decide upon a definite meaning. Some (as Faber, Elliot, Smith) make it 
to denote Christ, He being the object of desire of Hebrew women. This, 
perhaps, is scarcely its meaning, but, if so, would evince, what we have — 
already stated, a disregard to the paramount authority, etc., of Christ. 
Others (as Bh. Newton, etc.) think it denotes discouraging of marriage, — 
which would find a verification in the repeal of the laws (Julian and 
Papian) encouraging marriage by Constantine, the veneration of monastic 
life, celibacy, etc. Others (as Stiudlin, etc.) interpret it as meaning 
cruel, i.e. disregarding the tears of women, or (as Bertholdt) would not — 
spare little children, the object of a mother’s love, or (as Jerome) would be 
lustful, licentious, etc., all of which would find ample fulfilment in the 
‘ history of this power. ‘‘ Nor regard any god, for He shall magnify Him- — 
self above all; see v. 86, the reader noticing also that as the Spirit © 
takes into view this gigantic power as one whole, some of this exaltation or 
magnifying is still for the future to manifest. V. 38, “‘ But in his estate — 
shall he honor the god of forces.’’ Critics find the phrase, ‘‘ the god of 

forces,’ the most difficult in the prophecy, and some versions, unable to 
give a meaning, retain the original. It has been rendered ‘‘ God of 
forces,’’ ‘‘the strong god,’’ “‘ god of fastnesses or fortresses,’’ ‘‘ gods- — 
protectors or tutelar gods,’’ ete. The idea, as all admit, that this ‘* god’? — 
is one of power, having force or ability to exert in protection or sustaining, 
etc., is very evident, and a clew is given to its character, etc., by the next 
verse, in which it is called ‘‘ a@ strange god.’’ Let history in its indisputable — 
facts tell us of the only ‘‘ god’’ or ruler that was venerated and adored by — 
the Roman power during this period, and the answer is, the Pope, who 
was acknowledged the Spiritual Head, having the keys of heaven and hell, 
who was called the vicegerent of God on earth, who was so adored that 
even his foot was kissed by emperors. ‘This ‘‘ god’’ also sustained the Im- — 
perial power in its crowning, blessings, decrees, etc., and when, in antag- 
onism at times with it, exhibited itself as a formidable power, able, upon 
several occasions, to depose and bestow the crown. If Bh. Newton’s 
rendering (see his Diss. on Proph.) is correct, that the word ‘‘ forces’? de- — 
notes ‘‘ protectors,” then there would be an allusion to the worship of — 
saints and images as ‘‘ protectors.’’ Therelationship that the Papacy sus- — 
tained to the Empire is here briefly but distinctively expressed correspond- 
ing to past history. ‘‘ But in his estate shall be honor,’’ etc. ; Gesenius, — 
Luther, De Wette, etc., suppose this to mean, ‘‘ But in his place or stead 
he shall honor ;’’ if so, then it wou!d denote that the Pope shall be adored — 
or honored in the place of the former gods of the Roman power. Barnes | 
and others think that the idea of base or foundation is conveyed, so that 
it may denote ‘‘ in his foundation,” i.e. in his throne, by civil power shall 
he honor this god. If this should be the meaning, then again is it fully - 
verified in the imperial decrees by which the Papacy was exalted, the su- 
premacy given to the Bishop of Rome, in the grants of territory and civil 
power, and in the supports often tendered to it by the emperors. The 


Prop. 160.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 653 


notion of being firmly established and highly honored by Imperial patron- 
age is the one conveyed. ‘‘ And a god whom his fathers knew not ;” that 
is, the ancient Imperial power was not cognizant of this Papal power, for 
it was to arise, being distinct from anything that had preceded, in the 
course of its history. Brief as the description is, yet how applicable. 
** Shall he honor with gold, with silver, and with precious stones, and with 
pleasant things ;’’ the student need scarcely be reminded that the enor- 
mous wealth of the Papacy, in every age, has been drawn from the patron- 
age of this Roman power through grants, gifts, taxes, legacies, indul- 
gences, revenues, endowments, etc. ‘The riches of Rome, the seat of the 
Papacy, during the past centuries has been notorious, and the source from 
whence derived is equally well known. V. 39, *‘ Thus shall he do in the 
most strongholds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge and in- 
crease with glory ;’? which may denote that in all parts of his dominion, 
including his strongholds, this god should be honored, or, that under the 
auspices, aid, etc., of this god he should take strongholds. Critics are 
divided as to its meaning, but either one or the other would find ample 
fulfilment inthe Papacy. Bishop Newton’s translation (Diss.) brings out 
the idea that the defenders or abettors of this god, he (the Roman power) 
shall honor with the god ; so also Mede’s rendering and others’. ‘‘ And 
he shall cause. them to rule over many ;’’ that. is, the aiders, upholders of 
this god, shall be also honored with power over others, as exemplified 
abundantly in the priesthood, bishops, archbishops, etc., of the Papacy. 
“And shall divide the land for gain ;’’ among these Papal officials, as 
witnessed in the bishoprics, dioceses, etc., in the bestowment of special 
grants, church lands, endowments, etc. Indeed, so much was this the case, 
that the power and wealth thus obtained became a serious embarrassment 
to nations, and led to great contests. V. 40, ‘‘ And at the time of the 
end.’’ ‘The prophet having given a rapid but distinctive description of the 
Papacy, its union with this Roman power, etc., now turns to the time of 
the end, viz., to the closing scenes of this Gentile denomination, to the 
period when this Roman power, notwithstanding its greatness, shall come 
toanend. ‘This that follows, then, wholly relates to the future, being yet 
unfulfilled. The Roman Empire in its divided form still exists in the 
spirit and principles avowed (and while it is for the present headless, yet 
this is particularly predicted as something that shall come to pass, so that 
we are cautioned not to be misled by its headless condition), and this god, 
the Papacy, also exists and stillis honored, more or less, by the adherents 
and advocates of Imperialism. Our attention is pointedly called, to avoid 
all mistake, fo the time of the end, the closing period of this gigantic 
power, viz., to the time of the last head of this power, described in other 
prophecies as the fourth beast in the long-continued succession of Gentile 
rule. In the interpretation that follows, the conjectures or ‘suppositions 
that appear the best supported by the text are only given. ‘' Shall the 
King of the South push at him? ’® Much depends upon the locality where 
the revived head will be restored; ifin France, then Spain, Italy, etc., 
might form the King of the South ; if in Austria, then Italy, etc., might 
be the power denoted, or, as some do, Egypt, Turkey, etc., may be de- 
noted. In fact, the power here predicted may or may not be in existence 
at present, and relatively to the locality or seat of the last head of the 
beast is a ‘‘ King of the South.’ ‘ And the King of the North shall come 
against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with 


> 
654 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 160, 


many ships; that is, this Roman powér will also be attacked by some 
king or power located toward the North,.as, e.g. England, Germany, or — 
Russia. While mere conjecture can only be presented, yet the ‘‘ many — 
ships’? indicate a power possessing anavy. “‘ And he shall enter into the 

countries’’—this is perhaps the clause which has caused the greatest diffi- 
culty to critics, owing to the sudden transition from one person to another. 
If we were to confine ourselves to this prophecy, it would be impossible 
from the language to decide what king this was that is to enter into the 
countries ; whether the King of the North, or of the South, or of the ~ 
Roman Empire, but we are not left to conjectwre upon this point. The 
king who is thus victorious at the time of the end we find in Dan. 2 and 7 
and Rev. 17 to be identified with the fourth beast, the Roman power, 
Taking other prophecies as interpreters, it refers to the Roman power 
under its last head, who shall invade other countries, thus implying that 
the King of the South and the King of the North have been wnswecessful — 
against him. What countries these are, time must reveal, but the lan- 
guage impresses the idea of conquest, for it is added, *‘ And shall overflow 
and pass over ;’’ beating down all resistance and obtaining the victory. — 
V. 41, ‘* He shall enter also the glorious land ;’’ this land ancients and 

moderns have, almost universally, applied to Palestine.* This corresponds 
with Zech. 14; Joel 35; Rev. 14 : 20, etc., which all agree (see e.g. com- 
parison of Faber, Diss. on Proph., vol. 2, ch. 11, sec. 3) in placing the 
overthrow of the last great power in connection with his entrance into © 
Palestine and subjugation of the same. ‘‘ And many countries shall be 
overthrown ;’? the word ‘‘ countries’’ is supplied by the translators ; it 
may refer to countries, cities, places, forces, etc., evincing that his course 
would be a devastating, victorious one. ‘* But these shall escape out of his 
hand, even Edom and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon ;” 

whether the countries geographically known as such, or whether those are — 
figurative appellations for other countries that shall escape, is difficult to 
decide. Yet, if the former, the student may find a reason for their escaping 
in Prop. 166, in the extraordinary procedings that will at that time be 
inaugurated at Mt. Sinai. V. 42, ‘‘ He shall stretch forth his hand also 
upon the countries,’’ or ‘‘ send forth’’ (so Luther, and marg.) ; occupying 
the position of conqueror, perhaps by levying heavy taxes, or by sending © 
forth forces to countries not immediately in his course. ‘‘ And the land 
of Hygypt shall not escape, but he shall have power over the treasures of gold, 
and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt, and the Libyans and — 
Ethiopians shall be at his steps.’’ 'The course of this power in its career of 
conquest seems to be this: after enduring a struggle with the King of the 
South and the King of the North, he invades the countries, passing on to 
Turkey and into Palestine, and from thence into Hyypt, obtaining the 
wealth of the country augmented by those who-fled there before his inya- 
sion. Krom Hgypt he returns to Palestine, the extent of his conquests 
being intimated by the Libyans and Ethiopians (see Barnes, Jocz) attending 
him. V. 44, ** But tidings out of the East and the North shall trouble 
him ;’? what those tidings are it is impossible to tell, but that they are in 
some way related to the Jews (Mede, Faber, and many others) 7s reason-_ 
able, for the tidings bring him back to Palestine. What portion of the 
North is meant, whether, as some, England, or, as others, Russia, or, some 
other country, it is impracticable to say, but the tidings from the Hast can 
be more definitely fixed. If the reader turns to Prop. 166, where it is al- 


PRoP. 160.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. _ 655 


leged that the formatory, introductory movement of the Theocracy is in- 
itiated at Mount Sinai, just at this period, he will see abundant reason for 
tidings directly Hast from him (for he isin Egypt when they arrive) to 
reach him which, owing to their remarkable nature, are sufficient to 
‘“‘ trouble him.’’ ‘Taking the period of time denoted and the prophecies 
relating to it in consideration, there can be no doubt but that the question 
of the restoration of the Jewish nation and the re-establishment of the 
Theocracy at Jerusalem is involved. The last head of the Roman power ts 
to have possession of Palestine at the tume of the restoration (and, as some 
Jews have, perhaps through his instrumentality, been put in possession of 
Jerusalem), he returns to Palestine to fight against Jerusalem, as e.g., 
Zech. 14:1, 2, a revolt from some cause having taken place after his de- 
parture to Egypt.’ ‘ Therefore he shall go forth with great fury to destroy 
and utterly to make away many ;’’ the tidings enrage him to make a war 
of extermination, and it is well to notice, as Bh. Newton, Faber and nu- 
merous writers have observed, that as the original of ‘‘ utterly to make away 
many’’ signifies ¢o anathematize, to consecrate, to devote to utter perdi- 
tion,’’ it strongly implies that this war shall be prosecuted on the account 
of religion, and that religion is in some way related to it. This supposi- 
tion is supported and confirmed by the fact that this beast under his last 
head is represented as finally making war against the Lamb, etc. V. 45, 
‘And he shall plant the tabernacles of his palaces between the seas in the 
glorious holy mountain ,’ his royal tents shall be planted, not only at 
Jerusalem, between the Mediterranean and Dead seas, but in Jerusalem 
(for “‘ the city shall be taken,’’ Zech. 14:2) and on Mount Zion.* “* Yet 
he shall come to his end ,’’ that is, shall be overcome and destroyed. The 
manner in, and the instrumentalities by, which this is to be accomplished 
are succinctly stated in other prophecies, as, e.g., Zech. 14; Rev. 19 ; 
Dan. 7%, etc. ‘‘ And none shall help him ,’’ his destruction is certain and 
without reparation. Oh. 12:1, ‘* And at that time ;’’ the reader will 
observe the zntimate connection that the following sustains to the manifes- 
tation of the last head of the Roman power in Palestine. ‘* Shall Michael 
stand up, the great Prince which standeth for the children of thy people?” 
It is not in our province to discuss the question concerning Michael, some 
contending that an Archangel is denoted, specially devoted to and in- 
trusted with the interests of the Jewish nation, while others believe that 
the Messiah is thus designated, and still others that Michael is named here 
as the guardian angel of the nation who will be associated with Christ.” 
Taking the several prophecies relating to this period, it is not very mate- 
rial to decide such a question, the main, leading, and important particular 
being the great results that are to be affected by the Christ or His agents. 
One thing, however, must not be overlooked, viz., that this interference 1s 
made in behalf of the Jewish nation, whose extremity—the closing act of 
their long-continued tribulation—is great, as seen in Zech. 14:2. “* And 
there shall bea time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation, 
even to that same time ;’’ that is, a time of wnprecedented trouble. Ac- 
cording to Matthew, Mark, and Luke, our Saviour predicted the trouble 
befalling the Jewish nation a¢ the destruction and continued down-trodden 
condition of the city and nation wntil it culminates at this very pervod, 
being at this crisis ‘‘ the time of Jacob’s trouble,” Jer. 30 : 6-9. But great 
as this is, owing to its long continuance, long-borne calamities, its climax 
under this Roman power, it is as nothing compared with that which the 


656 THE THEOOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


vengeance of God shall pour out upon the vast confederation of Gentile 
nations found arrayed against Jerusalem and His people. If there is a 
prophetic truth distinctly taught, it is the one that as and after the Jew- 
ish tribulation closes, then a most fearful season of trial, indignation, and 
woe will befall the Gentiles (see Prop. 162). ‘* And at that time tha y people 
shall be delivered ;’’ that is, notwithstanding the greatness of this Roman 
power and the extremity to which it shall reduce the Jewish nation, that 
nation, Daniel’s people, shall be delivered. But let the reader keep in 
mind our Props. relative to the election of this people and how the Gen- 
tiles by faith are engrafted into that elect people, and he will at once be 
prepared for what follows: viz., that at the glorious restoration of the 
nation under the Theocratic ordering predicted, the time has also arrived 
for the resurrection, not only of the Jews, but also of the engrafted believers— 
all God’s people—to participate in the blessings and glory of the Messiah’s 
reign. Hence in the following verses the resurrection’ is predicted, for 
which see Prop. 126, our purpose now only being to show that the Roman 
power will exist in its last form, a destructive force, down to the end of this 
age, and will only be removed when the Advent of Christ, the resurrection 
of the saints, and the ushering in of the Theocratic Kingdom has come. 
To indicate that the series of predictions run down, past our time, into 
the future, the most solemn assurance is given, Ch. 12:7 “when He shall 
have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these things — 
shall be finished.’’? The Jewish tribulation is not yet finished ; the nation 
is still scattered ; the capitol is still trodden down ; the times of the Gen- 
tiles still endure e; and while this lasts we must still look for the fulfilling 
of what is thus predicted, with the experience attached Ch. 12 : 10.” 


1 Even Jerome, Theodoret, Luther, @colampadius, Geier, Calovius, Klieforth, Keil, 
and many others applied the prediction to the New Test. Antichrist. A multitude of able 
writers ally it, in some form or other, with the Roman state, It is a matter of surprise 
that the Antiochus Epiphanes theory should even yet, notwithstanding its direct and 
logical antagonism, be indorsed by some commentators. Others make a sort of compro- 
mise in order, if possible, to remove the difficulties, viz., while making a direct reference 
to Antiochus, they advocate a double fulfilment—one in Antiochus and another in the 
future Antichrist, the former being typical of the latter. But the context forbids such a 
twofold application, 

* Some writers introduce Antichrist at verse 21, but we vastly prefer, upon the histori- 
cal grounds given by Bh. Newton and others, to adopt the view here presented, Nothing 
is gained by so premature an interpretation, which is opposed by historical connection 
and unity. On the other hand, the introduction of the Romans, corresponding accu- 
rately with history, and the final development of Antichrist out of it, agreeing with the 
general tenor of prophecy, is in accordance with the spirit and intent of the prediction. 
We also thus avoid making a chasm in prophecy and fulfilment, bringing it into full ac- 
cord with Dan. 7 and Rev. 13, 17, ete. 

8 Barbour (Three Worlds, p. 111) makes this to be the Papacy setting itself up in the 
church (i.e. in the ‘‘ holy place,’’ ‘‘ the temple of the Holy Ghost’). We deem this, for 
reasons assigned, premature. The only interpretation and application (considering ch, 
1aeai0 4 eh. 9: 27, and the reference of Jesus, Matt. 24 : 15) is that which directly applies 
it to the Romap. Power, and which (whatever fulfilment in the past) finds its culminating 
point under the last head of this same power (in connection with the last siege, Zech. 14, of 
Jerusalem). 

+The student need only be reminded that the empire was designated “ Holy ;’’ that 
its emperors were such ‘‘ by the grace of God,” divinely appointed, and thus ‘‘ the Lord’s 
‘anointed ;’ that the subjects were taught to regard their rulers, divinely commissioned, 
with reverence and awe ; that laws were instituted which assumed power over conscience, 
regulated worship, enforced under penalties uniformity, recognized a State Church with 
a civil establishment, persecuted dissentients ; that the spirit evidenced a dominion over 
religion, founding or accepting of special commands, institutions, codes, rites, objects of 


ROP. 160: | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 657 


worship, ministers, etc., either by its own will or adopting that of the Papacy which it 
supported. 

> Elliott and others think that ‘‘ push at him’’ is incorrectly rendered, the preposition 
in other places meaning ‘‘ with,’’ so that they would translate it as implying union or 
alliance with the Roman Power. 

6 Hence Bh. Horsley (Letter on Isa. 18) says : ‘‘ I have an unfashionable partiality for the 
opinions of antiquity. I think there is ground in the prophecies for the notion of the 
early Fathers, that Palestine is the stage on which Antichrist, in the height of his 
impiety, will perish.’’ See also the opinions of the Jews, Jewish Rabbies, Jerome, etc., 
as given by Newton, Mede, Faber, etc. May we add, that the application of this part of 
the prophecy by the Jews themselves to the Romans, as Jerome and others state, and not 
to Antiochus (as Porphyry, Grotius, Barnes, etc.), is at least evidence that they did not 
regard Antiochus as fulfilling the prediction. 

1 Many writers (as e.g. Brookes, Maranatha, p. 437) have a covenant existing between 
the Jews and Antichrist which is broken in the middle of the last week ; this will be 
referred to under another aspect of the subject. 

8 Tf the reader desires to see a laborious but utterly futile effort to accommodate this 
to Antiochus Epiphanes, let him refer to Barnes, Com., Dan. loci. Bishop Newton has well 
observed that it cannot possibly apply to Antiochus, for he returned no more to Judea, 
but miserably died on his journey (not from Egypt but) from Persia on the frontiers. 
To satisfy a theory, undue liberties are taken with the text, viz., in accommodating it to 
the closing scenes of Antiochus’s life in a mountainous region where probably a heathen 
temple stood which the prophet calls ‘* holy,” ete. 

® We only notice that the opinion seems to be gaining ground that the Messiah is 
denoted, so that even Fairbairn (On Proph.) agrees with Ode, Vitringa, Haivernick, Heng- 
stenberg, etc., in making Michael, Rev. 12:7, 8, another name for Christ—“ a name 
given Him in special connection with this great conflict to indicate the certainty of His 
success grounded on His divine nature, for it means, ‘ whois like God?’” On the other 
hand, able writers maintain that Michael is only an attendant of Christ’s, of whom an 
allusion is found in 1 Thess. 4, as “‘ one of the chief princes” (Dan. 10 : 13, 14) who minis- 
ter unto Him. So Tregelles (On Dan., p. 154) makes this the Archangel spoken of by 
Jude, and pertaining to the economy respecting Israel. Much weight is given to this 
view by a reference to ch. 10:13 (comp. Barnes, etc., loci), and hence Fausset (Com. 
Dan. 12 : 1) makes him ‘‘an archangel’’ and ‘‘ the guardian angel of Israel.’’ In favor 
of making him to be the Christ (in virtue of the meaning of the name and the action 
ascribed to him) are many of the older exegetes, various commentaries, and writers (as 
e.g. Kurtz, His. Old Cov., vol. 1, p. 192; Smith, Thoughts on Dan., p. 241; White, The 
Redeemer and Redeemed, p. 16; Cummings, The Great Tribulation, p. 19, etc.). But, on the 
other hand, many assert that an archangel, so named, is intended (comp. e.g. Barnes, 
Com. Dan., and the arts. on ‘‘ Michael” in Cyclops.). We need not dogmatize on the 
point, as strong reasoning is presented on both sides ; and surely we need not exhibit 
the credulity and superstition (For. Quart. Review, vol. 36, p. 331) of the monks of Mt. 
St. Michael in France, who do not hesitate to exhibit, as pious relics, the sword and 
shield with which Michael combated the dragon of the Revelations. 

1 Some who are partial to chronological deductions—very unreliable data for the reason 
that the precise periods are purposely obscurely given—may desire us, perhaps, to 
express our opinion respecting the dates given in ch. 12. None that have as yet fallen 
under our observation seem to fill all the conditions required. If we are to receive the 
year-day fulfilment, then the best starting point, historically established, is that sug- 
gested by Newton and others, viz., the time when the Pope became truly a temporal as 
wellas an ecclesiastical Prince. Some refer this to the time when Charlemagne gave cer- 
tain grants to the Pope, but history informs us that he only renewed and enlarged those 
previously given by Pepin. Itisin the year 755 (see Bower's His. of Popes, Stephen 
IT.) that the Bishop of Rome was raised to the rank of a Prince. The thirty and forty- 
five additional years have, as suggested by various writers, a relation to the restoration 
of the Jews. But if we are to take the literal day fulfilment, then these prophetic periods 
have reference to the closing period of these wonders, relating more specially to the career 
of this last head of the beast in his course of conquest, and to the time of sore tribula- 
tion preceding that of deliverance. Whatever the wise may understand in reference to 
the general outlines of the prophecy (ch. 12 : 10), yet there is sufficient said in ch. 12 : 9 
to indicate that some things shall not be clearly apprehended until the time of the end, 
the closing period has arrived and is actually inaugurated. And of all things thus con- 
cealed the prophetical dates, giving no definite starting point, are the most difficult of 


658 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


comprehension, thus teaching us, if we will but receive it, not to dogmatize concerning 
them. For aught we know they may have reference to the initiatory proceedings of Christ 
and His saints in re-establishing the Theocratic ordering, which process begins the period 
of wonders that shall then be witnessed. We may indeed offer conjectures, but they are 
only conjectures. The Book of Dan. (Jewish Apoc.) remains at least sealed, 12 : 9, for the 
nation to the time of the end, while Rev. (Christian Apoc.) is unsealed, Rev. 22 : 10, 
inviting study and knowledge. The student will, additionally, observe several things : 
(1) That this continuation of prediction down to the Advent and resurrection, sets aside 


that contradictory interpretation which locates the fulfilment of these things in the past. 


Such a procedure violates unity and lessens, immeasurably, the predicted results. (2) 
The ‘‘ time of the end” is one that specially pertains to the period in which this Anti- 
christian power is torage. Hence we must reject as utterly untenable the theories, 
however plausibly presented by a number of writers at the present, that we have already 
passed into this special ‘‘ time of the end.” Prophecy clearly and unmistakably unites 


it with the career of this last head of the Roman beast in his devastating work (comp. — 


Jast Obs. of Prop. 130). (8) That itis utterly impossible, with the intimate connection 
of this last head with the Roman Empire, to receive those theories, however forcibly 
expressed by otherwise able writers, which make this last Antichristian power some one 
outside of the Roman Empire, i.e., some power not actually incorporated and acknowledged 
as a head, as e.g. the Turco-Mohammedan, etc. Such views are prevalent and highly 
esteemed by some students of prophecy, but, as shown, are irreconcilable with the 
demands of prophecy. (4) That no theory respecting the Antichrist in its culminated 
head can possibly be received, which does not make Him a controlling civil head of the 
Roman Empire ; this sets aside a mass of loose inferential pleading on the subject. (5) 
The reason why this empire is to receive, as predicted, the vengeance of God, is its his- 
tory asa pagan beast and professed Christian beast, its support of hierarchy, its Anti- 


christian developments and persecuting manifestations. (6) The view that is given by 


some that we have a regular history of the successors of Alexander down to Antiochus 
Epiphanes, or that the last is primarily to be applied to Antiochus and secondarily to 
Antichrist, is not admissible by the historical connection, the time of fulfilment, the 
events connected therewith, and the harmony of other predictions. (7) That the views 
which make the delineation of the Antichrist still future are to be preferred (although 


they differ as to the interval, some preferring to commence from v, 20 or 21, others from ~ 
30 or 31, or 33, or 36) to those which make the same past or simply typical. Tregelles — 


(On Dan.) and others give interesting interpretations of these prophecies, but we are 
not impressed to specially defend one or the other, the material point being—in harmony 
with other predictions—to extend the career of the wilful king or Antichrist to ** the 


time of the end,” and preserve its relationship to Daniel’s people in the latter days. (8) — 


Some writers, in their eagerness to present and urge a present fulfilment, pervert the 
historical connection, as e.g. Sparkes in A His. Com. on 11th of Dan. (who makes vs, 44 
and 45 refer to the Crimean War—as if the Antichrist were the Turk and would be 


destroyed by man), Swormstedt in The End of the World Near (who, under the plea of — 


special aid from the Spirit, makes extraordinary work of the prophecy ; for, crowding 


almost the whole chapter within forty years, he allows his imagination to distribute the — 


events between the Sultan of Turkey, Victor Emmanuel, Egypt, Antichrist, England, 
Russia, etc.), and others. (9) Probably one of the most arbitrary, imaginative, and wild 
of expositions, is Baldwin’s Armageddon, in which the United States is eulogized as the 
prominent prophetical figure of Daniel, the Fifth Universal Empire, ete. ; and conse- 
quently everything must be, nolens volens, interpreted to apply, as e.g. the United States 
is designated by ‘‘ the glorious holy mountain,” by ‘‘ Michael,’’ by the ‘‘ holy people, 
etc. Buta writer who e.g. can make the new song of Rey. 14 : 1-5 to be the song of 
freedom in the U. 8., or the statement of Rev. 11 : 15-18 to be applicable to the U.S., 
etc., etc., is capable of any interpretation and application. This is evidenced by his 
application of the Stone, the Ancient of Days, the Advent of the King of kings, ete., to 
the United States, Certainly no Pre-Millenarian, even of the most extreme and fanatical 
sect, has ever produced such vagaries, or extravagances. (10) We conclude by saying, 
that so plain is this reference to the future Antichrist, that commentaries largely 
addicted to spiritualizing and to the Antiochus theory still admit such a reference, as 


e.g. The Crit. and Experimental Com. says on this point : ‘‘ The wilful king here, though 


primarily Antiochus, is antitypically and mainly Antichrist, the seventh head of the seven- 
headed and ten-horned beast of Rev. 13, and the beast of Armageddon, who gathers 
together thither the kings of the earth against the Lamb (Rev. 16 : 13, 16 and 19 : 29).’’ 


i 


Prop. 160. | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 659 


Obs. 6. The same feature, viz., the continuation of the Roman power to 
the time of the end, is contained in the now largely received interpretation 
of the seventy weeks of Daniel. If we are to accept of the explanation 
of those weeks (Dan. 9 : 24-27), as given by Dr. Burgh, Sir Denny, 
Tregelles, Kelsall, Maitland, B. W. Newton, Strange, Taunton, Guinness, 
McCausland, Parker, Bickersteth, Birks, Seiss, Brookes, Baxter, ete. 
(and as intimated by ancients, as Ireneus, Hippolytus, Julius Africanus, 
Victorinus, Apollinarius, Primasius, etc.), then it is self-evident that the 
Roman power continues to exist down to the final and complete deliver- _ 
ance of the Jewish nation at the Second Advent. ‘The scheme as pre- 
sented is, at. least, worthy of due consideration from the prophetical 
student. It has been well observed by various writers that if the seventy 
weeks are to end with the death of Christ and the incoming destruction of 
Jerusalem, it is simply zmpossible—with all ingenuity expended in this 
direction by eminent men—to make out an accurate fulfilment of prophecy 
from the dates given, for the time usually adduced being either too long to fit 
with the crucifixion of Christ or too short to extend to the destruction of 
Jerusalem.?’ That, and that alone, which seems to meet the difficulty, is 
to allow, that the Spirit when He comes to a certain period, introducing 
the Roman power, separates a portion of those seventy weeks from the rest, 
because of the rejection of Christ by the Jewish nation and the domination 
of the Gentile power. But, that the reader may obtain a clear idea of the 
matter, we present in the briefest form a running comment upon Dan. 
9 : 24-27, given without reference to those authors just named, but corre- 
sponding accurately with, and adding to, the position assumed by them. 
Before proceeding, attention is called to Daniel’s prayer, which was for the 
restoration of the nation and city and the introduction of the promised 
blessings of the prophets. Barnes and others tell us that the answer to his 
prayer is not direct, that instead of being told of the restoration of the 
nation, etc., he is informed of the First Advent of the Messiah, the closing 
of the temple service, and a more enduring destruction of the temple, city, 
etc. We take the ground, that as Daniel’s prayer included a complete and 
final deliverance of his people and a continued (as previously predicted) 
restoration to their land, God answers Daniel according to the spirit and 
intent of his prayer.? For the partial restoration from Babylon which fol- 
lowed does not, as history proves, meet the scope of Daniel’s prayer as de- 
rived from previous prophecies, or even those given by himself in Chs. 2 
and %. Hence in a special revelation, the restoration from Babylon— 
which never fulfilled the magnificent predictions pertaining to the Jewish 
nation—is rapidly passed by, and the mind of Daniel is directed to several 
great events that must first transpire before (so implied, seeing that the 
fulfilment of the prophecies is taken for granted) the prayer of Daniel in 
its fulness could be realized. Those events directly alluded to are the 
Coming of the Messiah (but instead of the restoration), His removal, the 
destruction of Jerusalem, and continued ruin until a certain period of tvme 
was reached. V. 24, ‘‘ Seventy weeks ;’’ seventy sevens of years, or 
seventy weeks, symbolizing years (see Barnes, etc., loci). ‘‘ Are deter- 
mined ;’? Gesenius, and other critics, inform us that the original prop- 
erly denotes a cutting off, a dividing off, and Barnes gives the meaning 
thus : ‘‘ This portion of time, the seventy weeks, was cut off from the whole 
duration, or cut out of it, as it were, and set by itself for a definite purpose.”’ 
This criticism is well sustained by fact, seeing that it is only a small por- 


660 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


tion of time out of that larger period of Jewish overthrow, etc., before 
their final restoration. If the question be asked why such a brief period 
should be cut out of the larger portion and be thus expressed, several an- 
swers are suggested: (1) the time stated is, if we may so callit, Jewish 
time, i.e. time relating to the nation, and hence the period of Gentile dom- 
ination is not included under it ;° (2) the Divine Spirit in a most remarka- 
ble manner presents His abhorrence of the appalling act of which the nation 
was guilty, viz., in crucifying the Messiah, by which act the nation for- 
feited for a period God’s recognition of it as a nation, and hence the period 
of such non-recognition is not reckoned ; (3) Jesus Himself tells us that 
‘the times of the Gentiles’’ shall intervene, which are not included, they 
becoming such pre-eminently by the rejection of the Messiah. For, at the 
appearing of the Messiah, as we have seen (Prop. 57, etc.), the Kingdom 
was tendered to the nation on condition of repentance. Had the nation 
repented, the period of seventy weeks alone would have embraced their 
degradation, for the Kingdom would have been re-established, Prop. 55, 
ete. Hence the prophecy is given in view of the offer of this Kingdom, and 
yet fully by implication expresses ¢he refusal of the same. ‘The events re- 
corded in the prophecy are such as pertain preparatory to the re-establish- 
ment of the Theocracy, and down to the sixty-ninth week the Theocracy to 
be restored was freely within the choice of the nation, as evidenced by the 
preaching of this Kingdom (Props. 54-58). But in view of the sinfulness 
of the nation, it was postponed, Prop. 66, and hence a week is detached 
from the rest, which is only verified when God again recognizes the Jewish 
nation as @ nation in the work preparatory to the setting up of the prom- 
ised Theocracy. The Gentile times will come to an end, and time special- 
ly related to the people belonging as an inheritance to Christ will begin 
again. This will appear more clearly as we proceed—these remarks being 
now made that the reader may observe the force and propriety in the 
phrase that this designated time is something cut cut of, separated from 
time in general—thus in the outset calling attention to the fact that 
another (and as history shows the larger) portion is not reckoned in view 
of the rejection of the nation for its treatment of the Messiah.*, “* Upon 
thy people and upon thy holy city ;’’ respecting or pertaining to the Jew- 
ish nation and Jerusalem. ‘* 70 finish the transgression ;’’ the reading 
generally adopted (Barnes, Hengstenberg, etc.) is that of the margin: 
To restrain, confine, shut up. Here it is positively asserted that at the end 
of the seventy weeks “ the transgression,” either the sin which brought 
such misery into the world, or the results of such transgression, or, per- 
haps more specially, the sin and punishment pertaining to the Jewish 
nation, shall be restrained, shut wp, ended. If we take the usual inter- 
pretation given to the passage that this was done at the First Advent in the 
sufferings and death of Christ for sin and to restrain sin in His followers, 
we reply that it does not meet either the spirit of Daniel’s prayer or that of 
the prophecy, because the death of Christ fearfully increased the sinful- 
ness and the punishment of the nation, and increases the sinfulness of the 
world in rejecting Him. ‘Transgression produced that death, continued 
transgression rejects Him, and yet the prophecy declares that, as pertain- 
ing to them and the city, at the close of the seventy weeks they shall be no 
longer under the dominion of transgression. Comparatively few Jews were 
converted, so that the immense mass of believers are Gentiles ; and it is 
certainly wrong to insist upon a fulfilment, in which neither the nation 


Prop. 169. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 661 


nor city, as such, participated to any extent, but terribly suffered for trans- _ 
gression. On the other hand, the prophets predict a period of time when 
the sinfulness of the Jewish nation shall be forgiven, when transgression 
shall be blotted out and the nation shall be gloriously delivered, when 
Satan himself shall be restrained, shut up, so that ‘‘ all shall be righteous,”’ 
—the time that Daniel evidently longed and prayed for—which is still 
future. Now this prediction, in some way, stands related to this period. 
So far as the sixty-nine weeks are concerned, there is no difficulty, for 
there is, as numerous writers (Tregelles, Brookes, etc.) have shown, a 
strictly chronological fulfilment down to Christ’s death. The trouble is 
what todo with the last week which is in excess to that death and too brief 
to extend to the destruction of Jerusalem. It is at the end of this last 
week that the transgression is to be restrained. The only explanation is, 
that, as the prophecy itself intimates, this one week is detached, separated 
from the rest, and held in abeyance—owing to the rejection of the nation 
and pre-eminence of Gentile times—wvtil this nation is again recognized 
in its national capacity. The closing of the seventy weeks, separated by 
an undefined period—the resultant of the death of the Messian and the 
non-recognition of the Jewish nation as such—is to be found at the usher- 
ing in of the Millennial period, when transgression shall indeed be re- 
strained. ‘‘ To make an end of sins’’ or, as many, “‘ to seal up sins ;’’ the 
meaning being, as Barnes, etc., ‘‘ to remove it from sight, to remove it from 
view,’ to banish it, etc. The usual explanation given, is that ‘‘ faith in 
Christ forgives sins and makes them inert,’’ etc. But this is defective for 
the same reasons just assigned under previous clause, and from the fact 
that although God pardons sins, yet, like David’s, Peter’s, etc., they are 
not necessarily concealed from view, and that pious men have constantly to 
resist sin. ‘This promise specially given to the nation and city cannot, 
without violation of the prediction, be thus applied to the present experi- 
ence of believers. But the time is coming when sin shall be effectually re- 
moved from sight, when Satan himself is confined and a seal is affixed 
(Rey. 20 : 3), when holiness shall be triumphantly established. ‘* And to 
make reconciliation for iniquity ;’’ critics tell us that the meaning of the 
original is not ‘‘ to make reconciliation,’’ but ‘* to cover’’ or ‘‘ to cover over,’’ 
and, Barnes says, 1s often used in the general sense of to pardon or forgive. 
The reasoning already given will equally apply to this phrase ; for, instead 
of pardoning the iniquity of the Jewish nation, to whom the prophecy 
specially applies, the nation is still feeling the effects of God’s withdrawal, 
but the time is coming when their iniquity shall be forgiven and the forgiyve- 
ness manifested in prosperity and exaltation. See Props. 112, 113, 114. 
‘To bring in everlasting righteousness ,” literally, *‘ to cause to come,”’ 
‘“a permanent enduring’’ state of “‘ righteousness,” or, as some, “* t0 cause 
to come the righteousness of the ages,” which is emphatically true of the 
Millennial era bringing in an enduring period of righteousness. ‘‘ And to 
seal up the vision and the prophecy,” or ‘‘ prophet ;’’ this indicates, 
keeping in view that the prophecy pertains to the Jewish nation, that the 
nation would not comprehend this vision or prophecy. ‘They did not when 
the Messiah came; they do not now ; and they will not until the Second 
Advent. Or, if it denotes, as some may think, the fulfilment of the whole 
prophecy, this will only be accomplished at the end of the seventy weeks. 
If this prediction is not thus understood by the Jewish nation, how comes 
it that Gentiles may understand it? ‘The sealing of it alludes fo the proph- 


662 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 160. 


ecy as it pertains to the Jewish nation and not to the times of the Gentiles 
intervening, and not to those who would accept of the Messiah, for Jesus 
Himself gives an unsealed Revelation relating to this intervening period 
and the closing of this prophecy which also is only received by believers, 
and not by the nation.® ‘‘ Zo anoint the Most Holy ;’’ passing by the 
different views (Barnes, etc., Joc?) of this phrase, it is sufficient to indicate 
its probable meaning ; either that Christ will consecrate, at His Second 
Coming, with His presence the Holy hill of Zion ; or, that the New Jeru- 
salem will thus be exalted ; or, that Christ Himself shall then (as Dan. 7) 
receive the Kingdom from the Father ; or, that it pertains to the glorified 
saints. It refers us to an act of consecration, because of its connection 
with the preceding, at the time of the Sec. Advent, and refers either to — 
Christ Himself or to some place, as Jerusalem, Mount Zion, New Jerusalem, 
or to the corporate body of saints that there inherit the Kingdom. It is 
perhaps impossible to definitely fix its meaning.® V. 25, ‘‘ Know there- 
fore and understand, that from the going forth of the commandment to re- 
store and build Jerusalem unto Messiah, the Prince, shall be seven weeks and 
three score and two weeks.’’ Omitting the lengthy details of commenta- 
tors (Barnes, etc.), it is sufficient for our purpose to say, that the almost 
generally received opinion that the time of the decree of the Persian king 
(commonly called Ezra’s), extending down to the First Advent of Christ, 
which precisely includes those sixty-nine weeks (with slight variations), 
seems to be the best founded.’ This throws the ministry of Christ either 
into the middle or at the close of the sixty-ninth week. This view has 
been so ably defended by numerous writers, independently of the interpre- _ 
tation that we have adopted (as e.g. Burnes, ete.), that it requires no ex- 
tended mention, our object being merely to notice the relationship that the 
prophecy sustains to the Loman power and the future. There is a phrase, — 
however, added in the 25th verse that we must apply differently from other ~ 
writers, viz., “‘ the street shall be built again and the wall even in troublous — 
times.”’ In the wide diversity of rendering given to this, it may be re- — 
garded impracticable to definitely determine its meaning. From the ren- — 
derings given we suggest the following: ‘‘ The way or broad way” 
(Barnes, etc.) *‘ shall be restored and built’? (Hengstenberg, etc.) ‘* and the 
threshing instrument’? (the word ‘‘ wall’? in original so used in Isa. — 
28:27; Amos. 1:3; Isa. 41:15; Joel 3:14 marg.) ‘‘in a time of dis-~ 
tress’? (Hengstenberg). ‘This phrase is erroneously affixed to the ending © 
of the seven weeks or forty-nine years, but itis expressly stated as following 
the sixty-nine weeks and the coming of the Messiah. Aside from the im- | 
possibility of showing that there was this rebuilding of Jerusalem just after 
seven weeks, the location of the statement in the prophecy, as following 
after the sixty-nine weeks, forbids such an application.’ Even if it refers 
to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, as our version has it, then the reference is 
to that rebuilding which is still future and predicted. But let the reader 
turn to Prop. 34, and see how the prophets describe the future glory as” 
dependent upon the Advent of the Messiah without indicating which one 
is meant, owing to the fact that the First Advent itself tendered to the 
nation this Theocratic restoration. Hence the prophet, having referred 
to this Advent, before describing the rejection of the Messiah, in strict 
accord with the other prophets, declares that “‘ the way or broad way 
shall be built,’’ which is done when the Millennial age is ushered in, as 
seen in Isa. 35: 8-10; Isa. 48:19-21; Isa. 62:11, 12, ete. That the 


Prop. 160. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 663 


millennium is preceded by a ‘‘ time of distress,’’ has been repeatedly stated, 
and that the Jewish nation becomes at that time ‘‘a new sharp threshing 
instrument’ (Isa. 41:15; Micah 4:18; Joel 8:14, comp. Prop. 115), 
has been shown. Had the Jews accepted of the Messiah thus sent and 
repented, this, too, would have been accomplished, but, rejecting Him, this 
is now postponed to His Second Coming, and therefore the prophet gives 
us what follows. ‘‘ And after three score and two weeks shall Messiah be 
cut off ;’ this, as eminent commentators have abundantly shown, was 
fulfilled in the death of the Messiah. ‘‘ But not for himself ;’’ if this 
rendering is correct, then He died for the benefit of others ; if the marg. 
reading is to be preferred, ‘‘ and shall have nothing,’’ it refers to the fact 
that the Messiah, as David’s Son, did not obtain His inheritance (Prop. 
67); if the Vulgate, ‘‘ and they shall not be His people who shall deny 
ffim,’’ reference is had to the taking away of the Kingdom and bestowing 
it (as an inheritance) upon others (Prop. 61), if we are to follow Hengsten- 
berg (similar to Syriac), ‘‘ and is not to Him,’’ i.e. dominion, authority is 
not to Him, which would agree with the postponement of the Kingdom 
(Prop. 66). Thus almost every rendering given to the concise and diffi- 
cult phrase would find a fulfilment in fact. Now we come to the part of 
the prophecy having reference to the Roman power.: ‘‘ And the people of 
the prince that shall come ;” this refers to the events following the cutting 
off of the Messiah, and all commentators who favor the Messianic refer- 
ence of the prophecy agree in making ‘‘the people’ alluded to the 
Romans. The prince is the Roman emperor or head who comes with his 
armies after the death of the Messiah for purposes of devastation. ‘‘ Shall 
destroy the city and the sanctuary ;”’ how this was accomplished under 
the Roman power is partof history, and needs no explanation. ‘‘ And the 
end thereof shall be with a flood ;’’ the end of the city or nation shall be 
involved in the ravages, overwhelming devastation of this power. ‘* And 
unto the end of the war desolations are determined ;’’ the idea, as critics 
inform ns, is apparent, viz., that for an indefinite time a decreed measure 
of desolation would be continued upon the city, which is contained in our 
version and in the following: “‘ And unto the end is war, a decree of 
ruins’? (Hengstenberg), or ‘‘ and the great desolations shall continue unto 
the end of the war’’ (Bertholdt), or, ‘‘ and after the end of the war desola- 
tion is determined’ (Vulgate), or ‘‘and unto the end shall be war, a de- 
creed measure of desolations’’ (Prof. Stuart), or “‘ and unto the end of the 
war, desolations are decreed’’ (Barnes). The city and the sanctuary being 
overthrown, this desolation would be continued on during a period of time 
decreed or determined by God, as e.g. the Messiah predicted that Jerusa- 
lem would continue (after it was taken) to be trodden down by the Gen- 
tiles until the times of the Gentiles were fulfilled. 'The impressive feature 
that after the taking of the city by the Romans the overthrow and desola- 
tion of the Jewish nation would not cease, but continue on, has been fear- 
fully verified in its history. V. 27, ‘° And he shall confirm the covenant 
with many for one week ;’’ here, after the indefinite, unmeasured period 
following the sixty-nine weeks, is introduced the last week, making the 
total of seventy weeks ; and the one alluded to, who shall make the cove- 
nant, is by the tenor of the prophecy connected with ‘‘ ¢he people of the 
prince that shall come,’’ i.e. shall also belong to, or be head of, this per- 
secuting Roman power. The effort of Barnes and others to apply this to 
Christ is futile for the simple reasons (1) that 7 follows the cutting off of 


664 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. ‘[Prop. 160, 


the Messiah ; (2) it sweceeds the destruction of the city and sanctuary, and 
this pre-determined tribulation of the Jewish nation ; (3) it 1s connected 
with its antecedent, the Roman power ; (4) Christ did not make a covenant 
for a week, or seven years; (5) the impossibility of making this week, 
seven years, fit with the public ministry and death of Christ. The only 
tenable position is to apply the personage denoted to a successor in the 
line of the destructive power previously mentioned. But with whom does 
this Roman power make a covenant? It is generally supposed by the 
writers referred to that a covenant with the Jews, raising them into the 
position of a nation (thus commencing the seventh week), is intended, and 
there are many things which make such a view plausible—such as the 
restoration of the Jews to their land under the agency of some power pre- 
vious (Zech. 14 : 1, 2) to their restoration under Christ and the indirect al- 
lusions to some such covenant (as in Isa. 28:18; 33:8; Ps. 55 : 20), 
While this opinion is worthy of the serious consideration of the student, 
yet another covenant, compact, or agreement that the last head of the 
Roman power shall enter into is more specifically noted in the Scriptures, 
and may be the one here denoted, viz., the agreement and union with the 
ten horns or powers mentioned in Rev. 17:12, 13. It is this covenant 


entered into between the revived head of the Empire and the ten kings — 


that leads to the last great conflict. The brevity of the agreement also 
corresponds, while the relationship that it may sustain to the Jewish nation 
(viz., partially restoring it) is wmplied by a comparison of predictions. 
‘And in the midst of the week he shall cause the. sacrifice and oblation to 
cease ;’? this may refer either to the terrible persecution of the Church 
under this last head, by which the nations shall be led to embrace the 
Antichristian worship, or, as many suppose, to the removal of the worship 
instituted by the Jews at their partial restoration, or, to the restoration of 
idol, image worship and the exclusion of other forms. Perhaps the best 
commentary on this clause is the one given by the Spirit in Rev. 14:9 


and Rev. 13 : 14-16. The worship of the true God is to be ignored and ~ 


persecuted with marvellous success.? ‘“‘ And for the overspreading of 
abominations he shall make «tt desolate ;’ amid the great diversity of 
rendering and interpretation, it seems scarcely practicable to give one that 
could be dogmatically maintained ; but the reader is requested to consider 
one peculiarity admitted by a large number of critics, viz., that the phrase- 
ology implies, if it does not explicitly declare, that idol.or image worship 
or something relating to false worship 1s meant, by which desolation is pro- 
duced. ‘Taking, then, the more recent predictions in Revelations as ex- 
planatory of the concise statements here, it appears that when the last 


head of this Roman power arises and causes by oppression and fearful per- 


secution the worship of God to cease (i.e. forbids the liberty of such wor- 
ship), in place of that worship shall be sustituted the image worship to 
which all are forced upon pain of death, just before the Millennial age is 
ushered in (see Rev. 19 : 20; 14: 9-14; 18 714-16). ‘* Hven until the 


ww) 


consummation ;? that is, until the completion of the period appointed, — 


showing that all is under God’s control, and that this power, after all, en-— 


dures just as long as He allows it. ‘‘ And that determined shall be poured 
upon the desolate or desolater ;,? God has foretold the rise, progress, and 
apparent triumph of this Roman power, but He has also predicted the fear- 
ful vengeance that shall befall this hostile power at the time of the end, 


What God has determined to pour out upon him is stated in numerous 


menor, 160.'] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 665 


prophecies, as e.g. in those already adduced, Rev. 19 : 20, 21; Rev. 
14:10, 11; Rev. 16, etc. ‘Thus the latter part of this prediction was ap- 
plied by the early Church to the events preceding the future open personal 
Advent of Christ, and a careful consideration of the passage, in its relation- 
ship, indicates the propriety of such an application, and teaches (because 
no change is intimated after the Romans are introduced) the continuation 
of the koman power down to the time of the end, and the dreadful nature of 
the events introduced under the last head of this power.” 


1In looking over and comparing the various applications of the prophecy to other 
predictions and the facts of history, there is not one that will stand the test of a critical 
examination being based on a complete and perfect fulfilment of the 70 weeks in the past. 
It was this failure that, no doubt, caused Prof. Stuart (Hints on the Interp. of Prophecy, p. 
104) to say: “It would require a volume of considerable magnitude even to give a 
history of the ever-varying and contradictory opinions of critics respecting this locus 
vex a tissimus ; and perhaps a still larger one to establish an exegesis which would stand. 
Tam fully of opinion that no interpretation, as yet published, will stand the test of 
thorough grammatico-historical criticism; and that a candid, and searching, and 
thorough critique here is still a desideratum. May some expositor, fully adequate to the 
task, speedily appear.’’ ‘To make the 70 weeks to fit an exact chronological period in 
the past, has been the aim of numerous writers, and this is constantly repeated (as e.g. 
Amer. ed. in Lange’s Com. on Dan. loci). Ten different dates alone are given in Lange's 
Com. from which to date the 70 weeks, and to make the conclusion meet the supposed 
demands of the prophecy the method of parallelism, or of intercallation, or of transposi- 
tion, or of analogical application, or of reckoning by lunar years, or of counting by 
jubilee periods, or of substituting Chaldee years, or of enumerating mystically, has 
been resorted to in order to remove difficulties. The nearest approach made by any 
effort, worthy of consideration, makes Christ’s death to take place in the end of the 69th 
week, or the middle of the last week, but fails in linking this last portion to any signifi- 
cant historical fact predicted. 

Thomas in ‘* Hlpos Israel” and the ‘‘ Chronology’’ attached to it, after treating with 
his usual contempt all efforts but his own in arranging chronological eras, takes it for 
granted (p. 94, Chronology) that 490 years must necessarily end with the crucifixion, and 
hence conveniently arranges his figures to bring about the foregone conclusion, but most 
signally fails to show how the last week is realized when he extends it beyond the cruci- 
fixion to the reception of believers who ceased to offer bloody sacrifices, and how this 
abomination, desolation, and destruction is realized within its bounds. The objection 
he urges, that if the last week is separated from the 69th and placed in the future, it 
would make Jesus no Christ and Christianity a fable, is of no force whatever in view of 
the explanation given in the text. For if Jesus was crucified at the end of the 69 weeks, 
as many able writers hold, that itself is amply sufficient to prove His Messiahship, over 
against the usual dogmatism of Thomas. So Barbour (Three Worlds, p. 159) ridicules our 
view, which comes with special bad grace from him, since he cannot, with all his posi- 
tiveness, show how the weeks are continuous chronologically, and shields himself (so 
complacent at his success in fixing definite time) under such admissions: ‘‘ There is 
some obscurity in relation to the ending of the last week.’’ ‘‘ For some reason God 
has left this one week obscure, and neither the Bible nor history give any further 
light on that point.’? Baldwin (Armageddon, Appendix), finding that he could not fit in 
the 70 weeks chronologically, boasts of ‘‘a new and wonderful” discovery, a key to 
prophetic chronology, a solvent of difficulties, viz., to count “‘ labor time,” to which 
must be added ‘“‘rest time,’’ or unite ‘“‘secular’’ and ‘‘ spiritual time,’’ thus obtaining 
respectively 564 and 603 years. 

2 Hence the retention of 70 in the prophecy. Daniel made inquiry concerning 70, and 
the angel informs him that another 70 relating to his people must transpire. God, while 
revealing to Daniel the future iniquity and punishment (preliminary to deliverance), in 
mercy to him and the nation, does not reveal in connection and detail the long-continued 
overthrow of the nation under Gentile domination, seeing that such a minute revelation 
would have been, in the nature of the case, terribly depressing. (The glimpses that 
Daniel received deeply affected him.) He therefore leaves out, cuts out, divides off a 
long interval, which belongs specially to the climax of unbelief, reaching from the cruci- 
fixion of the Messiah to the closing period of their dispersion. 

8 We add, to avoid misapprehension, that while the times of the Gentiles, evinced in 


5] 


666 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [| PRop. 160, 


the four world empires of Dan. 2 and 7, previously existed, yet Jewish time existed more 
or less contemporaneously down to the First Advent ; for while periods of non-recogni- 
tion existed (owing to sinfulness, and almost total in respect to the ten tribes), yet, in view 
of the divine purpose of God relating to the First Advent, He still recognizes the city 
and nation until we come to the crucifixion of the Messiah, when the non-recognition 
intervenes, and Gentile domination has paramount sway in power and.time. The non- 
recognition of the years of Abraham with Hagar, of the years under bondage to Midian, 
of the 70 years of Babylonish captivity, of periods after the return, etc., are presented 
by some writers as illustrative of this method, and e.g. Brooks (Maranatha) thus recon- 
ciles the enumeration from the Exodus to the building of the temple (480 added to 121 
under a foreign yoke and in slavery, making 601). 

4 Let it be observed that the intercallation of a period of time, especially between the 
sixty-ninth and seventieth weeks, has been adopted (Lange’s Com. on Dan., p. 208) by 
lEmpereur, Newton, Koch, Beer, Uri, etc., in order to remove the discrepancies of 
fulfilment. Even so early a writer as Hippolytus (p. 207) declared that the last week 
denotes the future period of the Antichrist at the end of the dispensation. So also © 
Apollinaris of Laodicea located the Antichrist still future in the last week, considering 
the prophecy as only applicable to him. So likewise (p. 212) others, as the Berlenburg — 
| Bible, Kliefoth, Keil, etc., consider the last week as only realized in the history of the 
_ still future Antichrist, with which view marty, as intimated above, agree in interpreting 
the prophecy eschatologically. The views generally entertained we cannot accept con- 
sistently with prediction. Thus e.g. that of Hivernick, Hengstenberg, etc., who make 
the conclusion applicable to the destruction of Jerusalem under Titus, which is opposed 
by the chronology of the 70 weeks ; that of Ewald, Hitzig, etc., who refer the whole to 
Antiochus Epiphanes, which is contradicted both by chronology and the facts predicted 3 
that of Hofman, Delitzsch, etc., who have a primary fulfilment in Antiochus and a 
secondary in the future Antichrist, which is a mingling of two things not supported by 
chronology and the facts of history ; and that of Kliefoth and others, who make the 
weeks mystical or symbolical periods, extending regularly down to the end of this dis- 
pensation, thus mixing the literal and the mystical, the length, location, and indefinite- 
ness of the periods at the pleasure of the interpreter. 

5 The “ veil” is still over the nation. However individuals may accept of personal — 
salvation in believing, the nation, as such, bears a strong dislike to Jesus of Nazareth, 
and regards with disdain the interpretation of prophecies which would link the ultimate 
forgiveness and glory of the nation with a reception of this same Jesus. Itis too 
humiliating for faith to accept, being at present regarded as a degradation for them to 
owe their final recovery and restoration to, ‘‘ the crucified One.” 

6 If we adopt the reading of many, viz., “ a holy of holies,’’ it then seems to direct our 
attention to the fact that not only the Theocratic order and worship is re-instituted, but 
to those who officiate in the highest relationship in connection with it. The Thtocratic 
King, His nearness and accessibility, His associates in rulership and priesthood, are 
evidently included. 

7 Comp., however, the able argument of Dr. Tregelles (On Dan. loci), who prefers the 
decree of Artaxerxes given to Nehemiah (that given to Ezra by Cyrus referring to build- — 
ing of the temple, and that given to Ezra by Artaxerxes pertains to the worship, while 
this one relates to the restoration and rebuilding of Jerusalem. From the date of this 
decree to the death of Jesus, he makes precisely 69 weeks. (Comp. his excellent 
remarks, p. 99. . 

8 Still, able writers adopt it as referring to the rebuilding after 49 years. So Tregelles 
(On Daniel, who renders: ‘‘ The street shall be again built, and the trench, or scraped 
rampart, even in pressure of times”) and many others. ‘The reception of this applica-_ 
tion would not affect our general conclusion, since Tregelles fully adopts the same. The 
division into sevens and the rebuilding under Ezra, suggest both the rendering and 
application, while we accept of the plain implication that it is something following the 
69 weeks—in fact, linked with, and resulting from, the 70th week. 

9 The opinion (Hiivernick, Hengstenberg, etc.) that this refers to Christ’s expiatory 
sacrifice superseding the Old Test. institution of sacrifice, cannot be accepted for the 
reasons, that (1) this is not asserted ot the Messiah but of another ; (2) the verb does not 
express superseding ; (3) Christ’s work and death did not cause the temple service to 
cease, seeing that it was continued down to the destruction of Jerusalem ; (4) the impos- — 
sibility of fitting the 70th week with the death of Christ or the destruction of the © 
temple ; (5) the transposition and violation which such an application produces. 

10 Commentators almost universally allow that whatever difficulties prevent a dogmatic 
rendering of the phrase, it includes the idea ot “ abominable things from a religious point of 


PRoP. 160.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 667 


’ 


view,’’ which tend to “ desolation,” so that some designate it ‘‘ desolaling abomination of 
idolatry’’ (Lange’s Com.) ; others have it abominations, i.e. idolatrous image worship, 
led on by a desolator ; some, ‘‘ the desolator comes upon the pinnacle of abomination ;’’ 
others, ‘‘On the head (summit) of the abominations is a desolator ;’’ others, “a 
destroyer comes on the wings of idolatrous abominations ;’ marg. reading, “‘ upon the 
battlements shall be the idols of the desolator ;’’ others, ‘‘ upon the summit of abomina- 
tion comes the destroyer,” etc. Numerous writers affirm that itis applied to idols or 
that which is abominable and detestable in worship, and this fully accords with what is 
predicted to take place at “ the time of the end.” 

1 The critical student will not fail to notice one peculiarity. connected with this 
prophecy, viz., that God in the manner of presenting the truth avoids the fearful depress- 
ing effect that the real facts of the future would have had, if fully stated, upon the 
nation. Suppose e.g. that the Spirit had revealed that the time determined upon the 
Jewish nation and city would embrace over eighteen centuries of trial and persecution 
—what a terrible blow this would have been. God's mercy veils this in the peculiar 
manner of prediction. Daniel, who obtained a view of this long interval, was so deeply 
affected that for weeks he mourned and fasted (ch. 10 : 2, 3). Let us briefly place our- 
selves in Daniel’s position, and then we may more correctly imagine his feelings. He 
had previously received (chs. 2, 7) an epitome of history which indicated the deliver- 
ance of the nation at the Advent of the covenanted Messiah. But these were also so 
framed that‘they mercifully concealed the awful fact of the rejection and death of the 
Messiah by the nation and the consequent long-continued tribulation. The framework 
of the prophecy, dealing with the times of the Gentiles, allowed this skilful and compas- 
sionate veiling of the nation’s sin and doom. Now Daniel, because of this merciful con- 
cealment of facts, entertained (ch. 9 : 2-19) the hope that, according to Jeremiah, the 
restoration from the Babylonish captivity would result in the ultimate restoration under 
the Messiah. To ascertain the correctness of this hope, he proceeds to ‘‘ prayer and 
supplication with fasting, and sackcloth and ashes,” and proceeds to a confession of sin 
and supplication for mercy. The result is, that God reveals to him the inexpressible 
painful fact that his nation would reject the Messiah, and that fresh and long-continued 
tribulations would have to be endured, Jerusalem again being destroyed. No wonder 
that Daniel was astounded and mourned over that dreary, dark future—having a clear 
and unmistakable view of the inevitable postponement of the Messiah’s Kingdom. Happy 
we, if, like Daniel, we feel deeply interested in, and ponder over, such predictions. In 
the world to come we may hear from Daniel’s own lips how powerfully his feelings were 
wrought upon, and what fervent supplications flowed from his heart. God will honor 
him for his expression of feeling, and we, too, shall be honored with him because of our 
respect and reverence for such communications, 

Rev. Baxter (Coming Troubles) enumerates a large number of expositors and writers 
who adopt such a view, and to these we have added others. Tregelles (On Dan., p. 96, 
etc.) gives the idea of all these, when he makes the prediction to extend to the time of 
the future Jewish restoration and Messianic Kingdom, thus including the interval from 
the crucifixion of Jesus to the reception and persecution of the culminated Antichrist. 
So Brookes (Maranatha, p. 421, etc.), who correctly declares that this prediction relates 
not to the Christian Church, as erroneously supposed, but to the history of Israel, indi- 
cated by ‘‘ thy people,” ‘“‘thy holy city,’ etc. Compare e.g. Bh. Nicholson, Pre-Mill. 
Essays, p. 229; Ebrard, The Rev. of John; Epp (German) in his tract on Prophecy ; 
-Brewster’s Life of Newton, p. 250, says that Newton made the 70 weeks to run down to 
the Sec. Coming of Christ; Lange, Com. Rev.., p. 47, who likewise (by a symbolical 
application) extends the weeks to the Sec. Parousia ; Fausset, Com. Dan. loci, who says 
of Auberlen’s and Tregelles’s application of the last week : ‘‘ Perhaps both interpreta- 
tions of the whole passage may be in part true ; the Roman desolator, Titus, being a 
type of Antichrist, the final desolator of Jerusalem.” 


668 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 161, 


Proposition 161. This Kingdom will not be re-cha ed 
until after Antichrist ts overthrown. 


This has already been represented under Prop. 123 (and othe 
places, as Prop. 160, Obs. 4, etc.), and follows in view of the elec 
position of the J ewish nation in this Kingdom (being the special 
inheritance of David’s Son), and the predicted fact that this nation 
is fearfully oppressed by the Antichrist, and only finds deliverance 
and restitution at the open manifestation of Jesus and His saints, 
Zech. 14, ete. We present the subject again in this form in order 
to add some observations to a very important matter, deeply 
affecting the interests of man. } 

For special articles on Antichrist see Herzog’s Cyclop., Smith’s Bib. Dic. and Cyeloal 7 
in general ; for particular applications see commentaries of Lange and others on 2 Thess, 
2 and Rev. 13 and 17, and also special commentaries like Tregelles, Auberlen, Roos, and 
others on Daniel ; for representations of the subject compare such discussions as are 
given by Alford in ’ Proleg g. to 2 Thess., Greswell on Parables, Elliott's Hore Apoc., ete. ;_ 
for works which largely treat of Antichrist see Bonar's Development of Antichrist, Frere’s s 
Combined View of the Prophecies, Knight’s Lectures on the Prophecies Voneerning Antichrist, 
Faber’s Dissertations and Sacred Calendar, Keith’s His. and Destiny of the World and Chui hy 
Frederick’s Times of Antichrist, Cameron’s Antichrist, Clarke’s Diss. on the Dragon, Beast, 
and False Prophet, Todd’s Dis. on Antichrist, Malvenda’s Antichrist, as well as the writings be 
of Lord, Birks, Darby, Thomas, Cressener, Roach, Fysh, Bickersteth, Brooks, 1, and 
Cunninghame, and Pre-Mill. authors generally. Trench’s Synonyms of the WV. T- 
works of that class, are instructive. 


Obs. 1. The Church has always kept its eye fixed on the prophecies 
pertaining to Antichrist. Every century, from the Christian era down, 
gives us in the writings of eminent men an expression of opinion. relating: 
to it. However important the subject in the past, interest in it increases 

roportionately to the increasing nearness of the Millennial age. ‘The Mil- 
ennium can never be introduced before the fearful scenes under tha 
Antichrist are first witnessed and experienced. 'The prominence givens 
Antichrist in the Scriptures and by the faith of the Church ; the nearness 
of fulfilment that may be nigh to us; the delineation of ‘character an id 
work given by the Spirit ; these are sufficient warrant for a careful cons! id- 
eration of this powerful actor in the world’s history. 

Alas! multitudes of professors, and even believers, turn away from the nate 
foolishness. They do not reflect that this was a subject much dwelt on in apostolic 
(e.g. 2 Thess. 2:5, 6; 1 John 2 : 18), and that a very large portion of Scripture is te 
up either in descriptions or references. The conduct and example of the apostles anc 
primitive Christians, as well as the prominence given to the subject by the Spirit, should 
rebuke our neglect or inattention, The worldly spirit of the age is censured by the 
language held in former days, as e.g. given by Turner (His. of Anglo-Saxons, vol. 2, p. 
477), expressive of a subject of contemplation, in a sermon beginning : ‘‘ Beloved men 
there is great need that we should be aware of the fearful time that is now approachin 
Now, very soon, will be the times of the Antichrist ; therefore we ought to expect h nL m, 
and carefully think upon him.”’ 


PRopP. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 669 


Obs. 2. It was a generally received opinion of the Jews (comp. Reuss, 
His. of Ch. Theol. Ap. Age, p. 115, ete.) that the Messianic Kingdom 
could not be introduced without the previous manifestation of the Anti- 
christ. This view was derived from Daniel and the other prophets, who 
described such an Antichristian power—the great enemy portrayed in its 
outward culminated form—as preceding the coming of the Son of man to 
set up His Kingdom.* This belief was incorporated in the early Church, 
and was universally held as belonging to the period immediately antecedent 
to the open, visible Advent of the Lord Jesus at His Second Coming. It 
evidently, too, was a point much contemplated, so that John (1 John 2 :18) 
could say, “‘ Ye have heard that Antichrist shall come,’’ and Paul (2 
Thess. 2:5) could assert, “‘ Remember ye not, that, when I was yet with 
you, 1 told you these things?’ ‘The language, ete., of the apostles fully 
corroborates the Jewish view, only applying to the Sec. Advent what had 
previously been supposed to pertain to the First. This at once confirms 
our previous positions respecting the Kingdom, viz., that the Church 
is’ not intended, because Jesus at the First Advent came in a time 
of peace and not of war with the Antichrist as predicted by Daniel, 
Zechariah, and others. ‘The student will here recognize in the prophecies a 
most wonderful evidence of inspiration in the foreseen rejection of Jesus, 
the postponement of the Kingdom, and hence in describing the continued 
Gentile domination passing over the First Advent and linking its over- 
throw under the culminated Antichrist with the Second Coming—and 
doing this, too, without specification of the same, lest it interfere with the 
tender of the Kingdom to the nation. The doctrinal position of the early 
Church, the general drift of the prophecies, pertaining to the Antichrist 
alone, if duly considered in its connections, abundantly confirms our view 
of the Kingdom. Prophecy links the re-establishment of the Kingdom 
with the destruction of the Antichrist ; any other view is witerly unten- 
able ; for it is impossible to uphold such a previous erection of the Mes- 
sianic Kingdom, seeing that Antichrist, not only oppresses the Church and 
the Jewish nation, but is actually represented as triwmphant over both 
Church and nation, holding Jerusalem, Palestine, etc., in his power at the 
time of the Advent.’ 


1 Thus e.g. the word “ wicked’’ in Isa. 11 : 4 was by many regarded as an equivalent to 
“the impious Roman.” So the Chaldee, Beng. Gnomon, V. p. 364. The name given to 
Antichrist by the Jews was ‘‘ Armillus”’ (Clarke’s Com. on Isa. 11:4, Smith’s Bib. Dic., 
art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’’ which refers to Buxtorf, Eisenmenger, and gives an abstract of view 
entertained), and some Rabbinical works had him ‘‘ born of a marble statue in one of the 
churches at Rome,” professing himself to be ‘‘ the Messiah.” He was generally regarded 
as a Roman, identified with the Roman power.. Renan, Life of St. Paul, p. 165, when 
speaking of the Antichrist, mentions it as an ancient opinion, and refers as its basis to 
Dan. 7 : 25; 9:27; 11:36, Targ. of Jerusalem, Numb. 11°: 26 ; Deut. 34 : 2, Targ. of 
Jonathan, Isa. 11:4, etc. <A brief statement of the Mohammedan traditions and belief is 
given by Smith’s Dic., Sale’s Koran (Prel. Dis.), in which the Antichrist is made to be 
the Jewish Messiah Ben-David, who will finally be slain by Jesus. The Sibylline oracles 
and Apocryphal books also refer to the Antichrist attacking the people of God, after 
which comes deliverance (Comp. e.g. the various extracts given by Prof. Stuart in The 
Apoc., vol. 1, p. 91, ete. Comp. Tregelles on Dan. and coms. generally.) 

2 The Scriptures constantly represent Antichrist in the height of his triumph and 
consequent self-exaltation, when the vengeance of the Sec. Advent suddenly overtakes 
him. His destruction is swift and sudden, like to the overthrow of the Babylonian 
monarchy by the Persian king. One day in complacent power and grandeur, exulting 
in the supremacy of will and adulation, the next this power, grandeur, and supremacy is 
swept away. When the vials of wrath are emptied upon his devoted head, a brief period 


670 THE TIEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


will bring the pride of the most haughty and arrogant that ever lived to the dust. But 
it is not man that does this work ; it is not the Church that overcomes this proud and 
victorious enemy ; it is the Second Advent, with the divine agencies resulting from it, 
that effectually crushes the Antichrist, 


Obs. 3. It will be interesting to give a brief statement of the opinions en- 
tertained respecting Antichrist, because it serves, not only to illustrate the 
interest taken in the subject, the influence of mere prejudice, the crude- 
ness of interpretation and comparison, but also that Divine revelation has 
purposely enshrouded the matter so as not to interfere with the free ageney 
of man in development, so as to cause a diligent comparison and study of 
the Word, and to excite a state of watchfulness in view of the constant 
presence of Antichristian elements. A sufficiency is given for warning 
and for recognition when the time arrives ; a minute tracing of the Anti- 
christ, giving the details concerning him, would in many respects have 


been unwise both as to the proper attitude of believers and of unbelievers ; 


an omission of mention, on the other hand, with a general description in- 
cluding the outlines, would have been in opposition to the uniform merci- 
ful kindness of God, who will not leave any without suitable admonition 
and caution. Like all subjects which are given by the Spirit in a fragmen- 
tary form, here something and there something, it can only be properly 
comprehended by observing all the passages relating to it; by confining 
ourselves (being prophetic, and hence beyond man’s power to portray) 
closely to the Scriptures ; and by drawing conclusions supported by the 
general analogy of the entire Scriptures. ‘lhe great variety of opinions, to 


wiiich we shall now refer, does not weaken the scriptural representation of — 


the subject—that remains unchangeably the same, although a multitude 
more were added—it only indicates the weakness of man in often violating 
the first principles of interpretation, or in giving place to mere passion 
designing to make others odious, or in substituting mere human deductions 
for the prophetic announcements. The history of this doctrine and the 
use made of it in the past may lead us to renewed caution in its applica- 
tion to the future. 

1. The quite early Fathers express themselves in general terms very 
different from that exaggerated, fabulous addition appended afterward. 
Thus, e.g. Justin Martyr (Dial. Trypho., etc.) clearly teaches, as Bh. Kay 
(Kay’s Justin, p. 103) remarks, ‘‘ the appearance of the man of sin as im- 
mediately connected with the Second Coming of Christ in glory, and His 
appearance as the prelude of severe persecutions against Christians.” 
Irenseus (Ag. Heresies, B. 5) does the same, declaring his overthrow by 
Christ’s Advent, and then ‘‘ the restoring to Abraham the promise of the 
inheritance,’”’ etc. In tracing the Antichrist, the early Fathers in some 
way identified him with the Roman Empire, which (as by Ireneus, outs 
was made the fourth beast of Daniel, and that his ascendency and downfall 
would be ‘‘ in the six thousandth year.’’ Barnabas before these speaks of 


the time, viz., at the close of the six thousand years, ‘‘ when His Son shall 
come and abolish the Wicked One.’’ Polycarp refers to the Antichrist in 


John’s language ; Hermas speaks of it as a subject well understood, in 
that he predicts and warns the Church to ‘‘ endure the great trial at 


hand,’’ which Coming tribulation was universally attributed to the Anti- — 
christ. Tertullian (Res. and Apol.) also locates the Antichrist before the 


open revelation of Christ, and specifically identifies the appearance of him 


4 a 


fia 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 671 


with the division of the Roman Empire into ten Kingdoms. This notion 
of an existing Antichrist at the personal Coming of Jesus, was not only 
common to Chiliasts, but to their opposers of the Origenistic school, and 
even to those who, in antagonism to Paul, developed extreme Jewish no- 
tions respecting the law. An example of the last can be seen in the author 
of the Hpistle of Peter to James prefixed to the Clementines (comp. Nean- 
der, Ch. His., vol. 1 p. 361).* All parties, too, were agreed in referring 
Antichrist’s appearance to the closing of the sixth Muilliad, so e.g. Origen, 
Clemens, Alexandrinus, Lactantius, Cyprian, etc. One feature deserves 
attention ; one reason why so much interest was taken in the subject by 
the early Fathers was the supposed imminency of His appearing arising 
from the adoption of the Sep. chronology.? ‘The resistance already mani- 
fested to the truth, the persecution of believers, ctc., led them all, in the 
language of Jenatius, to say: “‘ The last times are come upon us ;’’ or, in 
that of Clement of Rome, ‘‘ Ye see how in a little while the fruit of the 
trees come to maturity. Of a truth, yet a little while, and His will shall 
be accomplished suddenly, the Holy Scripture itself bearing witness that 
He shall come quickly and not tarry,’’ etc. Persecution was invariably 
associated with the time preceding the Advent, and its presence and ex- 
perience, more or less during the first centuries, always induced a belief 
either in the speedy Coming of the Antichrist, or else, if the persecution 
was very severe, of His being already here in the persecuting power. 
Hippolytus wrote a tract concerning the Antichrist, and in portions of an 
exposition of Daniel, preserved in Syriac in the British Museum (see Trans. 
in Journal of Sac. Lit. N. S., vol. 8, p. 3848-354), he makes the Anti- 
christ to be destroyed by the personal Coming of Jesus followed by the es- 
tablishment of ‘‘ the Kingdom of heaven.’’ Victorinus wrote in the same 
style ; also Sulpitius Severus, Cyril, Nepos, Coracion, Melito, Commodian, 
Methodius, Apollinarius, in brief, all the Fathers so far as their writings 
have come to us or their sentiments are expressed by others. All located 
the Antichrist and his destruction according to the plain prophecies. * 

2. The writers down to the Reformation continue to locate the Anti- 
christ in the future and preceding the Advent. Thus, e.g. Jerome (Bh. 
Newton’s Diss., p. 412, Bickersteth’s Guide, p. 112), and in view of the 
supposed nearness of the close of the sixth Mulliad, the Antichrist’s ap- 
proach was also conjectured to be nigh. So also Augustine, Chrysostom, 
and others identified the coming of the Antichrist with the breaking up 
of the Roman Empire, and insisted that without his preceding, Christ 
would not come, laying special stress on 2 Thess. 2. The views thus held 
by recognized leaders in the Church were incorporated in the writings of a 
long line of successors. Even the rise and progress of the Papacy, the 
triumph of the Church in its temporal emoluments, etc., which now pro- 
duced a change of doctrinal position, and led men to predict increased 
prosperity, could not eradicate delief in a coming Antichrist. One of the 
most noted instances is that of Gregory the Great who (Bower’s His, 
Popes, vol. 1, p. 409), resisting the effort of the Patriarch of Constantinople 
to obtain the title of ‘‘ The Universal Bishop,”’ declares : ‘‘ But this is the 
time which Christ Himself foretold ; the earth is now laid waste and de- 
stroyed with the plague and the sword ; all things that have been pre- 
dicted are now accomplished ; the king of pride (that is), Antichrist, is at 
hand, and, what I dread to say, an army of priests is ready to receive him ; 
for they who were chosen to point out to others the way of humility and 


672 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 161. 


meckness, are themselves now become the slaves of pride and ambition.’’ 
It so happened that when this title, denominated antichristian by Gregory, 
was adopted by the Papacy, and that the ambition, vices, etc., of the Popes 
were exhibited, men here and there arose who either called the popes Anti- 
christ or forerunners of him. Indeed, as time developed still more and 
more the characteristics of the Papacy, this application to the Popes of 
the name became so notorious that, as Bh. Newton remarks, the Pope in ~ 
the Lateran Council (Lat. Conc. sub. Julio et Leone Sess. 11., specified in — 
Jewell’s Defence) “‘ gave strait commandment to all preachers, that no ~ 
man should presume once to speak of the coming of Antichrist.” When 
Mahomet arose in the East, and his religion extended far and wide, the 
name of Antichrist was applied to him or to Mohammedanism, and this in 
proportion to the widening conquests. In addition to this, as will appear 
in a following observation, parties hostile to each other accused one 
another of being forerunners of the Antichrist. The feeling increased in ~ 
intensity as the periods approached (assigned by the opponents of Chili- 
asm) of the end of the world, as in the tenth, fifteenth and sixteenth cen- . 
turies. 

3. The reformers continued to advocate either the presence of the Anti- 
christ (as in the Papacy and Mohammedanism, or in both) or the coming 
of the same, of which forerunners already existed. Thus e.g. Brooks 
(Elem. Proph. Interp., p. 266) instances Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingle, 
Calvin, Knox, Latimer, and Hooper; Bickersteth (Pract. Guide, p. 119) 
gives additional Cranmer, Ridley, Bradford, Jewell, Frith, Tyndale, Fulke 
among the English, and Ad’colampadius, Martyr, and Musculus among the 
foreign, reformers. This list might be greatly swelled from the co-laborers 
and contemporaries ; for, as Brooks justly observes, ‘‘ it is notorious that 
in the times of the Reformation the opinion that the Pope was Antichrist 
became general and decided among Protestants.’? The student well 
knows that this very belief materially aided in advancing the Reformation.°® 
Indeed, so generally did this opinion advance that we find it finally even — 
inserted as an article of faith in the Confession of the French Reformed 
Church at the Synod of Gass in 1603,’ and in the Smalcald Articles 
(Rechenberg’s Hd. 2, 4, p. 314, and Ap. p. 347.) 

4, Since the Reformation, down to the present, men have variously advo- 
cated the doctrine of the Antichrist, chiefly applying it to the Papacy, or 
to Mohammedanism, or to both combined, or to some existing system or 
party, or to a power or person still future. Those who make an applica- 
tion to the Papacy are numerous, as e.g. Bickersteth gives Gualter, Frith, 
Daneus, Fox, More, Whitaker, Downame, Abbott, Beard, Maresius, 
Keach, Halifax, Hurd, Mede, Warburton, Bh. Newton, Cressener, Cun- © 
ningham, Bonar, Llliott, Fleming, Gregory, Gault, Jones, Keith—a list — 
which could be swelled by many hundreds of Protestant writers, such as — 
Ramsey, Hoe, Broughton, Bengel, Daubuz, Lowman, including various 
commentators, as Vitringa, Clarke, etc., down to recent ones, as Barnes, 
etc. Some ofthese, ase.g. Doddridge, Fox (Book of Martyrs, p. 675, ete.), 
Bickersteth (Hl. Proph. Interp., p. 164), Homes (Res. Revealed, p. 
148, etc.), held to several Antichrists existing in Popery and Mohammed- — 
anism—thus reviving the view of Sulpitius Severus (2 Dial. de Vita 
Mart., ch. 14) who in the fifth century spoke of two Antichrists who should | 
arise, one in the Hast and the other in the West. ‘l'o these last many 
others can be added, as Keith, Habershon, Brooks, Rabett, Owen, 


oe 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 673 


Wigand, Smith, King, Whitaker, Frere, who, like Scott (Com.), pronounce 
these two ‘** twin sisters,’’ or who, like Prideaux (Faber, On Proph., vol. 1, 
p- 256), seeing two such powers arise about the same time, said: ‘‘' That 
Antichrist had at tnat time set both his feet on Christendom together, the 
one, in the Hast, the other in the West.’’? Others, as e.g. Graserus (His. 
of Antichrist), Whitby (Scheme of Prophecy), etc., confine the Antichrist 
to Mahomet or the Turks. While others reject the application to the 
Papacy, deeming it either as fulfilled in some other power, as Pagan or Im- 
perial Rome, or Mohammedanism, or Infidelity, or in one still future to 
arise, as e.g. Zanchius, Grotius (comp. Maresius’s, Marcus’s and Limborch’s 
answers to same), Hammond, Bossuet, Sheldon, Thorndyke, Maitland, 
Burgh, Horsley, Fraser, etc. A class of these, among which Faber is a 
noted example, while discarding the title as applicable to the Pope or the 
Romish Church (holding that *‘ the Antichrist’’ is still future), yet inter- 
pret passages, usually attributed to the Antichrist, as e.g. the little horn of 
Daniel 7%, delineative of the Papacy. Davies,in ‘*‘ Two Antichrists,’’ 
definitely makes two, viz., Infidelity and Romanism. Some have a num- 
ber of Antichrists, as e.g. Riland in the very title of his work, ‘‘ Antichrist: 
Papal, Protestant, and Infidel,’’ or Rutherford, in his ‘‘ Spiritual Anti- 
christ: Opening the Secrets of Familism, Antinomianism, etc.’’ Others 
again evince a low spirit in making out an opposing system of religious 
belief to be such, as e.g. Bh. Willams in his ‘* Antichrist Revealed,’ main- 
taining him to be the Presbyterians ; or Tazewell, ‘‘ On the Antichrist,”’ 
making him to be the Quakers ; or Bramhall’s (Smith’s Dic., Art. Antichrist) 
suggestions respecting the General Assembly of the kirk of Scotland. 
Comparatively few have condescended to such perverted interpretation, and 
these, too, have exerted no influence upon others. Govet and others, both 
Protestant and Romish, have placed the Antichrist in the future, and this 
opinion has been latterly gaining ground among prophetical interpreters. 
Dollinger, while making (Lange, 2 Thess.) a kind of typical Antichrist of 
Nero, also places him, with other “Roman Catholic writers, in the future. 
Calvin (Lange, 2 Thess., p. 134) included Mahomet and Sectarianism ; 
Kern, Bauer, and Hilgenfeld returned to the Neroic theory ; Schnecken- 
burger has a mere personification of evil ; and Jowett has it fulfilled in the 
Jewish heretics ; and Nevin makes it to consist in ‘‘ the spirit of sect and 
schism.’’® 

5. It may be interesting, as a matter of history, to notice to whom, in 
addition to those mentioned, the name has been applied. Calmet states 
(Dic., Art. Antichrist) that Nebuchadnezzar, Cambyses, Herod, Judas 
Iscariot, Simon Magus were regarded as types, and that most of the 
Roman Emperors, under whom persecution arose, were either considered 
Antichrists or forerunners of him, or types of him, such ase.g Claudius, 
Nero, Domitian, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, Decius, Gallus, Diocletian, 
and Julian. Antiochus Epiphanes was supposed by some to be the Anti- 
christ (an opinion revived by Jirasmus, etc.), but Jerome, Theodoret, 
Cyprian, and others only made him a type. It is remarkable that Grotius, 
in his efforts to neutralize the Protestant interpretation relating to the 
Papacy, made Caligula and then Simon Magus the Antichrist ; Dr. Ham- 
mond applied the same to Simon Magus and the Gnostics ; Le Clerc, to 
the rebellious Jews under the leader Simon, the son of Gioras ; Whitby, to 
the Jews who rejected Christ ; Schétgen, to the Pharisees and Rabbies ; 
Krause, to the Zealots ; Harduin, to the High Priest Ananias. Faber (On 


674. THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop: 161. 


Proph., p. 87) informs us that the character was attributed to Cerinthus 
and the Manicheans, and also to the impostor Barchochehas. Balaam was 
not overlooked. Wetstein gives the title to Titus; Herder, to Simon 
Gorionides ; Gensler, to Julian the Apostate ; Bossuet, to Diocletian ; 
Feuardentius, etc., to Luther ;? Rupertus, to Genseric ; 'Talitskoi, to Peter 
the Great ; the Starovers (or Old Believers, Harper’s Mag., p. 421, 1872), 
to Tae the Reformer ; Davis, to Czar Nicolas ; Nelson, to Oliver Crom- 
well ; Christadelphians, ‘to Russia ; Faber, to the French Emperorship ; 
Baxter, to Louis Napoleon III. (the same being formerly bestowed upon 
his uncle, Napoleon [., because in Hebrew Corsica numbered 666, ete.) ; 
some, to Louis XIV.; the priests of Spain and Italy, to Gustavus Adol- 
phus ; others, to the infidelity connected with the French Revolution or to 
infidelity in general ; Hilary, to a semi-infidel power; Pelt, to a mere 
tendency, and F. D. Maurice, to Vitellius.*° 

6. But it must be noticed that the application of the name by many in 
these ways—being designed simply to designate that which was regarded 
antagonistic to Christ or at variance with His doctrine—did not supersede 
the notion that the Antichr ist, by way of pre-eminence, in its culminated 
form was still future.’? The generality of writers thought that he was re- 
vealed (as e.g. inthe Papacy, Mohammedanism, Infidelity, etc.), but would 
finally culminate in one great personal head in whom all the marks, in- 
choately fulfilled, would be found. Some of the writers favoring such a 
view are Bickersteth (Pract. Guide), Brooks (£1. of Proph, Interp.), ete, 
Others thought that the term Antichrist could not be legitimately given to 
any but to ‘the one who was still regarded as future, ase.g. Faber (On 
Proph., p. 87, etc.) Lange, (Com., 2 Thess. 2; Doct. 2), ete. These both 
agreed that the distinctive great Antichrist was yet to be revealed. The 
former, while insisting upon a present fulfilment, looked for a more com- 
prehensive and striking one; the latter, while considering the Papacy, ete., 
unchristian, and applying Scriptures usually interpreted as belonging to the 
Antichrist, also awaited a futur e revelation which should pr operly ‘be thus 
designated. 12 Neither party went to the length, as a few have done, to 
make these conflicting and hostile elements, however presented, a “necessity 
in the history of nations, but both, whatever truth they may have possessed, 
and whatever services they may have rendered, spoke of them as opposed 
to the true doctrine and interests of the Church, and originating in the 
freedom and depravity of man. Amid the diversity, there is a > general 
agreement (aside from rationalistic interpretations) respecting the mean- 
ing of the word Antichrist, the time of his appearing, viz., preceding, 
and at the open manifestation of Jesus Christ and His saints—the forma- 
tion of a confederation by him— and a terrible persecution to the Church, 
etc. It is a subject properly belonging to eschatology, and forms an im- 
portant link in the history of ‘* the last things,’’ which cannot possibly be 
omitted’® without serious injury to a proper understanding of the historical 
connection. Within the Jast twenty years many writers ‘(those of ability), 
after a careful examination of the Scriptures, have come to the conclusion — 
that, whatever inchoate fulfilment has been exhibited in the past or the © 
present, the Antichrist, who is to exist at the Coming of the Lord Jesus 
with His saints, has not 4 yet arisen as predicted. Among the more recent 
writers who, relying upon a comparison of scriptural announcements, hold — 
to this opinion, are the following: Lange(Com., 2 Thess. 2.), who an-_ 
nounces (Doc. 4, p. 186) ‘‘a resumption of the Patristic interpretation” 


Prop. 161. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 675 


and a ‘‘ leaving open the prospect of a still impending realization of the 
prophetic picture”’ (and instances Bengel, Roos, Olshausen, Hofman after 
deducting his Antiochus redivivus, Luthardt, Baumgarten, Von Gerlach, 
Heubner, Dollinger in a second future fulfilment, Thiersh, Von Ocettingen, 
Alford, Ellicott, Lilhe). M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop. of Bib. Lit., 
Art. ** Antichrist,’’ fully indorses this view, and specifies various writers of 
eminence who hold to it, as Ben Ezra, Burgh, 8S. Maitland, Newman, C. 


Maitland, and others. Hundreds of recent writers in Europe and America 
could be added. 


1'The student knows that the early Apocryphal writings of the Church contain many 
allusions to an Antichristian power preceding the coming and reign of Christ, such as 
the Second Book of Esdras, The Book of Enoch, The Sibylline Oracles, etc., this evidenc- 
ing the extent of the doctrine entertained. 

? Thus, in view of the excess of the Sep. over the Hebrew, we have (Shimeall’s Reply to 
Shedd) ** of the chronological calculus of the writers of the early Church, as founded on 
the Septuagint version, Clement of Alexandria terminated the 6000 years about A.D. 374 : 
Cyprian earlier, in A.D. 243; Eustathius, Lactantius, Hilarion, Jerome, etc., in A.D. 
500 ; Sulpitius Severus, in A.D. 581 ; and Augustine, in A.D. 650.’’ This gives us the 
key to much that was written in expectancy. 

3 About this time also arose what may be called the Nero-myth theory : viz., it was 


suggested by Victorinus and others that Nero was the Antichrist, some even believing 


that he would return and fulfil the Scriptures. It would be scarcely necessary to notice 
such a view, if it had not been revived in modern times by Reuss, Bleek, Kern, Bauer, 
etc., and incorporated by Prof. Stuart in his Com. on Apoc. Millenarians may be charged 
with credulity, but nothing in the annals of Apocalyptic interpretation can eaceed this 
rationalizing effort in absurdity. More than this, it detracts from the inspiration of 
the book, makes the writer incorporate an idle superstition, and invalidates its truthful- 
ness. ‘The theory is misleading and utterly untenable, because the events predicted to 
occur under the Antichrist (as e.g. confederation of nations, war with Christ, overthrow, 
etc.), and which were to follow his destruction, never took place. The derivation of the 
name from the Hebrew, upon which so much stress is laid, is unsatisfactory, seeing that, 
for consistency’s sake, it ought to be in the same language in which the account is 
given. ‘The theory,.too,is hard pressed to make out its three and a half years, being 
largely dependent upon conjecture in thus making the angel give John an indorsement 
of a fable. This interpretation cannot be sustained by criticism, much less by faith in 
Divine inspiration, in a comparison of Scripture, as e.g. Danieland Apoc. Theonly real 


point of coincidence is in the persecuting and lawless spirit manifested, which gives pro- 


priety to Neander’s remark (Ch. His., vol. 1, p. 94): ‘‘ There was something intrinsically 
significant in the fact that the individual by whom the renunciation of everything on 
the side of the divine and moral was most completely carried out, that the impersonation 
of creaturely will revolting against all higher order, must give the first impulse to the 
persecution of Christianity.”” We may well imagine the Antichrist to exhibit Neroic 
traits. 

4 As the language, etc., of Gregory is highly interesting in view of the fact that a success- 
or of his not long after assumed the very title which was regarded as Antichristian, we 
append the following. Writing directly to John the Patriarch, Gregory loads the title 
of ‘‘ Universal Patriarch or Bishop’’ with all the reproach that suggested itself, calling 
it ‘* vain, ambitious, profane, impious, execrable, anti-Christian, blasphemous, infernal, 
diabolical,’’ reaching the climax by applying to him Isaiah’s description of Lucifer : 
“Whom you do imitate in assuming that arrogant title? Whom but him, who, swelled 
with pride, exalted himself above so many legions of angels, his equals, that he might be’ 
subject to none, and all might be subject to him?’ (Bower’s His. Popes.) Again, Bh. 
Newton (Diss., p. 413) quotes from Gregory these remarks : ‘‘ I speak it confidently that 
whosoever calleth himself universal bishop, or desireth so to be called, in the pride of 
his heart, he doth forerun Antichrist.’’ ‘‘ By this pride of his” (i.e. John’s) ‘‘ what thing 
else is signified but that the time of Antichrist is now at hand.”’ 

5 The student will require some references. Bh. Jewell, in his Defence of the Apology, 
refers to St. Bernard making out Petrus Luna an Antichrist ‘‘ gotten into Peter’s 
chair.” He also quotes Arnulphus as saying : “The very Pope himself, notwithstand- 
ing any, his canonical election, if he want charity, is Antichrist sitting in the temple of 
God ;” and in the council of Rheims (10th cent.) Arnulphus declared : ‘* What think 


676 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


you, reverend Fathers, of this man” (i.e. the Pope) ‘‘ sitting on high in his throne, glitter- 
ing in purple and cloth of gold? What think you him to be? Verily, if he be void of 
charity, and be blown up, and advanced only with knowledge, then he is Antichrist 
sitting in the temple of God and showing out himself as if he were God.” ‘‘ The bishops 
in the Council of Rheinsberg say thus: ‘Pope Hildebrand, under a color of holiness, 
hath laid the foundation for Antichrist.’ Dante, by express words, called Rome ‘the 
Whore of Babylon.’ Petrarch likewise saith: ‘Rome is the Whore of Babylon, the 
Mother of Idolatry and Fornication, the Sanctuary of Heresy, and the School of Error,’ ’’ 
** Joachimus Abbas said : ‘ Antichrist is already born in Rome, and shall advance himself 
higher in the Apostolic See.’” (Bickersteth, Pract. Guide, p. 173, gives also the above 
with others. ) Bh. Newton (Diss., p. 414, etc.) calls attention to the extent to which this 

was carried, by showing that “ the King ‘of France, with the advice of his council, inter- 
dicted that any should ‘call the Pope Antichrist ; ;’ that Grotius (afterward Montagu, Fell, 
etc.) composed his treatise concerning Antichrist as a kind of apology or defence of the 
Pope who was thus denominated ; and that ‘‘ James the First had written a treatise to 
prove the Pope Antichrist.” So Queen Elizabeth also (Smith’s Dic., art. Antichrist), 
Bower (His. Popes, vol. 1, p. 224) says: ‘‘ Bellarmine employs a whole book to prove 
that the Pope is not the Antichrist’ (thus showing how extended the opinion was to 
make such a work necessary), and then adds in a foot-note : “ Our king, James I., used 
jocularly to say, that he would not swear that the Pope was the Antichrist ; but if there 
were a hue and cry after the Antichrist, the Pope would certainly be taken up.’’ Bower 
also informs us (vol. 2, p. 405) that ‘‘ Eberhard, Archbishop of Saltzburg, in a speech 
which he made at the Diet at Ratisbon, in the time of Frederick II., calls ‘ Hildebrand 
the founder of the Empire of Antichrist, and the first that, under color of religion, began 
the wicked war, which has been not less wickedly carried on by his successors.’ ”’ The 
fact is that, as evinced by some of these examples, Imperialism, in its contest with the 
Papacy, resorted to the use of such terms of reproach. Brooks’s (Elem. Proph. Interp., 
p. 265) instances among others taken from Clarke’s Proph. Records, Gouthier, Bh. of 
Cologne, Tergand, Archb, of Treves, the Clergy of Liege (according to Aventin, lib. 4), 
Frederick ‘Oe Frederick Il., Darsilius of Padua as having designated the Bishop of 
Rome as the Antichrist. Genebrand and Baronius are pointed out as designating the 
tenth century as containing popes ‘‘more like apostates than apostles.’’ Vitringa 
(Apoc., p. 74) says that in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries many pious persons 
held that the Pope was Antichrist and Rome Babylon. Girdlestone (Analyt. Comment. on 
fev.) declares ‘‘ that some spiritual men of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the 
most eminent of whom were Peter John Olive and Hubert de Casali, denounced the 
gross body of the Church of Rome as the Babylon of the Apocalypse.’’ ‘This reminds 
one of the threat stamped on certain coins (Mosheim’s Church His., p. 9, vol. 3, text and 
note) by Louis XII., that he would overthrow the Romish power designated by the name 
Babylon. Itis well known that the Waldenses gave this title to the Pope and Romish 
Church. Thus e.g. in a treatise concerning the Antichrist, etc., dated A.D. 1120, sup- 
posed to be written by Peter de Bruys (see long extract Hncy. Rel. Knowl., art. Anti- 
christ), it is asserted that ‘‘ Antichrist is not any particular person,” but ‘‘ a system of 
falsehood, adorning itself with a show cf beauty and piety,’ etc. ‘‘ The system of 
iniquity’? with its ministers and supporters—‘‘ this is the congregation which, taken 
together, comprises what is called Antichrist, or Babylon,’’ etc., and is applied to the 
Romish Church at length. In this interesting treatise the Antichrist is made both an 
Imitator and Oppressor, as e.g. “He is termed Antichrist, because, being disguised 
under the names of Christ and His Church and faithful members, he opposes the salva- 
tion which Christ wrought out,” etc. The Encyclop. Relig. Knowledge, in the art. Antichrist, 
remarks, after alluding to Gregory and Arnulphus: “In the eleventh century all the 
characteristics of Antichrist seemed to be so united in the person of Pope Hildebrand, 
who took the name of Gregory VIL. that Johannes Aventinus, a Romish historian, speaks 
of it as a subject in which the generality of fair, candid, and ingenuous writers agreed, 
that at that time was the reign of Antichrist.’’ The Paulikians, Cathari, Sect of the 
Holy Ghost, Apostolic Brethren, Fraticelli, Flagellants, Wycliffites, Hussites, early 
Moravian Brethren are specified by writers as expressing the opinion that either the 
Pope or the Romish Church is the Antichrist. In Dr. Déllinger’s Essay on the Proph. 
Spirit and the Prophecies of the Christian era are found a number of references. He 
instances such men as Wm. St. Amour, Ryckel, and Jacobus de Paradiso (p. 332, Dodd 
& Mead’s edition, edited by Prof. Smith), who had no hope in the reformation ‘of the 
Church, but looked for the ¢ appearance of the Antichrist. In the Cosmopolitical Prophecies 
(sec. Vi. \ he gives a view of the expectations excited from the Carlovingian times down to 


the sixteenth century, the first part, especially “in the ninth and tenth centuries and © 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 677 


until the middle of the eleventh, the coming of Antichrist and the approaching end of 
the world are the well-nigh exclusive objects of men’s presentiments ;” and this was 
continued, more or less, down into the 14th and 15th centuries (p. 331) in the class of 
men stated above—St. Amour, etc. Dollinger includes the periods of the time of the 
Black Death, the Papal Schism, etc., when prophecies pertaining to ‘‘ judgments 
impending over Rome, Popes, and Clergy” gradually increased in intensity (against 
predictions relating to renovation, reformation, renewed prosperity, etc.), until, he 
remarks, “‘so that at last, this prophetic expectation became the consciousness, the 
saving anchor of faith, of all earnest religious spirits.’’ These judgments were believed, 
even by those who looked for reformation, to come, owing to the antichristian con- 
duct of popes and clergy. The more moderate, as Jordanus of Osnabriick (p. 356), 
writes : “Since the Roman Empire has shared in the great honor of constituting 
the bulwark of the Christian world against the Antichrist, who could not appear 
until that Empire was overthrown, all these forerunners, who assist in this over- 
throw, are but preparing the way for the Antichrist ; and the popes, chief enemies 
of the Empire, are doing this most of all,” etc. The same view was expressed by others, 
especially by a party of the Joachimites (the Minorites or Spirituals, p. 379), who, we 
are told, were inclined ‘‘ to unsparing and severe condemnation of the popes and their 
avaricious and luxurious courts.” Of the latter, Arnold of Villanova (p. 39) was, prob- 
ably, one of the boldest, for ‘‘ it seemed to him that the whole Western Church was 
already completely ruined, beyond redemption, by the excess of its sins; and so he 
thought that everything must rush quickly to perdition ; and therefore (about 1297) he 
put the coming of the last great Antichrist in the year 1316 and the end of the world 
in 1335.” Dr. Dédllinger,in his Sec. on ‘‘'The Joachimites,”’ distinctly announces (p. 
367) *‘ that Joachim had discovered more than one Antichrist in the history of the 
Church and in the prophetic intimations of the Bible ;”’ and ‘ that, in consequence of 
the deep corruption of the Church and the poisonous influence of the Roman Curia, he 
naturally came to the idea that all these evils met at. Rome, concentrated in a single 
person and a single pope.” He tells us (p. 380) how Wm. St. Amour, writing against 
Joachim’s predicting after a terrible scourging, etc., a still brilliant future (Joachim’s 
period of the Holy Ghost) for the Church, ‘‘ discovered that all the signs of a coming 
Antichrist were already present,’’ and that, instead of a better future, ‘‘the Church has 
now to look for nothing else but the advent of the great adversary ;” and finally how, 
through the persecution of the Spirituals (p. 386), ‘‘ sprung up the fearful thought that 
the Papal Chair might have been for a time the seat of the Antichrist, or yet should be.’’ 
Jacopone of Todi pronounced Boniface VIII. the ‘‘ new Lucifer ;’’ so (p. 387) ‘* the view 
of the Joachimites, that the chair of St. Peter should be for a considerable period the 
spoil of an adversary of Christ, who was to bear all the marks foretold of the Antichrist, 
came to appear more probable in the eyes of many persons,’’ instancing the great Italian 
Dante (Parad., 27, 22-24), the classical Petrarch (p. 395—referring to the sonnet beginning 
with “Covetous Babylon of wrath divine,’’ ete.—SonnetC., V.I., Macgregor’s Tranls. of 
Petrarch). Comp. Smith’s Bib. Dic., art. Antichrist, where, in addition Almaric, Teles- 
phorus, Ubertinus, John of Paris, Grostete, and Eberhard are mentioned as attaching 
the name Antichrist to the Pope; Buckle’s Mis. vol. 2, p. 257, etc. ; Hurd’s Twelve 
Sermons ; Bengel’s Gnomon; Calmet, Herzog, etc. 

6 Luther’s views are so well known, being expressed in the various popular Lives, 
D’Aubigne’s His. of the Ref., etc., that they need not be repeated. Melanchthon, more 
conciliatory, was inclined to make the Turk the Antichrist. The opinions of the others 
are also expressed in numerous works, and are very decided in their utterance. Thus, 
e.g. Cranmer, when about to be committed to the flames (Brooks, El. Prop. Interp., p. 266), 
said : ‘‘ As for the Pope, I refuse him as Christ’s enemy and Antichrist, with all his false 
doctrine ;” and Ridley, just before his martyrdom, declared : ‘‘ The See of Rome is the 
seat of Satan, and the Bishop of the same, that maintaineth the abominations thereof, 
is Antichrist himself indeed. And for the same cause this See at this day is the same 
Which St. John called in his Revelation Babylon,’’ etc. Others might be mentioned, as 
e.g. Bucer, who, in the disputation at Berne, Jan. 7th, 1528 (D’Aubigne’s His. Ref., vol. 
4, p. 290), said : “‘ When Antichrist gained the upper hand throughout the world-—in the 
East by Mahommet, in the West by the Pope—he was able to keep the people in the unity 
of error.” Alfierio (1542), in his addressto Luther, in the name of the churches of Venice, 
Vicenza and Trieso (Michelet’s Life of Luther, Ap., p. 405), calls the Pope ‘‘ Antichrist.” 
John Huss, in De Anatomia Antichristi, preceded these in calling the Pope Antichristian. 
So also Beza, Bullinger, Calixtus, Hutchinson, Sandys, Philpot, Rogers, and others, have 
been instanced. Bickersteth, Guide, p. 165, says : ‘‘ The Reformer, Bernard Gilpin, thus 
argued, assuming Babylon and Antichrist to be the same: ‘If the Pope be Antichrist, I 


678 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


——————— 


see not only probable, but even necessary, causes to depart from the Popish Church. 
But if the Pope be not Antichrist, I see no sufficient ground for such a departure. It is 
not lawful to make a separation from the Church. But we are not ohly enjoined to 
come out of the Church of the Antichrist, but we see the fearful anger of the living God 
and hear His dreadful threats thundered out against those who shall remain in Babylon, 
that synagogue of Antichrist, Rev. 17 and 18.’’’ ‘The personal references of Luther and 
others are frequently severe, as illustrated by (Mosheim, Ch. His., vol. 2, p. 381, note 34) : 
Wickliffe calling the Pope ‘‘ Antichrist, the proud worldly priest of Rome, and the most ‘ 
cursed of clippers and purse-cutters.’’ This was keenly felt by the Pope and his 
adherents, as shown e.g. (Mosheim, vol. 3, p. 296, note) when Christopher Rojas proposed ' 
the return of the Protestants, one of the terms annexed was ‘‘ the acquittal of the Prot- 
estants from the charge of heresy, provided they would cease to call the Pope Anti- ‘ 
christ.’’ One fact alone evidences the interest in this direction ; the first book men- A 
tioned by Panzer, in his Cat. of the Older German Lit., is The Book of Antichrist, or ‘‘ Little 
Book Concerning Antichrist’s Life and Rule through God’s Providence, how he doth ; 
pervert the world with his false Doctrine and Counsel of the Devil,” reprinted at Erfurt, 
1516 (Cyclop. Bib. Lit.). 

7 In view of the fact that the Pope, Clement VIII., keenly felt the act of the Synod, 
that the King of France, Henry IV., resented it as implying that he was “ an imp of 
Antichrist,’’ that the French Government being offended caused tho printing of ittobe 
suppressed, we give the article taken from Bickersteth’s Guide (foot-note, p. 174, and 
quoted from Quick’s Synodicon, vol. 1, p. 226) as follows: ‘‘ Whereas the Bishop of 
Rome has erected for himself a temporal monarchy in the Christian world, and usurping | 
a sovereign authority and lordship over all churches and pastors, exalts himself to that 
degree of insolence, as to be called God, and will be adored, arrogating to himself all 
power in heaven and earth ; and to dispose of all ecclesiastical matters, to define articles 
of faith, to authorize and expound at his pleasure the Sacred Scriptures, and to buy and 
sell the ‘souls of men—to dispense with vows, oaths, and covenants, and to institute new 
ordinances of religious worship. And in the civil state he tramples under foot all lawful 
authority of magistrates, setting up and putting down kings, disposing of kings and of 
their kingdoms at his pleasure. We therefore believe and maintain that he is truly and 
properly the Antichrist, the Son of Perdition, predicted by the holy prophets—that great 
whore clothed with scarlet, sitting upon seven mountains in that great city which had 
dominion over the kings of the earth ; and we hope and wait that the Lord, according to 
His promise, and.as He hath already begun, will confound him by the spirit of His 
mouth and destroy him by the brightness of His coming.” This Synod stated that “‘ this 
was the common faith and confession of all our churches, and of this present synod, and 
one of the principal causes of our separation from the Church of Rome ; and that this 
confession we find contained in and extracted out of the Holy Scriptures, and had been 
sealed with the blood of a world of martyrs,’’ ete. Comp. the Bohemian and Belgian 
confessions (Bickersteth, p. 174). 

8 The spirit of animosity often suggested the title, as e.g. when Pope Gregory called 
Frederick the Sec. ‘‘the apocalyptic beast,’? and Frederick retorted by designating the 
Pope ‘‘ the great dragon.” Even Bh. Andrews, not so far removed from the Romish 
type, in his Response to Cardinal Bellarmine maintains, in opposition to Papal suprem- 
acy, in one of his thesis, “ that it may be probably gathered from the 2d ch. of the 2d 
Epis. to the Thess. that the Roman Pontiff is Antichrist.’’ So Melchior Cano, a Spanish 
Ecclesiastic and Dominican, in his opposition to the Jesuits, taught that they were the 
forerunners and emissaries of the Antichrist, who was about to appear. A thousand 
similar instances could be quoted, where passion, or prejudice, or party spirit suggested 
and enforced the application, there being not the slightest attempt to investigate the 
subject calmly or dispassionately, Such perversions and simply denunciatory interpre- — 
tations, probably, led Sir Thom. Browne (Relig. Med., 8. 46) to profess that the proph- 
ecies pertaining to Antichrist, as explained in his day, were unsatisfactory, making too — 
much of a present existing fulfilment, so that he concluded ‘‘ that Antichrist is the — 
philosopher’s stone in divinity.” 

® Others thought that when Luther married Catherine von Bora ‘‘ that Antichrist must 
be the fruit of such a union, for it was predicted by some that he would be the offspring 
of a monk and anun.’’ This caused Erasmus to utter that biting sarcasm : ‘‘ If that 
prophecy be true, what thousands of Antichrists the world has before now seen.” 7 

10 To these might be added, Ellis’s Pseudo-Christus, against W. Franklin and Mary Glad- — 
burg ; the title as given to several fanatics who claimed special Divine honors or position 
(as e.g. Munzer, Burchardt, etc.) ; Arnold’s Antichrist of Priesthood ; Biack’s application © 


¥ 


PRop. 161. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 679 


(in Messias and Anti-Messias) to Satan ; ‘‘the Priestcraft Antichrist,” and “‘ the Anti- 
christ of Utilitarian Unbelief,” and ‘‘ the Spirit of Chivalry’ (Stanley’s Life of Arnold, 
vol. 2, p. 88, and vol. 1, p. 255) ; Claude Harms’s ‘‘ Pope of our Times, our Antichrist, in 
respect to faith is reason, in respect to action is conscience.” The various expressed 
views result mainly (1) from a disregard to the distinctive marks of Antichrist ; (2) from 
a mistaking and confounding Scripture which describes some other hostile power with 
that portion descriptive of the Antichrist ; (3) from mere prejudice or bigotry attempting 
to make others odious ; (4) from the efforts to avoid the application of the title to them- 
Selves (ase.g. the Papacy, nationalized establishment advocates, etc., seeking various 
theories as an offset) ; (6) from the entertained idea that as there are “many Anti- 
christs,” the name might, without detracting from the notion of a still future Antichrist, 
be applied to individuals, systems, etc., exhibiting more or less of an Antichristian 
spirit ; (6) from the fact that such Antichrists are by many merely regarded as types or 
forerunners of an Antichrist still to arise in the future. This diversity—the resultant of 
human infirmity and common to all doctrine—should teach us the more caution in 
cleaving to Scripture, seeing that, as Mede long ago observed, “‘ the wit of man is able, 
where it is persuaded, to find shifts and answers until the day of doom, as appears in so 
differing opinions held among Christians, with so much endless pertinacity on both 
sides.”’ 

11 Some, as e.g. Bengel, Roos, Brandt; etc., think that the Papacy itself will yet assume 
a more infidel, Antichristian position, developing into the Antichrist. This is a favorite 
theory with a few of the Sec. Adventists. 

2 Comp. Bengel’s Gnomon, vol. 5, p. 351, who gives a number of writers who insisted, 
that whatever Antichrist had arisen, one of pre-eminent wickedness was still future. He 
quotes Bernard, F’. Lambert, the Divines of Heidelberg, 1561, and of Zurich, Jo. Brent, 
Crocius, Heding, Weisman, Horchius, Michaelis, and Vitringa. 

13 Yet itis a sad fact that many theological works, professing to give a systematic and 
detailed scriptural account of Eschatology, utterly ignore the whole subject, just as if the 
Bible did not give it any prominency. Such efforts in eschatology are seriously defec- 
tive and misleading. 


Obs. 4. In addition, the student will observe that the ancients and the 
moderns (more recent writers) coincide in making this Antichrist a per- 
sonal one, and not merely a system of doctrine, etc. The force of the arti- 
cle attached (comp. e.g. Lange’s Com., 2 Thess. 2 : 3-5) leads to the idea of 
“fa single personality,’ over against the collective (Zwingle, etc.) notion 
which (as applied to the Papacy, etc.) has also itsupholders. Brooks (#71. 
of Proph. Interp., p. 257) asserts: ‘* The Fathers were wnanimous in their 
opinion that the Antichrist was to be a person ; nor has the Greek Church, 
which in most respects has maintained the sentiments of the Fathers on 
this point, ever made a question of it.’? Many Roman Catholic writers 
also described him as a person, and this individuality or personality is 
found in the writings of men in the various churches, some limiting it to 
a single individual, others extending it to a succession of persons.’ The 
more ancient view of confining it toa single person, the leader of anti- 
Christian forces, 7s revived and ably defended by recent writers, as the 
most consistent with the titles given to him, the acts to be performed b 
him, etc. Our leading commentators (Lange, Delitzsch, Alford, etc.) 
favor it, while prominent prophetical writers (as Tregelles, Bonar, Purdon, 
Dean Trench, Bell, Birks, Chester, etc.) fully indorse it, as numerous 
works indicate. Even such writers as Pressense (Marly Years of Christian- 
ity, p. 488, foot-note), are inclined to the view that Antichrist will be *‘a 
personality.’’ Van Oosterzee (Theol. of the N. T., sec. 42) makes him 
‘the highest and more individual concentration,”’ and (Ch. Dog., vol. 2, 
S. 145) declares: ‘‘ Here it can only be said, that for him who interprets 
the Scripture without preconceived views and allows his thoughts to be 
brought into captivity to the obedience of the Word, there can be no doubt 


680 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


that a personal Antichrist will yet arise before the close of the world’s his- 
tory.’’ He repudiates ‘an ideal personality’? (advocated by Hengsten- 
berg), admits that other Antichrists have appeared, but only as the fore- 
runners of a “‘ central personality’’ still future. (He makes the character- 
istics pride and deception, which work by false signs, Matt. 24 : 24; 2 
Thess. 2:9, adding: ‘‘ Truly it is entirely natural, but at the same time 
the terrible irony of a higher Nemesis, that disbelief in the true miracle 
should yet once more be punished with a superstitious belief in false 
signs.’’) The position and prevailing view is that of Cyprian, who, pro- 
nounced all heretics—all that was opposed to Christ—‘‘ the precursors of 
that one and special Antichrist which is to come at the last end of the 
world’’ (quoted by Bickersteth, p. 165). Comparatively few entertain the 
idea of a Satanic incarnation, or a resurrected Judas (reviving in another 
form and person the old resurrected Nero—comp. Stuart, Apoc., vol. 2, p. 
441—theory, Sulp. Severus saying: ‘* At the close of the age, he is to be 
sent again that he may exercise the mystery of iniquity’’); the large 
majority inclining to his being a mere man, wonderfully endowed, and in 
whom wickedness shall reach its consummation (some incorporating in a 
measure Theodoret’s or Chrysostom’s idea that he shall be under the 
special energy of the devil and exhibit therefore Satanic might). Smith’s 
Bib. Dic., Art. Antichrist, 5, commenting on the titles given to Anti-— 
christ (2 Thess. 2), remarks: ‘‘ If words have meaning, these words desig- 
nate an individual,’’ and Olshausen (Com., 2 Thess. 2) declares: ‘‘ The 
individuality of Antichrist can manifestly be excluded from this passage 
only by forcing its meaning.’”? 


1'The Waldenses, more early (as in ‘‘ The Noble Lesson,’’ Smith’s Bib. Dic., art. Anti- 
christ), held also to a personal, individual Antichrist, which later was changed as we 
already quoted. Those limiting it to a single person were divided respecting the nature 
of him. The quite early Fathers, judging from their expressions, expected him to bea 
man in whom wickedness would culminate ; at least the additions afterward made are 
not found in their writings. Hippolytus made Antichrist (Baring Gould’s Curious Myths) 
the devil, occupying a phantom body, or (Brooks, Hl. Proph. Interp.) the devil assuming 
‘**the appearance of flesh, but not be really so, and boast himself to be born of a virgin.”’ 
Others, as Hilary, made him ‘‘ true man and true devil,’’ a diabolical parody of the Incar- 
nation. John Damascene says he will be ‘‘a devilish man,”’ i.e. a man inspired by the 
devil. Lactantius, Sulpitius, Bede, made him the son of the devil and his mothera 
harlot. MHilary’s opinion that the devil would become incarnate, as the Word was in the 
Man Jesus, was continued by others on the ground that ‘‘ the mystery of godliness’’ was 
exhibited in its highest form in the Incarnation and so also would ‘‘ the mystery of 
iniquity.’’ Jerome says (Bickersteth’s Guide, p. 161), “ Let us not suppose him, accord- 
ing to the opinion of some, either to be a devil or a demon, but one of the human race 
in whom all Satan shall dwell bodily,’’ etc. (on 2 Thess. 2, and comp. Ambrose Com. 
on Apoc.). Brooks (p. 258, comp. Lange, 2 Thess. 2 : 1-12 ; Doc. 3 : 1) remarks : ‘‘ Chry- 
sostom, Theophylact, and Theddoret thought he would be a real man, but the agent of 
Satan. Most, however, of those who thought he would appear as man (whether he would 
be Satan incarnate or not) concluded likewise that he would appear as a Jew, or actually 
be ‘fa Jew, of the tribe of Dan’’ (the tribe of Dan being omitted in Rev. 7, suggesting 
the Jewish origin). So extensively was this entertained that Bickersteth (p. 159) 
remarks: ‘‘ the Early Fathers of the Church held generally, that there would be a per- 
sonal Antichrist—born of a Jew to be developed shortly before the Sec. Coming of Christ, 
and to be destroyed in Judea.” * During the Middle Ages many believed (Hagenbach’s 


* After writing the preceding, I found that Meyrick (Smith’s Bib. Dic., art. Antich.), 
says: ‘* The authors of the Sibylline Oracles A.D. 150, and of the Apost. Constitutions, 
Celsus (see Origen c. Celsus 6. 6), Ephrem Syrus A.D. 370, Theodoret A.D. 430, and a few 
other writers seem to have regarded the Antichrist as the devil himself rather than as his 
minister, or an emanation from him, But they may, perhaps, have meant no more than 


PRopP. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 681 


Mis. of Doc., vol. 1, p. 120, Déllinger’s Prophecies of the Middle Ages) ‘‘ that Antichrist 
would either be brought forth of a virgin, or be the offspring of a bishop and a nun.” 
Vincens Ferrer (Déllinger, p. 329) ‘* was fully aware, when he wrote to Pope Boniface 
XII., that the Antichrist was already nine years old; it had been contemporaneously 
revealed to many, demons had been forced by exorcism to declare it ;’ a revival of an old 
opinion as e.g. Martin, Bh, of Tours, about A.D. 380 gave out that the Antichrist was 
then living, though still a boy. Such views led to those curious works noticed by 
Baring-Gould, Ddllinger, etc., in which the birth, life, and death of the Antichrist is 
represented in rude woodcuts. The Minorite Peter de Boreth (Chron. of Alberich, 
Dillinger, p. 344), had the Antichrist already born and ten years old (1237), Bowers (His. 
Popes, vol. 2, p. 439), relates how Paschal IL. came to Florence, whose bishop maintained 
that the Antichrist was already born and the end of the world at hand, and held a coun- 
cil respecting it, resulting in his enjoining the bishop’s silence. In the Annals of Roger 
De Hoveden, vol. 2, p. 177, etc. (Bohn’s Lib.), Joachim’s (Abbot of Curazzo) views are 
given, and among other things it is asserted that the Antichrist which was to come, 
‘* He is already born in the city of Rome and will be elevated to the Apostolic See’ 
etc. And, to indicate the views afloat, in the interview betwcen Joachim and Richard 
the King of England, the latter in reply to the former said : “ I thought that Antichrist 
was to be born in Antioch or at Babylon of the descendants of Dan, and was to reign in 
the temple of the Lord at Jerusalem,” etc. Joachim virtually had a number of Anti- 
christs, making ‘‘the seven kings” to be ‘“‘ Herod, Nero, Constantius, Mohamet, 
Melsurmet, Saladin, and the Antichrist.’’ Dédllinger (p. 877) observes : ‘‘ With reference 
to the Antichrist, who is meantime to appear, there are contradictory statements in the 
writings of Joachim, which are, however, capable of reconciliation since he adopted the 
opinion that there are to be many Antichrists, partiy in succession, partly contempora- 
neously, and that nearer the end of the world’s history so much the more would they be 
multiplied.’’ (Comp. art. Antich., Smith’s Bib. Dic., 6:1.) Sir John Maundeville 
(Travels, ch. 10) says: ‘‘ In Chorazin shall Antichrist be born, as some men say ; and 
others say he shall be born in Babylon; for the prophet saith, out of Babylon shall 
come a serpent that shall devour all the world.’’ ‘* This Antichrist shall be nourished in 
Bethsaida, and he shall reign in Capernaum, Luke 10 : 13, 15,’’ a revival of Adso’s 
opinion repeated by Th. Aquinas, etc. Turner (His. of the Anglo-Saxons, vol. 2, p. 477, 
etc.), gives a summary of Acuins’s views respecting the Antichrist : ‘‘ He is to be Lorn of 
a most flagitious robber and harlot, with the aid of the devil, at Babylon. He will pervade 
Paiestine ; convert kings, princes, and people; and send his missionaries all over the 
world. He will work many miracles ; bring fire from heaven ; make trees vegetate in a 
moment; calm and agitate the sea at his will; transform various objects ; change the 
course of rivers ; command the winds ; and apparently raise the dead. He will bitterly 
persecute Christianity. He will discover hidden treasures and lavish them among his 
followers ; a dreadful period of tribulation will follow. He will not come until the 
Roman Empire has entirely ceased, and that cannot be while the kings of the French 
continue. One of the French kings is, at last, to obtain the whole Roman Empire and 
will be the greatest and last of all kings. He is to go to Jerusalem and lay down his 
crown and sceptre on Mt. Olivet. Then Antichrist is to appear, and Gog and Magog to 
emerge. Against them this French king of the Romans is to march ; to conquer all 
nations, destroy all idols, and restore Christianity. The Jews are to be restored,’’ etc. 
Malvenda (Kees’ Cyclop. art. Antichrist), made, in his work, Antichrist born of a Jew of 
. the tribe of Dan, basing his deductions upon Gen. 49 ; Jer. 8:16; Rev. 7. It is a little 
singular how some of those old notions are revived in recent writers. Thus e.g. Chapell 
(Proph. Times, Sep., 1873, p. 131), says: ‘‘ if the mystery of godliness ’ was God manifest 
in the flesh, perhaps, ‘the mystery of iniquity’ will be Satan manifest in the flesh.” 
‘“*Tt is a serious question whether the Incarnation will not have a Satanic parallel ; 
whether Antichrist will not be a demon-man just as Christ was a God-man ; whether he 
will not be miraculously begotten by Satan as Christ was by the Holy Ghost. So also 
Nathaniel, vol. 14, p. 6, Dec., 1870. (The student will see how this opens up the old 
story of angels mingling with the women in the Antediluvian world and producing giants, 
the old monkish legends of demon copulation, the claims of the heroes of antiquity toa 
supernatural origin, etc. Comp. Sir Th. Browne’s Works.) Litch (A Complete Harmony 


to express the identity of his character and of his power with that of Satan.” The same 
authority says, that a man energized by Satan, or having Satanic powers, was believed in 
by Justin, Irenzus, Tertullian, Origen, Hippolytus, Cyprian, Victorinus, Lactantius, 
Cyril of Jerusalem, Jerome, Chrysostom, Hilary of Poitiers, Augustine, and Ambrose. 


682 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


of Dan, and the Apoc.) returns to the same, when he makes him a being from hell confed- 
erated with Satan, and introducing an infernal supernaturalism, etc. Reinke (Proph. 
Times, vol. 11, p. 92), also says : ‘‘ The Antichrist will be a resurrection man, he will as- 
cend out of the abyss ; apparently Satan’s masterpiece ”’—and he makes the false prophet 
confederated with him likewise a resurrected person, viz., Judas Iscariot because of 
John 17:12; Ps. 109, ete. So also Olshausen (Com. 2 Thess.) makes him a Satanic 
incarnation. And to this may be added Hofman’s idea (Die Heil. Schift N. Test., p. 
330, vol. 1), that Antiochus Epiphanes is to be revived again, resurrected, and become 
this Antichrist ; thus applying the Neronic resurrection theory to Antiochus. So Brown, — 
the Evangelist, and others, revive this Neronic idea, viz., that Satan brings up some 
deceased one, like Antiochus, Nero, or Napoleon, and incarnates himself with him. Dr. 
Braune (Lange’s Com., 1 John, p. 75), declares that the Antichrist, just as “‘ the many 
antichrists,”’ is a man, and opposes the Satanic theory as follows: ‘‘ Hence Antichrist is 
not Satan himself (Pseudo-Hippolytos, Theodoret) : the idea of Satan becoming man is 
inexecutable, since the Eternal Word only, the Image of the Father, in which man has been 
created, can become man.’’ The reason, apparently, for such a view of the Antichrist 
springs from the remarkable performances that are attributed to him in prophecy, which 
it is supposed that a mere man cannot possibly produce, and hence the supernatural 
even in birth or rise is attached to him, thus overlooking the prophecies which bring 
him in as one who regularly succeeds to this position in an allotted line of descent. If 
he be, as Cyril of Jerusalem pronounced him, ‘‘some great man raised up by the devil,” — 
or if evil culminates in him, yet this is done in reference to—not in opposition—his 
regular descent in the manner predicted. ‘ 

A few considerations alone will indicate to the student the impossibility of receiving 
such notions of Satan being the Antichrist, or Satan’s direct offspring, or a resurrected 
person in whom Satan is incarnate, or one (Lincoln’s Lects. on Rev., p. 161), possessed 
by a lost spirit or demon, the chief one, most mighty, called Destroyer. 1. All proph- 
ecy, as already shown, indicates that he comes in regular succession out of the revived 
Roman Empire ; like the other heads or powers he has an earthly origin, which isa 
fact taken for granted in logical connection. 2. The doom of Antichrist is one sepa- 
rate and distinct from Satan, as e.g. a comparison of Rev. 19:20 and Rey. 20:10 
plainly shows. 3. This would be giving Satan a resurrecting power which alone is 
bestowed upon Jesus. 4. Such a caricature of Incarnation is utterly unnecessary, 
seeing that all the prophecies can be fulfilled in a person, specially under the influence — 
of Satan. 5. Other reasons are given in the text and notes which confirm the per- — 
sonality and humanity of this Antichrist (to which the reader is referred), so that a — 
constant reference is made to the ‘‘man” (as e.g. Ps. 52:1; Isa. 51:12; Ps. 118 :6, 
etc.). 6. Other antichrists (many) are spoken of, and alluded to, as human, and analogy ~ 
requires the same of this one. 

* The student will be interested in a few expressions of opinion thus presented. — 
Riggenbach (Lange’s Com. 2 Thess. 2), says: ‘* The Man of Sin, again with ‘the article, — 
the one already known to them; plainly a personality.’’ ‘‘ The complete opposite 
to Christ is not a spiritual tendency, but a person. Nor is he called merely ‘qa 
martolés, but the Man of Sin, in contrast with Jesus, the Maun of obedience.” Dr. 
Fausset, the commentator (Christ. Herald, Ap. 10th, 1879), expresses his faith in 
‘fan individual Antichrist,” and refers to John 5 : 48, where the contrast to 
the personal Christ in the words ‘‘ another” and ‘‘ him’ ‘‘ distinctly foretells an indi- 
vidual deceiver.” (Comp. his Com. on 2 Thess. 2, and the Apoc., where the same views 
are given.) Irenzus, who conversed with the disciples of John, said: ‘‘ By Antichrist 
we understand a single individual whom Satan shall use pre-eminently as his instrument, — 
just in the same way as he did the serpent when tempting our first parents to rebel 
against God,’’—calling him ‘‘ an impious and unjust person.” Alford in Proleg. to 
Thess., p. 50, says: “ We still look for the Man of Sin, in the fulness of the prophetic 
sense, to appear, and that immediately before the Coming of the Lord. We look for 
him as the final and central embodiment of that anomia—lawlessness—that resistance to 
God and God’s law, which has been for these many centuries fermenting under the crust 
of human society, and of which we have already witnessed so many partial and tentative 
eruptions. Whether he is to be expected personally, as one individual embodiment of 
evil, we would not dogmatically pronounce ; still we would not forget that both ancient 
and historical interpretation points this way. Almost all great movements for good or 
for evil, have been gathered to a head by one central personal agency. Nor is there any 
reason to suppose that this will be otherwise in the coming ages.” This conclusion 
reminds one of the language employed in Lange’s Com. on 2 Thess. p. 187, where after 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 683 


specifying this personal Antichrist ‘‘as the Godless, self-deifying ruler of worldly 
empire,’ it is added : “In every worldly empire a tendency to apotheosis had been | 
observable (Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander) ; of this current Paul notes the shameless con- 
summation. Why should it be ‘ more conceivable’ that in this last empire the personal 
climax should be omitted, which was wanting in none of its predecessors? In all history 
there exists a reciprocity of action between the actual movement of the time and the 
achievements of an energetic personality. For every historical individual there is a thou- 
sandfold work of preparation, and he makes his appearance not otherwise than as a child 
of his age. And again the drift of the time only reaches an irresistible supremacy, 
when one man conceives the spirit of the time at its height, with bold grasp brings to 
bear what is fermenting half obscurely in a thousand minds, and so stamps the age with 
his seal. He can doit, if he has the courage—after all, it will be the effrontery—to 
express and carry out what is in a thousand hearts.” “A Member of the Boston Bay’’ in 
his Briefs on Prophetic Themes, justly argues that the same reasoning which makes out the 
personality (from prophecy) of the Christ also confirms the personality of the Antichrist, 
both being spoken of in the same way. Comp. a tabular statement given by Rev. 
Parsons in “The Present Age and Development of Antichrist’? (Pre-Mill. Essays, 
published by Revell, p. 217), where it is shown that the language applicable to the 
personality of Jesus is likewise applied to the Antichrist. Indeed when John refers to 
‘* many antichrists” in his day, ‘‘ even now,’’ he evidently does not limit the notion to 
systems or dynasties,but includes individuals as such. When Jesus says: ‘* Iam come 
in My Father’s name, and ye receive Me not ; if another shall come in his own name, him 
will ye receive,” we cannot divest ourselves of the idea of an individual thus coming, 
which is enforced by the express language relating to Antichrist, such as “ Man of Sin,’’ 
“son of perdition,” <‘the wicked one,’’ *‘ the prince that shall come,’’ etc. Hofman 
Prophecy and Fulfilment) holds to a future personal Antichrist; so Gregory (Harth’s 
Eventide) assumes the same, and that he shall aid in restoring the Jews, rebuilding the 
temple, prostituting the latter inthe basest manner ; so also Brookes (Maranatha, p. 485), 
says, he is ‘‘a person, appearing in the last davs, as the exponent and head of the 
universal infidelity and blasphemy that shall prevail.’’ Dr. Lange in art. “‘ Antichrist” 
in Herzog’s Hney., fully indorses the patristic idea of a future personal, individual Anti- 
christ. Dr. Tregelles (On Daniel, p. 191), shows clearly that a worse power than even the 
Papacy causes the rise of the personal Antichrist, that Rationalistic Infidelity is paving 
the way for his appearance, ete., and quotes Krummacher (Hvang. Christendom, Oct., 
1851, p. 334), of Berlin, discussing the forms of opposition to belief current in Protestant 
Germany, and concluding thus: ‘‘ Little more is necessary than that a mighty and 
talented personality should appear, who should set himself up as the centre of Infidelity, 
and represent it with energetic pathos and strong decision, and the reign of ‘the Man of 
Sin’ would be among ts in more than a state of embryo.’ Dr. Braune (Lange’s Com. 1 
John 2 : 18) insists that as the Antichrists of v. 19 were persons so the Antichrist must 
also be a person, and emphasizes the word “ man” in ‘‘ the Man ofSin.’’ Thus we might 
quote Seiss (Last Times), Burgh (Lects. Sec. Advent), Kelsall (antichrist), Darby (Lects. on 
the Hopes of the Church), Denny (Comp. to the Chart of Seventy Weeks), Maitland (Apos. 
School of Proph, Interp.), as well as highly interesting statements enforcing the same by 
Baxter, Purdon, Strange, Kelly, Molyneux, Wilson, Porter, Phillips, Frere, Taunton, 
and many others. 


Obs. 5. (1) Another feature in the discussion of the past, and fruitful 
of mistake (even in otherwise very able writers), is the indiscriminate ap- 
plication of all predictions relating to antichristian powers to this one Anti- 
christ. Thus e.g. Protestant writers have quoted, Rev. 17, and interpreted 
the woman as representative of the Papacy. This favorite application, 
confirmed, too, by a historical record and association the most powerful, 1s 
also made out to be the Antichrist over against the most positive proof in 
the chapter itself, that (however much the Papacy may aid in the coming 
of the Antichrist and be with him in the initial career) this woman, de- 
lineative of the Romish Church, is likewise destined (v. 16) to be punished 
and overthrown by ‘‘ the ten horns.and the beast’’ (so Bengel, Stuart, etc., 
read, comp. Tischendorf’s N. 7.), i.e. by the confederation under the Anti- 
christ as the context plainly shows. How, then, can the Papacy, here 


684 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


doomed to confiscation, fearful retribution, and utter destruction, be the 
Antichrist under whose leadership and inspiration this is performed? 
And yet this simple and indisputable distinction has been overlooked by 
many, thus burdening interpretation with palpable contradiction. (This 
also shows that the Papacy (as advocated by Faber, etc.) is not the false 
prophet, or the second beast, Rev. 13, associated with the last head of the 
first beast, because this prophet remains in flourishing existence down to 
the final catastrophe after the woman has met her fated end.) The whore 
is not the Antichrist, since she comes to her doom when this Antichrist is 
at the height of his power, and to blend together what the Scriptures so 
plainly separates only introduces confusion. Any interpretation (as e.¢. 
Bengel, Schmucker, ete.) which makes either the Beast out of the sea, or 
the Beast out of the earth (these existing down to the battle with Christ) 
to be the Papacy is most certainly erroneous, and involves the predictions 
into contradictory statements. For, however much this Beast out of the 
sea may have sustained the Papacy in the past (as taught in Rey. 17), it 
will, under the last head of this same Beast, be its deadly enemy, and it is 
only under this last head (still future, Prop. 160, etc., that this second 
Beast arises. The points of resemblance between these and the Papacy, 
however striking, are not sufficient to justify so wide a departure from 
the plain prediction. The Antichrist-and his associate perish under the 
power of the Mighty King and His armies ; the Papacy is previously over- 
thrown by this Antichrist and his confederation.’ ‘To the believer, such a 
distinction is all-sufficient, although other reasons (such as the tracing of 
the seven heads in the Roman line, etc.) are to be found corroborative of 
the same. 

(2) Again: Another and more plausible interpretation is that given 
to the little horn of Daniel, ch. 7%, which is at great length and force 
—owing to strong resemblances—applied to the Papacy, and hence charac- 
terized as descriptive of the Antichrist (excepting Faber, and some others, 
who make this application without designating the little horn or the Papacy 
as the Antichrist). This theory, which has had a multitude of expounders 
(and is ably presented by recent writers, as Barnes, Com. Dan., Guinness, 
Approaching End, etc.) 1s not at all abashed by the fulfilment of its year 
day, 1260 years, dated from A.D. 533 or 606, without the corresponding de- 
struction predicted to accompany the close of the times, times and a half. 
Its advocates still endeavor to find some explanation to satisfy, if not 
remove, the difficulty. But one, which clearly shows that this little horn — 
is not the Papacy they cannot possibly overcome, viz., that the fate of this 
little horn is brought about not by the interposition of earthly powers 
(as e.g. is the case with the woman in Rey. 17), but (as in the case of the 
last head of the beast and the false prophet) by direct agency of a supernat- 
ural nature. ‘The prediction of Dan. most certainly impresses the reader 
with the idea that this horn exists down ¢o the coming of the Ancient of 
Days, fo the personal Advent itself, thus corresponding—whatever inchoate 
fulfilment may be attributed to it—with the Antichrist destroyed at 
Christ’s Sec. Advent and not with the whore previouly destroyed by the 
Beast and ten horns. Faber’s position is also untenable, owing to this 
identity of end, a crucial test that very few of the past theories are able to 
sustain. For this reason we must regard Daniel’s little horn in: the 7th 
ch. as doth delineative of the Antichrist and still future. The only objec- 
tion of a serious nature (which would support Faber’s view) is, that 


Ror. 161, | THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 685 


Daniel speaks of the beast as ‘‘ slain and his body destroyed and given to 
the burning flame,’’ while in Rev. 19 the beast is taken and ‘“ cast alive’’ 
into the lake of fire ; but this is removed by considering that Daniel refers 
more to the Kingdom aspect (v. 23) of the beast and its utter destruction, 
and John more to the individual aspect, the leadership or last head, of the 
beast, for it is fully demonstrated (Prop. 160) that both beasts (in Dan. 
and John) are identical, and hence the language is not to be so pressed as 
to form an antagonism. If the objection, however, in the estimation of 
any, is a valid one, then the prophecy cannot be taken as descriptive of the 
Antichrist (seeing that their ends differ), but must be received very much 
in the manner specified by Faber, the Antichrist following after the little 
horn. The student in deciding this point will consider two things (1) 
that Daniel’s prophecy, pertaining largely to the Jewish nation, as under 
Gentile domination, would hardly omit mention of the last great Anti- 
christ in so connected an epitome ; (2) that it would be strange to omit 
what directly (as e.g. Zech. 14, etc.) pertains to the nation and the great 
tribulation ; and (38) link the overthrow of the Papacy (if denoted) with the 
immediate setting up of the Messianic Kingdom and reign of the saints, 
when virtually (according to this theory) ¢he greatest of all enemies and the 
most fearful of all persecutions still intervened between. Hence, regard- 
ing the prophecy in its connection with the last things, we are forced by 
preponderating testimony to regard it—whatever inchoate fulfilment for 
Wise purposes was allowed—as applicable ¢o the still future history of the 
Antichrist, the last head of the beast, who as the representative head will 
be cast into the lake of fire, while his Kingdom js utterly consumed, 1.e. 
the body, in his associated kings and followers will be slain, ete.’ 

(8) Again: Many writers when delineating the rise of the Antichrist, as 
given in Dan. 7 or Rev. 13 and 17, out of the seventh head unhesitatingly, and 
justly, too, have him developed out of the revived Roman power or Kingdom ; 
but when they come to Dan., ch. 8, we have at once a discord, for they 
tell us that (ase.g. Reineke, Proph. Times, vol. 11, Baxter’s. Napoleon, 
etc.) this Antichrist ‘* will take his rise out of one of the four Kingdoms 
into which the Greek Empire was divided at the time of Alexander’s 
death,’’ and without explanation how this can be so, make this httle horn 
the exact counterpart of the little horn in ch. 7. If they are correct in the 
interpretation of ch. 8, them it follows that the little horn of ch. 7 is not, 
and cannot be, identical with it, seeing that the one springs out of the 
Hastern Kingdom and out of the third beast from one of its four heads, 
and the other arises out of the fourth beast or Kingdom. Hence some 
writers, noticing the discrepancy, advocate that each horn represents a dis- 
tinct and separate hostile power. Thus, e.g. Faber, Barnes, and other 
writers, hold that the little horn of ch. 7 portrays the Papacy and the 
little horn of ch. 8 the Mohammedan power ; others, as e.g. a writer in 
The Israelite Indeed, Dec., 1861, hold that ch. 8 describes the still future 
Antichrist who is to arise out of one of the emerged or revived four divi- 
sions of Alexander’s Empire, and identifies it with that of ch. 7, without 
attempting ¢o reconcile, or even notice, the difficulty. If the prophecy of 
ch. 8 really delineates the rise of a power out of the Greek Empire, then 1b 
cannot be applied to the power rising out of the Roman Empire, and, 
instead of quoting it as applicable to the last Antichrist developed out of 
the fourth beast, we must fall back upon the theories, either that it refers 
exclusively to the Mohammedan power or to another one that is to arise in 


686 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 161. 


the East (co-operating with the Western) at the time of the end. If, on 
the other hand, we accept of the views of Sir. I. Newton, Bh. Newton, 
Cunningham, etc., viz., that the little horn of the goat denotes the Roman 
Empire as established in the Hast, then there is a point of contact (consid- 
ering the Roman Empire as a unity) by which the prophecy can be used 
as identical with that of ch. 7. But until this matter is cleared up, and 
the point of indentification fully stated and proven, it is wneritical, to say 
the least, to employ those prophecies so indiscriminately.‘ 

(4) Again: Writers have taken the year-day fulfilment of the Apoc. (as 
givene.g. by Elliott, Lord, etc.) as proven, and from it have deduced a chro- 
nological arrangement (as e.g. Bagster, etc.) respecting the literal-day fulfil- 
ment still future. All such deductions are hazardous, and from the nature of 
the case cannot prove reliable, since, allowing even a sort of inchoate fulfil- 
ment to the Apoc., on the principle advocated, a regular and consecutive 
fulfilment of the seals, trumpets, and vials has not yet—however coinci- 
dent and expressive the inchoate fulfilment hitherto may have been— 
been realized as predicted. Not only the variety of interpretations (some 
e.g. applying the first seals to the Church, others to the Roman power, 
etc.) forbid it, but a glance at the sixth seal (as e.g. compared with last 
vial, Rev. 16 : 1%,,18; Isa. 24:18, 20; Joel 3 : 15, ete.) and) ata 
simple fact that the vials which contain the seven last plagues in the out- 
pouring of God’s wrath are preceded by the res. and translation of the — 
144,000, and stand closely related to the slaughter (Rey. 14 : 10) and har- 
vest of the martyrs. Hence, whatever fulfilment may be accorded to por- 
tions of the Apoe., it is, in view of the unsettled and conflicting opinions — 
concerning such fulfilment, impolitic to take it as a basis for a future one.° 

(5) Again: The failure ¢o abide by the force and propriety of symbolica] — 
language, when once admitted to be symbolical, is prevailing to a great 
extent, and forms a most fruitful source of erroneous conclusions. Thus, 
e.g. we have writers who adopt the year-day fulfilment, and insist upon its 
accuracy, basing their opinion upon the alleged fact that the symbols have 
been thus verified ; but when they come to the lteral-day fulfilment the 
symbolical language 1s taken for literal, so that, by way of illustration, the 
locusts interpreted under the former as representative of human beings 
arising in their might, etc., are transformed by the latter method into 
real, literal locusts. Others make the language in one passage symbolical ~ 
and in another literal, according to fancy, so that not only fruitful diver- — 
sity but direct contradiction is involved. By the observance of a few rules 
legitimately drawn from, and abundantly exemplified in, the use of figura- 
tive language, an immense amount of irrelevant and misleading interpreta- 
tion would have been avoided.® 

1 This is the more important to notice, since various writers of Europe and this — 
country, not observing the overthrow of the woman before the final conflict, continue to 
make most inconsistently, the Papacy to be destroyed as the Antichrist at the Sec. — 
Advent. The least consideration —if it once be allowed that the woman of Rev. ch. 17 is 
a portraiture of the Papacy—ought to suffice to set aside such an interpretation. Some 
few suppose that because the act of this destruction of the whore being mentioned after 
the war with the Lamb (y. 14) it follows that event, but (1) verse 15 to 18 is an appended - 
explanation and addition to what preceded ; (2) the war with the Lamb results ina — 
complete overthrow of the beast and confederation, so that it cannot follow ; (3) the 
order laid down in Rev. 14, where the fall of Babylon precedes the martyrdom under 
Antichrist is conclusive. a 

* The student will observe that such considerations set aside a thousand fanciful inter- — 
pretations respecting these beasts, some linking the Papacy with the first beast asa 


a» 


am 


PROP Veh. | TIE THEOCRATIOC KINGDOM. 687 


head ; others with the second beast as thus represented ; and others even making them 
both declarative of the Popedom. The simple fact that they exist in full strength after 
the Papacy has been overthrown ; that the Papacy does not fall at the open Parousia of 
Jesus and His saints but previously ; that the beast and false prophet after the doom of 
Babylon wage war with Jesus and perish—this is amply sufficient to set aside all such 
Papal references. Any theory, however plausible, which contains such self contradic- 
tions is most certainly defective and misleading. The Papacy is graphically described 
in the harlot supported by the beast, drunken with the blood of saints. Her portraiture, 
divinely given, is faithfully delineated by history, but when we convert—under any plea 
—the woman into the beast itself, we pervert the prophetical portrayal, and introduce 
our own representations. The confusion, even among able prophetical writers, on this 
point, after the express guard thrown around it by the Spirit, is something to be regretted. 
That class of interpreters who make the first beast of Rev. 13, the Antichrist, in its last 
head, are to be commended as correct, when thus made aside or separate from the 
Papacy. ‘Those who make (like Napier, Bh. Newton, Cunninghame, Woodhouse, Haber- 
shon, etc.), the second beast, on the principle that it applies to the Papacy, the Anti- 
christ, are certainly in error. Those (like Brightman, Gill, Vitringa, Croly, Fysh, Elliott 
etc.), who make both beasts to be the Antichrist, do so in violation of express prophecy. 
Fausset (Com. Rev. 13) makes the second beast the Antichrist, being merely the first beast 
in another form, but this isforbidden by its separate mention, its aiding the other beast, 
its subordination to the first beast, its aiding the first beast in making war, and perish- 
ing in connection with it. 

We repeat, therefore, with emphasis, that finding, as we do, in a logical consecutive 
manner that the Antichrist is the last, culminated head of the First Beast of Rev. 13 and 
17, the same that is destroyed by the personal Second Advent of Jesus, and after he has 
desolated and burned the harlot, simple consistency demands us to consider—aside 
from other reasons—that the Antichrist of Dan. 7 and of 2 Thess. 2, which meets with 
the identical fate, is likewise the same, and cannot he applied to the great Apostasy or 
Papacy. We are forced to such a conclusion by the comparison already instituted. 
(Comp. Obs. 6.) Ebrard (The Rev, of John) takes the position that the Reformers were 
mistaken in confounding the Romish Babylon with the last and highest concentration of 
Antichristian power. This is so, and we need not be surprised that they, lacking the 
developments of history and the increased study and comparison given to the subject, 
should make this mistake, when it is yet evidenced in numerous prophetical writers of 
the present day, who cling to it with persistency and prejudice no-matter how plainly 
refuted. Hengstenberg refuses to identify the beast of Rev. with the Papacy, but then 
referring to Bengel he wrongfully concludes : ‘‘ He (Bengel) held with the Church of his 
day that the beast was the Papacy, Chiliasm is the necessary consequence of this view.’’ It 
is not a necessary consequence as seen in the Church before the Papacy, Reformers, 
Pre-Millenarians, and opponents. 

3 Attention is directed to Meyrick’s interesting art. “ Antichrist’? in Smith’s Bib. Dic., 
who deciding from 2 Thess. 2 and John’s Epistles that the Antichrist is an individual 
person, concludes that as Daniel’s little horn indicates a polity (including also the Apoc. 
Beast as identical with this horn) it cannot be the Antichrist. This conclusion based 
upon such a premise is inconclusive for the simple reason that this Antichrist arises out 
of a polity, is at the head of a polity, and therefore the Spirit in tracing the rise of him 
may well predict of him both in his personal relationship and in that of his polity. 
Indeed if he is, as predicted, the last head of the beast, the only possible manner to 
identify him for purposes of warning, etc., is to represent him in both these aspects, As 
a single individual it is impossible for him to accomplish what is predicted ; it isasa 
person directing a powerful government, etc., that he performs such great things. 
Besides the continued existence of the little horn and of the last head of the Apoc, Beast 
down to the Open Advent, etc., clearly and unmistakably unites the same with the 
Antichrist of 2 Thess. 2. Consequently Riggenbach (Lange’s Com. 2 Thess. 2 : 3-5) 
interprets, ‘‘ more correctly we shall recognize in this little horn of the 7th chapter 
(Daniel) the yet future adversary,’’ and makes it to agree with 2 Thess. 2. Tregelles 
(On Dan., p. 40, etc., and so others), correctly makes the little horn (and ten horns) the 
still future Antichrist, and in a sentence presents so cogent a reason for not applying it 
to the Papacy, that we see not how its conclusion can be avoided : “ The Papacy existed 
before the breaking up of even the Western Empire, instead of being a horn springing up 
after the other ten.” Baldwin (Armageddon, p. 191), making this horn the Papacy, is 
utterly opposed by the facts of history, and the relation that the Empire and Papacy 
mutually sustained. 


688 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


4 Another method by which the prophecy may be used as applicable to the future 
personal Antichrist is the old one given by Jerome, advocated by various authors, and 
indorsed in the art. ‘‘ Antichrist” in Smith’s bib. Dic. That is, the prophecy is descrip- 
tive of Antiochus Epiphanes, who is a type—thus to be understood—of the coming Anti- 
christ. See the quotation from Jerome and argument. The objection to this is, that Anti- 
ochus does not in all particulars meet the conditions of the prophecy, (as we have shown 
elsewhere, for that theory links Dan. 8 and 11 together) and that his overthrow is not 
followed by the grand results predicted. Itis certain that the Antichrist, pre-eminent, 
will not arise out of the revived subdivided (four) Macedonian Empire (as e.g. held by 
Baxter Christian Herald, Jan. 23, 1879), because this is positively forbidden by Dan. 2 and 
7, and Rev. 13 and 17, which all point to the Roman Empire in its divided form as the 
source from whence he springs. A writer in Waymarks in the Wilderness, vol. 3, p. 226, 
and vol. 3, p. 403, tries to reconcile Dan. 7 and 8 by making the Antichrist to arise in the 
Eastern and not in the Western portion of the Roman Empire, and to do this says that 
the four subdivisions of Dan. 8 will be revived in the future formation of the ten horns 
of Dan. 7. This, however, is opposed to the continuity of the prophecies, and the identity 
of the beasts. It is, however, ingenious and worthy of consideration. As the last head 
of the beast (the Antichrist) and his coadjutor (the second beast) are both future, we can 
only conjecture the method of reconciliation. If the idea of incorporation into the 
Roman Empire is not correct, then perhaps we may hazard another, viz., that Dan. 7 
refers to the head, the leader, and Dan. 8 to the second beast, the false prophet. But we 
decidedly favor the interpretation suggested by able writers, viz., that these four 
kingdoms being absorbed by the Roman Empire they must be regarded, after such 
absorption, in the ight of Roman unity. Fausset and Tregelles (so others) think that 
the Antichrist is the last head of the Roman power, but spring out of (as to location) the 
territory formerly occupied by one of those Grecian kingdoms, four of the ten horns 
virtually reviving those kingdoms. We, however, call the attention of the critical proph- 
etical student to this fact, viz., that several of these (4) Grecian kingdoms fell to the 
Romans professedly as an inheritance and were merged into their polity ; hence Dan. 2 
and 7 preserve the Roman unity, while Dan. 8 intimates (not a violent overthrow but) a 
peaceful incorporative act, which virtually prolongs attained characteristics and, proba- 
bly, fixes the location of Antichrist’s rise. Antiochus must be dismissed because he was 
a king in the regular succession and the prediction relates to the time of the end and 
Jewish deliverance. Mohammedanism cannot be received because it did not continu- 
ously spring out of one of the Grecian kingdoms, and not out of the Roman Empire. 
The last head of the Roman Empire must (in union with Dan. 2 and 7, Rev. 13 and 17) 
be denoted, and this is historically made satisfactory in this way : Daniel having twice 
already presented the fourth kingdom, he now in reintroducing the Grecian, lays stress 
on Alexander’s dominions being divided into four great parts, and that—at least—one 
continues on with a prolonged life until this king of fierce countenance—the Antichrist 
arises —and this prolongation is efiected by being merged into the Roman by legacy and 
conquest, and yet retaining much of the Grecian characteristic. If we open the History of 
the Roman Power, we find that affer the grants of Perseus and Cleopatra, after the vast 
Eastern absorption, the customs, etc., of the Greeks were largely adopted; and the 
adaptation and affiliation were so prominent especially in the Eastern division, that— ~ 
without ignoring Roman unity—the line of Constantinopolitan Rulers were designated 
Greek Emperors. One thing is self-evident, that this fierce king rules at ‘‘ the time of 
the end,” at ‘‘ the end of the indignation,” when ‘‘ the transgressors are come to the 
full,’’ and that the time and actions ascribed to him, as well as the results, fully accord 
with that predicted of the last head of the Roman power. This prediction of Dan. 8, 
while not invalidating the legal unity of the Empire, may thus give us two hints : (1) the 
Grecian affinity that we have mentioned ; (2) that this last head may arise within the 
territorial limits of one of these former kingdoms. (Those who favor Russia as develop- 
ing the future Antichrist, can only do so, consistently with other predictions, by making 
it to obtain countries thus absorbed by the Roman Empire and in virtue of such rela- 
tionship professing —even perhaps in Constantinople, the capitol—to revive and perpet- 
uate the Roman Empire. Time must determine which is the best application.) One 
clause relating to this king is pregnant with meaning (Dan. 8 : 24 ‘‘ his power shall be 
mighty, but not by his own power’’) serving to locate the time of fulfilment and to iden- 
tify the king intended, for it points us at once to Rev. 13 :2; 16:13, 14; 17 : 12,17; 
and 19:19. Wemay rest assured that any interpretation that does not bring in ‘‘ the 
last days,” the Jewish restoration, the Messianic Kingdom as covenanted (the desire and 
hope of Daniel), the fulfilment of predictions relating to Mill. blessedness (the outcome 


| 


PRopP. 161. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 689 


of all, as e.g. shown in Dan. 7, etc.), is defective. So also any effort to make one of the 
Grecian kingdoms of Dan. 8 to be the fourth kingdom (i.e. not the Roman), seeing that 
that is specially guarded against in Dan. 7, where the four Grecian are in regular succes- 
sion to Alexander's, while the fourth (Roman) is another and separate kingdom gaining 


the supremacy over all others. Hence we must carefully distinguish the powers, and 


also allow a certain amalgamation, as presented in prophecy and recorded in history. 

>It is sufficient, against this theory, to point out that Rev. 15 expressly affirms the 
deliverance and exaltation of those who refused to worship the Antichrist and assume his 
mark before the vials are poured out, and that we are under the sixth, is premature and 
opposed to fact. The truth is, as our line of argument shows, that the Antichrist and his 
worship are still future, and that any supposed fulfilment of the vials is fanciful and 
misleading. This is becoming more and more clearly apprehended by prophetical 
writers. 

6’ Even those who apprehend the symbolic language and endeavor to draw correct con- 
clusions from its use, permit themselves too often to lay special stress on some trivial 
part of the symbolical representation as if it were the main idea, overlooking the fact 
that itis added in order to bring forth and enforce the leading idea. The writer is 
convinced, after long reflection, that in the Apocalypse we have pictures expressed in 
symbolical language (as e.g. Ist Seal representing Victory, 2d Seal Anarchy, 3d Seal Fam- 
ine, 4th Seal Bloodshed or War, 5th Seal Martyrdom, etc.}, and that the details are given 
to complete the idea that the pictures are to represent. 


Obs. 6. Another characteristic exhibited in the writings of the past, and 
which has had a decided influence in forming interpretations, is the ten- 
dency to make the apostasy and the man of sin, in 2 Thess. 2, the same, 
both being by many Protestants applied to the Papacy. Chrysostom, Theo- 
doret, Theophylact, Augustine, and others, took the falling away to be the 
Antichrist himself who caused it, but the record distinctly teaches (comp. 
Olshausen, Com. 2 Thess. 2 : 3, 4; Lange, Com. do., Doc. 3. (4) 1; 
Smith’s Die., Art. Antichrist, 3"), as Riggenbach expresses it, that ‘‘ the fall- 
ing away ts by no means identical with the Antichrist (as the Fathers un- 
derstood it), or even merely (as De Wette thinks) the working exclusively 
of Antichrist ; rather, the general rush of violent departure from the faith 
precedes that final disclosure of the Antichristian despot.’? The most 
careful writers thus discriminate defween the apostasy itself and the Anti- 
christ which is developed from or arises out of it; the former being 
regarded as introductory, the latter as its ripened fruit. This falling 
away, too, is applied to an apostatizing from Christianity, extending in its 
effects to all nations, and embracing a denial of fundamental truths, which 
culininates finally in this apostatizing from all truth (as centred in God and 
His Word) being represented to us in the acts and brief rule of a single 
person, who, by way of eminence, is styled ¢he Antichrist. Weare not 
told how long this apostatizing is to precede this person ; commencing 
already in the days of the apostles, it works on in its leavening process 
from century to century, until finally it breaks forth with a power and 
energy, controlled and directed by a single head, which distinguishes the 
last part of its history from all the preceding. The emphasis attached to 
this apostasy by the Spirit indicates that it shall, even before the rise of 
the personal Antichrist, be a great, distinguishing departure from the 
faith. Hence, while the reformers and many others did not properly dis- 
tinguish between the preliminaries and the Antichrist, yet they were 
abundantly justified in applying 2 Thess. 2 to the Papacy, im so far as they 
showed that it departed from the truth. They were also correct in making 
the same application to Mohammedanism and other opposing systems, 7 
so far as the apostatizing in a general sense may include a wilful departure 
from the knowledge of God and the substitution of other forms of belief 


690 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


in its place. The apostasy is not confined simply to one person, one party 
or sect, but may embrace many persons and various systems under the one 
general term. Starting in the Church or at the side of it, ¢¢ extends to all 
men who are commanded to repent and obey, and all who refuse to do SO, 
are, in virtue of moral and religious obligation attested to by the Word 
and self-consciousness, regarded as included i in this apostatizing class, as is 
readily seen by looking at the characters described as prominent in the last 
days. Strictly limited, it relates to those who profess Christ and depart 
from the truth in Him; ; comprehensively it includes those who, knowing 
of Christ, still reject Him, and doth these pave the way for the Antichrist, 
who, in his own person, concentrates and manifests hostility to the Christ 
and His truth. Therefore itis, that while regarding this personal Anti- 
christ as still future (the one to whom prophecy points as pre-eminently 
deserving the title, and being the one specially predicted), yet the reformers 
and others were undoubtedly correct in designating opposing systems, etc., 
as Antichristian, from the fact that *‘ many Antichrists” (distinguished 
from the last great one) shall exist. The conclusion at which we arrive 
is, that, whatever inchoate fulfilment is evident in the past and present, 
the apostasy (however antichristian) only paves the way for the still future 
rise of the prophetic Antichrist, and that just previous to his manifesta- 
tion this apostatizing from the truth will, in and outside of the Church, de 
more widely extended. 'Vhe spirit of Antichrist already in John’s days (so 
he declares) exhibiting itself in persons hostile to the truth, departing 
from the faith, teachers of infidelity and of doctrine leading to sin, has 
been largely manifested in succeeding ages, and to-day in its aggregate, 
both in the professed Church and world, assumes proportions that makes 
it exceedingly significant to the thoughtful student, who believes with 
Treneeus (Smith’s Bib. Dict., Art. “ Antichrist?’) that this apostasy will be 
summed up in @ personal, individual Antichrist.’ 


1 But Smith’s art. (6 (4),) endeavors to make a distinction not allowable by the general 
analogy of prophecy on this subject, viz., that the apostasy follows the withdrawal of 
that which hinders or restrains. This is not asserted in the prediction but that which 
hindereth only stands related to the revelation of the Man of Sin; for the apostatizing 
from the truth was already manifesting itself in John’s day. The writer (Meyrick’, 
however, correctly defines the apostasy asa falling away from the faith and not neces- 
sarily a rejection of all belief ; and that it is applicable to the professing Church in so 
far as it is corrupted. 

2 The reader will observe that the apostasy paves the way for, and is an exciting cause 
to, the uprising of the Man of Sin. We have only to point to the sad fact that depart- 
ures from the faith, and the resultant abuses, as exhibited in Roman, Greek, and Prot- 
estant churches, has been a fruitful source of infidelity, so that to-day thousands of 
unbelieving works chiefly base their rejection of Christianity upon the doctrines and 
truits of such apostatizing, as if they flowed legitimately from the religion taught by 
Jesus. Leading minds, lke Voltaire, Draper, Lecky, and others, draw their sharpest 
arrows from this source. It is important to notice this, as it meets an objection urged 
by those (Dr. Falconer, and others), who make the Papacy the Antichrist, viz., that the 
Antichrist must be found in the Church itself, and not outside of it. Now prophecy 
does not assert this, but the reverse. The apostasy is found in the Church and prepares 
the way, as 2 Thess. 2 teaches, for the Antichrist, but a glance at parallel predictions 
shows, as we have proven, that he arises (Dan. 7. Rev. 13 and 17) out of the Roman 
Empire; that (Rev. 14 and 17) he persecutes the apostasy (harlot) itself and the saints. 
The condition of the professing Church materially aids in that development which meets 
the conditions requisite for his uprising. The attention of the student is directed, by 
way of illustration, to only one historical fact to indicate the influence of the apostasy 
in this direction, viz., in its supporting the Roman Empire, bestowing upon it alleged 
divine sanctions, and pronouncing it—a beast, so called by the Spirit—a Holy Empire. 


PROP. 161. ] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 691 


After a careful consideration of all the Scriptures bearing on the subject, we are forced 
to distinguish the antecedent Apostasy from the Antichrist. Reason itself corroborates such 
a position, seeing that, in the nature of the case, there must be something preparatory 
before such a Man of Sin can possibly be developed. In addition, it prevents that 
Sweeping and most uncharitable condemnation—wholesale—of the Church of Rome, 
which is based upon the identity of the Apostasy and Man of Sin. The dreadful portrai- 
ture of the woman, Rev. 17, verified by history, is surely ample enough to cover the falsity 
and bloody spirit of the Papacy, without adding that which certainly belongs to another 
party before which the Popedom will be crushed. While the Papacy, and outlying 
heresies and hierarchical claims, painfully manifest the Apostasy, yet, as all candid 
writers must admit, here and there examples of piety and devotion, a vital union with 
Christ evidenced by the producing fruits of the Spirit, are presented even in the darkest 
periods of the Hierarchy. God always had His people, and they never were exclusively 
confined to this or that church. Error has indeed often been allied with piety, but the 
former has been mercifully overlooked because of faith in Jesus ; if it were not so, alas 
for our own hopes of salvation. We must not forget that the Pope professes only to be 
vicegerent and that his authority is acknowledged officially to be derived from God, 
while the Man of Sin denies this vicegerency and this derivation ; the Pope in all his 
decretals, bulls, etc., recognizes God and His supremacy while the Man of Sin refuses 
such recognition ; the Pope confesses to a subordination, while the Man of Sin makes 
himself supreme and claims homage to himself as God ; Popery (whatever may be the 
individual expressions of some adherents or the blasphemous assumptions of superiority, 
etc.), directs worship to be tendered to God and His Son, while the Man of Sin perse- 
cutes all who worship God and His Christ, exalling himself to a superiority over God, and 
insists, as an essential element of his arrogance, to receive as his legitimate due the 
homage demanded by God ; the Papacy makes much of the Father and the Son in its 
creed, forms of worship, etc., while the Antichrist denies the Father and the Son; 
Popery confesses that Jesus came in the flesh, while Antichrist denies this coming ; the 
Papacy acknowledges as a cardinal point that Jesus will come again, while Antichrist 
refuses to believe in such a Second Advent. In order to make the Papacy the Antichrist 
there must be, if prediction is true, not merely striking coincidences, but an exact fulfil- 
ment. Now this cannot historically be asserted respecting the Papacy without resorting 
to a species of exaggeration, which is both unfair to the precise words of prophecy and 
to the actual facts as presented by history. Logically and consistently we are forced to our 
present position. The claims, arrogance, independence, opposition, exceeding impiety, 
arrogation of divine attributes, express denial of the Father and Son, demands of worship 
from adherents, lawlessness, wonder-working power, of the Antichrist are, however, they 
may have been imitated in the past, such as exceed anything that history has recorded of 
human wickedness. It is the culmination of depravity, calling for signal divine ven- 
geance. It is the personification of audacity, malice, deceit, cunning, hate, ambition, 
impiety, evil, rebellion, infamy and self-deification. Fausset (Com., 2 Thess. 2), says : 
“Two objections exist to Romanism being regarded the Antichrist, though probably 
Romanism will leave its culmination in him: (1) So faris Romanism from opposing all 
that is called God, that adoration of gods and lords many (the virgin Mary and saints) is a 
leading feature in it ; (2) the Papacy has existed for more than twelve centuries, and yet 
Christ is not come, whereas the prophecy regards the final Antichrist as short-lived, and 
soon going into perdition through the Coming of Christ (Rev. 17: 8,11). Gregory the 
Great declared against the Patriarch of Constantinople, that whosoever should assume 
the title of ‘ Universal Bishop ’ would be ‘the Forerunner of Antichrist.’ The Papacy 
fulfilled this his undesigned prophecy. The Pope has been called by his followers ‘ Our 
Lord God the Pope ;’ and at his inauguration in St. Peter’s, seated in his chair upon 
the high altar, which is treated as his footstool, he as vividly foreshadowed him who 
‘ exalteth himself above all that is called God.’’’ In view of the Reformation applica- 
tion to the Papacy, and the indorsement of the same in some of the standards (Artic. 
Smale. II. 4, p. 314, and in the Appendix, p. 347, Rechenberg’s ed.) the matter was 
discussed (Luth. Obs., Aug. 20th, 1875), in the Iowa Synod, which declared: ‘‘ We 
cannot acknowledge the expression ‘the Pope is the Antichrist’ as an Article of Faith, 
and, therefore, we cannot make it a condition of Church fellowship, that the complete 
and final fulfilment of the prophecy 2 Thess. 2 be found in the Pope.’’ In addition, 
wheh we come to examine the historical (historico-prophetical) claims of the Papacy to 
be the Antichrist (as given by its advocates), they are not supported by the facts of 
history. Aside from the fact that the Papacy did not arise in the chronological succes~ 
sion (after ten kingdoms, etc.), that it did not root up three kingdoms out of ten {as 


692 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


evidenced by the difficulty of making them out, and the varied and conflicting enumera- 
tion given),* it is sufficient to say that the favorite view of many that the Bishop of 
Rome obtained Universal Supremacy either under Justinian or Phocas is not sustained 
by the facts of history. This is seen in the separate independence of the Patriarchs ; 
that interference of one Patriarchate in another was disallowed ; that the Emperors 
retained the real power (so the Apoc. has the whore sustained by the power of the beast) 
and the Popes had a delegated power ; that the assumed supremacy was of later origin, 
being formulated under Hildebrand ; that the conflicts with the Imperial power and the 
requirements of Imperial sanction ; the severance of the Greek and Latin Churches, dis- 
putes of bishops, expressed opinions of Father and Emperors, acknowledged Imperial 
responsibility ; the divisions in the Papal Church on the subject of the supremacy (some 
holding it to exist in General Councils, others advocating a restricted form, giving the 
supremacy to the Empire in matters of law); these considerations alone sustain our 
position. 


Obs. 7. Another important matter to notice is this, that some Scripture 
predictions, directly applied by writers to the future personal Anticlirist, 
ure only applicable to a power or person associated with him ; and that for 
the sake of consistency we must distinguish between them. 'The old view 
of Hippolytus that the false Prophet or sec. Beast of Rey. 13 is the future 
personal Antichrist has been a favorite with some, and is adopted in 
Smith’s Bid. Dic., Art ‘‘ Antichrist.’’ While this interpretation is not 
near so objectionable as Faber’s, etc. (seeing that it avoids the incongruity 
of making the Papacy to exist down to the Sec. Advent, when it is pre- 
viously destroyed by the beast and ten horns), yet it is misleading from 
the simple fact that the last head of the first Beast is the great leading 
actor, under whose leadership the confederation is formed, etc.; and that 
this false prophet only occupies a subsidiary position, and one, too, which 
strives to honor and exalt the power and authority of this last head. 'The 
prophecy impresses us by the acts of this false prophet, all being allied 
with the revived last head, that he only arises and comes into play as an 
active agent during the career of this seventh-eighth (Prop. 160) head. 
Nothing in it is predicative of a previous existence ; all, so far as recorded, 
is descriptive of that brief but fearful period when the mighty leader to 
whom worship is tendered—hence the Antichrist (if worship were given to 
the false prophet and he were the prime mover of the confederation, then 
the argument might have force)—has control over nations. 

This chronological position of the prophet is conclusive against various theories. It 
at once and effectually disproves its application to the Papacy (Mede, Faber, Lord, 
Elliott, etc.), to the infidelity and revolutionary principles of the French Revolution 
(Kett, etc.), and to the French Republic (Galloway). Any interpretation which makes 
the First Beast the Papal polity or identical with the Romish Church (for it only sup- 
ports and aids it asin Rev. 17, and finally turns against and destroys it), or the Sec. 


Beast an upholder and extender of the Romish Church is undoubtedly defective and 
contradictory for the reasons previously given in the text. Another view (Smith’s Bib. 


* Thus e.g. Mede has ‘‘ Greeks, Longobards, or Franks ;’ Sir I. Newton : “ Exarchate 
Ravenna, Kingdom Lombards, Senate and Dukedom of Rome ;’’ Faber : ‘‘ The Herulo- 
Turingic, the Ostrogothic, and the Lombardic ;’’ Gaussen: ‘‘ Heruli, Ostrogoths, and 
Lombards:;” others: “The Exarchate of Ravenna, the Pentapolis (i.e. afterward so 
named), the dukedom of Spoleti (i.e. formerly embraced the city and senate of Rome), 
comprising the three estates of the Church ;’ others: ‘‘ The Heruli, Ostrogoths, and 
Vandals ;” ete. It is sufficient to say, that none of these meet the conditions of 
prophecy, not being uprooted, etc., before the Papacy, for even in ‘‘ The States of the 
Church’’ (to which we cannot consistently narrow down three of the ten kingdoms) the 
Pope had often but ‘‘ a shadowy rule’’ (see e.g. Seebohn’s Era of Protestant Revolution, 
Bower's His. of the Popes, Gibbon’s Decl. and Fall of the Rom. Emp., etc.). 


PRop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 693 


Dic., art. Antich, 6. (2),) which in a certain sense (that of ‘‘ many Antichrists”) might 
be allowed is that both beasts, the first and second together form the Antichrist (are 
Antichrists, so Brightman, Parens, Vitringa, Gill, Bachman, Fraser, Croly, Fysh, and 
Elliott). Whatever of truth may be contained in the idea of both being Antichrists (as 
both act co-jointly), yet for the sake of perspicuity and to distinguish the leader from all 
others as the particular, pre-eminent Antichrist, singled out of all others, we must give 
this fitle, as the. culminated head, only to the last head of the first beast, with (so Smith) 
Marlorat, King James I., Daubuz, and Galloway ; to whom can be added numerous 
writers, who advocate not only that the Roman Empire is designated by the first beast, 
but that under the leadership of the last head, thus constituted above all others “‘ the 
Antichrist,” the final conflict with Christ will take place, of whom, above all others, 
Faber, in his later works, deserves special mention as eminently successful in pro- 
phetical interpretation of the beast, the very best sustained by the textand history. The 
reader is invited to consider in this connection Prop. 160. 


Obs. 8. In the discussion of this subject, the student, in order to obtain 
an intelligent and consistent interpretation, must plant himself upon 
what we deem an impregnable position, viz., that the Roman Empire is the 
fourth Beast of Daniel (adopted literally by a host of able expositors, an- 
cient and modern), and that the little horn of ch. 7 springs out of, is 
attached to, as part,and controlling part, of the beast. This is clearly 
taught, and, owing to remarkable points of resemblance, the most eminent 
expositors have, in some way, made this horn representative of the Pa- 
pacy. Admitting wonderfuland striking coincidences (based upon perse- 
cuting Antichristian power), yet, taking the prophecy as a whole, it 1s im- 
possible to apply it to the Papacy, owing to the final end being diverse to 
that in Rev. 17; to the fact that the ten Kingdoms only arise, simulta- 
neously or nearly so, at the time (Rev. 17) of the closing period of the 
fourth Beast’s history (commentators have hitherto been unable to fix 
these ten Kingdoms, giving various lists of them, or else taking the num- 
ber ten for an indefinite number which is forbidden by the prediction and 
the three removed); to the fact that this horn arises after the ten King- 
doms; and to the additional fact that, however ingeniously pressed, the 
Papacy did not uproot three horns or Kingdoms in its rise (those usually 
urged being inadequate to sustain the position). But we proceed another 
step, in saying that this little horn is the Antichrist that shall arise at the 
time of the end, the closing period, and be destroyed at the Sec. Advent. 
The reasons already given respecting the similarity of end, etc., are suffi- 
cient to indicate this, which was the view of the early Fathers, and has 
been the favorite one of a multitude of writers. The reader will observe 
that the quite early Fathers invariably linked the coming of the Antichrist 
with the Roman Empire, and it was after the idea arose that the Roman 
power was the hindering cause that the notion was promulgated, that after 
the Roman Empire was overthrown then only would Antichrist be re- 
vealed. But still, in some way, he would reunite the Roman power and 
exercise sway over it and against Christianity. A comparison of Scripture 
forces us, if legitimately performed, to indorse the view that the Antichrist 
arises out of the Roman Empire, and arises, too, at the time it isin a 
divided state, the consolidation into a confederacy being performed under 
his auspices. Two objections that may be urged against this view ought 
to be considered. (1) The non-existence of the Beast or Roman Empire is 
supposed to militate against this view ; but, in reply, it is sufficient to say 
that this very non-existence is also predicted, and that it is only after a 
period of lost headship that a revival takes place, and the last head or 


694 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 161. 


Antichrist appears, comp. Prop. 160. (2) The personality or wndividual- 
ity of Antichrist is alleged against it ; but it is an ample answer to remind 
the student that Antichrist is presented to us by the Spirit in His several 
aspects (a) as an individual person, the leader of the confederation, as e.g. 

in 2 Thess. 2; (6) then the tracing the rise of this person (from whence he 
springs) as e.g. Rev. 13 : 3-8 ; Rev. 17: 9-11; (c) as virtually—yet differ- 
ing—a prolongation of the seventh revived head (comp. Prop. 160) ; (d) 
as a polity (for king and Kingdom are convertible terms, e.g. a person 
may stand for a Kingdom or polity, Dan. 2 : 38, last clause), thus showing 
that he is the head over a powerful government ; (e) thus being a person 
who is the head or controlling leader of the Beast, he is in virtue of his 
position represented either as an individual or as a power springing out of 
and directing the Beast, or in virtue of his tremendous influence in direct- 
ing the Beast, being its representative head, he is the Beast himself just as 
Nebuchadnezzar was the head of gold. In view of the fearful issnes con- 
nected with the coming of this Antichrist, the Spirit mercifully presents 
those several aspects, so that when the time arrives for fulfilment the points 
of recognition may be multiplied to the sustaining of faith in the dreadful 
fiery trial.? Now we tuke another step in advance, viz., in identifying the 
sameness of Dan. 7 (the lttle horn), Rev. 13 (the last head), Rev. 17 (the 
last head), and 2 Thess. 2 (the man of sin). In the elucidation of this 
subject such an identity becomes imperative. In looking over the exposi- 
tors, ancient and modern, nearly all agree in making Dan. 7, Rev. 13, 

and Rev. 17 descriptive of the same Roman Limpire “(some in its civil, 

others in its papal, prolongation, and still others in both of these), and in 
virtue of the civil headship attributed to the heads that were fallen (which 
John only designates as an additional fact of identification), it is impossi- 
ble, without a violation of consistency, to attribute to this last head (of the 
same beast) any other but @ civil headship like unto the rest of the heads. 

This is a point of vital importance, and cannot be yielded up without 
serious deviation from the prophecy.* Ifthis were allrevealed by John then 
we might fail in linking this last head with the Antichrist of 2 Thess. 2, 
but John informs us that this civil head sets up precisely the same claims 
to Divine honors, worship, etc., and is finally destroyed by the personal 
Advent of the Lord Jesus, just as Paul describes, so that we cannot doubt 
the correctness of that line of expositors who, whatever mistakes were made 
in details, applied all these predictions to the Antichrist. The personal 
Antichrist, taking these prophecies together, is then both @ civil and re- 
ligious head, endeavoring to control the civil, social, and religious interests 
of society, or, in other words, State and Church (such as the latter may be, 
viz., humanitarian), are represented in him. Our indebtedness to many 
able writers who, in some way, held up this Beast as the Roman Empire, 
and the Antichrist as springing out of it, 1s great (and here gratefully ac- 

knowledged), howeyer much we may differ from them in the way of trac- 
ing (prophetically and historically) the final headship of this Beast, 
because they preserved, amid diversity, an important and essential element 
in the correct apprehension of the subject. It was owing to this feeling— 
based upon the prophetic idea that the Antichrist must be, in order to 
meet the requirements of prediction, related to the Roman power—that so 
many of the Fathers and writers (Brooks, #7. Proph. Interp., p. 48, ete. ; 
Smith’s Bid. Dic., Art. Antichrist, etc.) thought that Rome itself would be 
the seat of the Antichrist (the latter, however, whatever power the Beast 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 685 


| may have over Rome, being especially applicd in Rev. 17 to the whore, 
the great representative of the apostasy).* 


1 As this is an interesting point we append a few illustrations. Aside from the 
opinions, entertained respecting the persecuting Emperors, the early Fathers, even those 
advocating the breaking up of the Empire, linked the Antichrist with the Empire in that 
he would obtain possession of and control it. Thus e.g. Bh. Newton quotes (Diss., p. 
411, etc.), Tertullian as saying (Apol. c. 32) that the division of the Roman State ‘‘ into 
ten kingdoms will bring on the Antichrist ;” Cyril locates (Cant. 15, c. 5), the coming of 
Antichrist at the future division of the Empire into the ten kingdoms, when “ the elev- 
enth is Antichrist, who by magical and wicked artifice shall seize the Roman power ;’’ so 
also Hilary, Ambrose, but especially Jerome, Augustine, Chrysostom, (vide quotations in 
Newton) who make the Antichrist follow a failing or breaking up of the Empire, and (as 
Chrysostom) “ he shall seize on the vacant Empire, and shall endeavor to assume the 
power both of God and men.’’ Comp. quotations in Smith’s Bib. Dic., art. Antichrist, 
6, (1) who gives additional, Andreas as ‘‘ reuniting the Roman Empire’’ under him, Aretas 
as being ‘‘ a king of the Romans ;”’ so also John Damascene, Adso, and others have him 
reuniting the Empire. Nearly all the Fathers justly kept in view the foretold division 
of the Empire, and made the rise of the Antichrist synchronize with that time ; and all 
agreed in having him destroyed at the personal Advent of Jesus. Comp. also pp. 318, 
341, 353, 356 Déllinger’s (Smith’s ed.) Proph. of the Mid. Ages, Alford’s Proleg. to 2 Thess. 
Lange’s Com. on 2 Thess. 2, ete. 

2? In Dan. 7 he is also represented as a horn arising after the ten kingdoms, thus inti- 
mating to us, what the Apocalypse predicts, that he is not precisely an eighth head, 
having a relationship to the seventh, but has special characteristics of his own which, in 
one aspect, gives him a certain independency, and yet, in another, shows him to be 
virtually a seventh-eighth head, i.e. in some respects a seventh, and in others an eighth 
head. Thus prediction presents us with the varied aspects of the last Antichrist, so that 
in some respects he is a horn, in others a seventh head, and in virtue of these may be 
designated an eighth head. 

3 The importance of this is worthy of consideration. These points are fundamental in 
tracing the rise of the Antichrist : (1) There are only four great world empires in regular 
succession until he is revealed ; (2) it is erroneous to make a fifth (as e.g. Russia, 
Turkey, Egypt, Greece), out of which he springs, unless hereafter incorporated as an 
integral part of it ; (3) the Roman Empire will be headless, i.e. cease to exist, but will 
be revived, and out of this revival springs this Antichrist ; (4) he, therefore, must 
proceed from the fourth or Roman revived ; (5) any other power from which it might 
arise, can only be recognized, provided it is fully incorporated in the Roman, becomes 
part of it, and its leader (as e.g. if Russia would conquer Constantinople and make that 
its capital, etc.) ; (6) no special stress can be laid on “ Gog,” for the simple reason that 
the name was applied to different nations, and can be found nearly all over Europe 
| (through the inundations of the barbarians) and in part of Asia—-and besides it may be a 

general name descriptive of an enemy—so that the order of succession must be our 
guide ; (7) the Czar professes to represent the Eastern part of the Roman Empire we are 
told, and hence Thomas, Cummings, and others, find the Antichrist in Russia, but this 
~can only be true in the future, provided it conquers Roman territory and becomes thus 
an integral part of the Empire—for the Antichrist must proceed from the recognized 
fourth Empire ; (8) this relation of the Antichrist to the Empire and being its civil head 
sets aside Wild’s theory (The Lost Ten Tribes, p. 143), and 8. Bonhomme’s (Proph. Times, 
March, 1880, ‘‘ Who is to be the Antichrist ?”) that the Antichrist will be a Jew over the 
Jewish nation (which nation he invades, fights, subdues, etc.), for the weighty consider- 
ation of order of succession forbids their inferences. 

4 The student will notice the important bearing that this view possesses in enabling us 
to avoid a mass of contradictory interpretation. The continuation of the Roman Empire 
—however divided and however headless in the past or present, down to the Sec. Advent, 
is fundamental as given by Daniel and John. The impossibility of accepting the Papacy 
as the culminated head of the Antichrist is fully evidenced by its destruction previous to 
that Advent by the beast and ten horns. The impossibility of receiving any power out- 
side of, and not incorporated with, the Roman Empire as the last Antichrist, is self- 
evident from the connection that this Antichrist sustains to the Roman power as its last 
head. ‘This also teaches us that the views now expressed by able writers that Rome is 
‘the false prophet” (as, e.g. Roberts in Prophecy and the Eastern Question), cannot be 
correct for two reasons : (1) the Papacy is previously destroyed, (2) this “false prophet’’ 


696 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


arises only in conjunction with this last head. This likewise shows us that we cannot 
possibly accept of the notion (entertained by many Expositors in the past and recently 
repeated by Roberts, Balfour, etc.), that the ten horns are to be regarded as fulfilled in 
the past, because (1) the last head of the beast is still future ; (2) the horns are brought 
out under this last head ; (3) the horns act in conjunction with this head, being con- 
trolled by him ; (4) the horns act only at this period for a brief time, viz., an ‘‘ hour ;”’ 
and (5) the acts and result, ascribed to these horns have not been witnessed in the past, 
for the Papacy is still a gigantic power. Our position also meets in the same manner the 
objectionable interpretation of Barbour (Three Worlds), respecting the heads of the 
beast, the two-horned beast, the ten horns (he arbitrarily makes ‘“‘ horn’’ to refer to a short 
time after the division of the Empire and not to the division itself existing a short time), 
etc.—of Lord’s (Kup. of Apoc.), exp. of the two-horned beast, ten horns, etc., of Barnes’s 
(Apoc.) interpretation of the last head, ten horns, false prophet, etc., besides that of many 
others. 

In view of the fact that so many prophetical writers insist upon the past existence of 
the ten horns in order to make out the following of the Papacy, it may be proper to add, 
that no such division can be proven to have preceded the rise of the Papacy, and to 
have existed contemporaneously. This is evidenced by the varied lists given. Thus 
e.g. Machiavelli's is adopted by some: (1) Ostrogoths ; (2) Visigoths ; (3) Suevis and 
Alans ; (4) Vandals ; (5) Franks ; (6) Burgundians ; (7) Heruli ; (8) Saxons and Angles ; 
(9) Huns ; (10) Lombards. But this is an enumeration of nations to which others could 
be readily added. If the ten kingdoms thus arose and are thus to be traced, we have 
the incongruity of the image existing the longest in the period of the toes. No history 
of the Roman Empire (as Gibbon, etc.), gives such a division, which is sufficiently signi- 
ficant. Other ten are enumerated by Sir I. Newton, and variations are given by Bh. 
Newton, Mede, Bh. Lloyd, etc., so that many owing to the changes introduced, the rise 
and fall and succession of nations, the difficulty of making out precisely ten and these 
contemporaneous (and especially to three being uprooted by the Papacy), and the patent 
fact that no such ten have existed down to the present time (much less to the Sec. 
Advent), make out the number an indefinite one. We are not concerned to find them 
in the past ; they relate to the future exclusively. Fausset (Com. Dan. 7) correctly says : 
** the definite ten will be the ultimate development of the Roman Empire, just before the 
rise of the Antichrist.’’ 


Obs. 9. The meaning of the word ‘‘ Antichrist’’ can readily be made 
out from the force of ‘‘ anti’? in composition, denoting ‘‘ against or op- 
posed to, in place of or correspondence to,’’ thus designating either oppo- 
sition to Christ or imitation of Christ. It may then mean (1) one who sets 
himself up against Christ, denying or usurping His power, or (2) one who 
strives to resemble Christ in His prerogatives, power, etc., or (3) one who 
unites both these characteristics. Over against the opinion of Greswell 
(Hxp. of Parab., vol. 1, p. 372), that it denotes rather a kind of rivalry 
than antagonism, a ‘‘ Counterfeit-Christ,’? we have in the account given of 
the Antichrist abundant evidence to sustain the almost universally received 
one that he will be an opposer of Christ. ‘This is unmistakably predicted 
both in his characteristics and in his acts, without, however, rejecting 
Greswell’s idea that he also may, in the course of such opposition, claim, as 
Dean Trench (Synonymes of the N. T.) suggests, to be, without taking the 
name, a kind of Messiah (for the honor and worship tendered to him seems 
to indicate something of the kind). Trench’s explanation, based upon the 
marks given to him that he will set himself up doth against Christ and in 
the place of (as the world’s Saviour) Christ, being thus both an, Anti and 
false Christ, is fully sustained by His being a denier of Christ (1 John 
2 : 22, Luther, a Wider Christ), an adversary or opposer of Christ (2 Thess. 
2:4), one who fights against Christ (Rev. 17:19), and also one who sets 
Himself up as a kind of Redeemer worthy of worship (2 Thess. 2:4: Rey. 
13 : 4, 12, ete.), thus occupying the place, the Theocratic position, assigned 
to Jesus.’ It may also be remarked that in view of the latitude of meaning 


ee ee 


Prop: 161; ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. a 63.75 


in the word, John already in his day (1 John 2 : 18) could well say, in view 
of the opposition to or denial of Christ (or, even the substitutions for 
Christ), ‘‘ Little children, it is the last. time, and as ye have heard that 
Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby we 
know that it is the last time.”? Every age has, in his sense, both in and 
alongside of the Church, produced its Antichrists, the preliminary earnests 
of the great one still to come: and because the Messiah bas come and such 
opposers to Him can thus exist in opposition to Him, we know, too, that 
this is the last hour, or time, or dispensation preparatory to Christ’s tri- 
umph over His adversary.’ 


1The Fathers generally speak of him as one who is an opposer of Christ, but some 
distinctively also intimate his twofold character, as e.g. Hippolytus says : ‘‘ The deceiver 
wishes in every way to appear like the Son of Man,”’ etc., (quoted by Brooks, El., p. 256), 
and so Lactantius and Jerome (quoted by Bh. Newton, Diss., p. 411), the former saying : 
“ This is he, who is called Antichrist, but who shall feign himself to be Christ, and shall 
fight against the truth :’—the latter that Antichrist ‘‘ shall sit in the temple of God, 
either at Jerusalem (as some imagine) or in the Church (as we more truly judge), show- 
ing himself that he is Christ and the Son of God,” etc. It isin view of this latitude of 
meaning, that the Papacy bearing so many of the characteristics of the Antichrist was 
deservedly reckoned in several distinguishing particulars to be Antichristian, as e.g. in 
its Theocratic claims (Bengel’s Gnomon, V., p. 306), in its assumption of the names and 
titles of ‘‘ the Christ’? (comp. Bellarmine as given by Dr. Butler in Lec. Apoc., p. 293), 
the worship of Mary (Cumming’s Lec. on Romanism, Butler’s Lec. Apoc., etc.), the 
persecution and slaughter of saints (Bickersteth’s Prom. Glory, p. 90, etc.), its canoniza- 
tion and invocation of saints, its ambitious and warlike Popes, its profession of miracu- 
lous power (Cumming’s Lec., Bede’s Eccl. History, etc.), its changing of commandments 
(Stillingfleet’s Works, vol. 6, p. 572, Cumming’s Lec. on Romanism, Christian World, March, 
1865, etc.) ete. 

2 We append a few statements as to the meaning of the word Antichrist. Bh. Hurd 
(Introd. to the Study of the Prophecies,’ Ser. 7) defines it : ‘‘ a person of power, actuated 
with a spirit opposite to that of Christ.” Barnes (Com., 1 John 2: 18), says: ‘* The 
proper meaning of anti in composition, is over against, contrary to, reciprocity, substitu- 
tion. The word Antichrist, therefore, might denote any one who either was, or claimed 
to be, in the place of Christ, or one who, for any cause, was in opposition to him.’’ ‘* If 
the word ,stood alone, and there was nothing said further to explain its meaning, we 
should think, when the word Antichrist was used, either of one who claimed to be the 
Christ, and who thus was a rival; or of one who stood in opposition to, on some other 
ground.’’ Dr. Braune (Lange’s Com., 1 John 2:18) says that ‘‘ anti may mean both 
hostility and substitution,” and favors ‘‘ not substitution but hostility to Christ exhibited 
, in the form of eminent strength.’’ He also mentions Huther as combining the two 
ideas : ‘‘ the enemy of Christ, who, under the lying appearance of being the true Christ, 
endeavors to destroy the work of Christ.” Fausset (Com. 2’ Thess. 2), says : “‘ He not 
merely assumes Christ’s character (as a false Christ), but opposes Christ,’’ and adds : 
*‘Tdolatry of self, spiritual pride, and rebellion against God; are his characteristics.” 
Appleton’s New Amer. Cyclop., art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’’ says: ‘‘ The current opinion of the 
Roman Catholic Church, in accordance with the general doctrine of. the Fathers, is, that 
Antichrist is an individual who will pretend to be the true Messiah, and be generally 
acknowledged as such throughout the earth, during the last epoch of the existence of 
the world.” Dr. Lange in Herzog’s Encyclop., art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’ combines the two mean- 
ings, and says that the opposition (anti) is enforced by the form of a false (anti) Christ 
that the former is made powerful by an imitation of the claims of ‘‘ the Christ,’’ which 
imitation is presented and urged by lies and a perversion of things relating to Christ. 
Dr. Tregelles (Daniel, p. 192), objects to the idea of being a Pseudo-Christ in view of the 
Antichrists in John’s time who were simply opposers to Christ, and consequently urges 
the meaning of opposer to Christ ; but in a subsequent page violates his own definite 
determined given meaning, when he declares that the Jews will receive him as a Messiah. 
M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., art. on, makes him both a “ false-Christ” and “ against 
Christ.” Such illustrations, which could be indefinitely repeated, only show, that no 
satisfactory conclusions can be drawn from the philological meaning of the word, which 
may have one determinate meaning (e.g. hostility or substitution) and exclude another. 
The meaning to be applied to the word Antichrist as related to this one great future 


698 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [PRop. 161. 


culminated power of evil, must be found on exegetical grounds by a comparison of the 
predietions descriptive of him. Such a comparison clearly demonstrates that the Anti- 
christ is as many hold an ‘‘ opposer of Christ’’ (for he persecutes believers in Jesus, 
organizes the nations against Christianity, and wages war against the Christ),and at the 
same time as Greswell (note to his Historical Testimony’, ‘‘ another Christ, a pro-Christ, a 
vice-Christ, an alter-Christ, a pretender to the name of Christ ;’’ or as others a ‘‘ Pseudo- 
Christ’’ or ‘‘ Counterfeit Christ,” (for he assumes the rights, honors, and worship of 
Christ, and is received by the Jewish nation as ‘‘ the Messiah’’). 


Obs. 10. Notice the marks or characteristics given to this Antichrist. 
1. By John in the Epistles. 1 John 2: 22, ** Who is a liar but he that 
denieth that Jesus is the Christ? Hews Antichrist that denieth the Father 
and the Son.’’ By this we have a denier of Jesus, the Christ, and the 
Father who sent Him. ‘This shows at once and conclusively (however men 
have ingenuously attempted to evade it) that it cannot be applied to the 
Papacy, which, whatever un-Christian (i.e. practical denial) may attach to 
it, never denied the Father and the Son, but acknowledges both in its con- 
fession of faith, and promulgates its decrees in their name. Here we have 
not simply an indirect denial of truths pertaining to them, but a@ plain, 
open, unblushing denial of their authority, and of allegiance to them. It 
is Jnfidelity in its highest phase. Again he says, 1 John 4:3: “* Every 
spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of 
God: and this ts that spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that tt 
should come, and even now already is tt in the world.’’ Keeping in view 
what the ancients meant by ‘‘ the Christ’’ (viz., the Theocratic ordering of 
Jesus, Prop. 205), we have here a refusal to acknowledge that Jesus as ‘‘the 
Christ,’’ 1.e. the covenanted David’s Son, had come in His First Advent 
in humanity. It isa total rejection of the claims of Jesus to the Messiah- 
ship grounded upon disbelief in His incarnation: a spirit which was 
already exhibited in John’s time.’ But again John teaches, 2 John 7: 
‘* Many deceivers are entered into the world who confess riot that Jesus 
Christ is come’? (Gr. is coming, or who cometh, so many writers have 
instanced, Lange’s Com. loci, etc.) ‘‘ in the flesh. This is a (or the} deceiver 
and an (or the) Antichrist.’’? This is declarative not only of a denial of the 
humanity of Jesus Christ, but that He will again come as the Son of man 
and the Christ.? If we turn tothe Apoc., John gives us, among other 
things, the following characteristics. He is to be a blasphemer (Rev.13 : 5, 
6, taking the Scriptural sense of blasphemy, viz., to say, claim and do 
that which properly belongs to God): an object of worship to the world 
(Rev. 13 : 4, 8, 12, etc.) ; a possessor of great military power (Rev. 13 : 4, 
7, 12); a@ persecutor of the saints (Rev. 13 : 7) and of the Papacy (Rev. 
17:16); anda direct hostile opposer of the Lamb (Rev. 17 : 14 and 19 : 19). 
In addition, we have, that he will be an eighth, but virtually seventh, head 
of the Roman beast (Rev. 13:3 and17:10,11. Comp. Prop. 160), and 
so intent upon establishing his power that he wil] slay all who will not 
receive his mark and tender homage to him (Rey. 13 : 15-17 and 14 : 9-13). 
2. We notice now the marks given by Paul, in 2 Thess. 2 as follows : He is 
‘‘the man of sin,’’?1.e., one of pre-eminent wickedness, in whom sin 
culminates, being wholly and successfully devoted to it ; ‘* the Son of per- 
dition,’’ i.e. Judas-like he is filled with Satan, Judas-like he opposes Christ 
and is devoted to destruction (comp. Rev. 17 : 11), leading others (comp. 
Rey. 14 : 9-11) to perdition ; the opposer or adversary (see comments) of 
God and the Christ ; the Anti-God (as Chrysostom designates him ; v. 4, 


: 
‘ 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 699 


exalting himself above all that is worshipped, etc.); the Lawless One 
(Coms.) centring in himself all law ; @ worker according to or through the 
energy of Satan ‘‘ with power and signs, and lying wonders,”’ etc. 3. We 
come to the delineation given by Daniel, chs. 7 and 11, where we have, in 
addition, this power related to, part of, and controlling the beast (the 
Roman), ‘* speaking great words against the Most High ;’ making war 
against the saints ; amvading Palestine, etc. ; in brief, having the same 
arrogant and hostile last development out of the Roman Empire arrayed 
against the truth and God’s people, and triumphing over them until deliv- 
erance comes from God. (And if we can take ch. 8 by either regarding— 
as many do—its fulfilment in some power (as e.g. Mohammedanism) as 
typical, or by making—as others—the little horn the Roman Empire suc- 
ceeding to the Grecian, then other traits could be added, as being ‘‘ a king 
of fierce countenance and understanding dark sentences,’’ who ‘ shall 
destroy wonderfully,’’ cause ‘‘ craft to prosper,’’ and shall ‘‘ stand up 
against the Prince of princes.’’ Here he is said to be ‘‘ broken without 
hand,’’ 1.e. by supernatural power, direct divine agency, as in Rev. 19, 
2 Thess. 2, by Jesus Christ and His armies.)’ 4. Allusions and descrip- 
tions are to be found in other Scriptures. Thus in Ps. 10 : 18 he is called 
“the man of the earth’? and in Ps. 9 the ‘‘ man’? (e.g. Jerome applies 
these Ps. to Antichrist) who will be judged by God (various Psalms de- 
scriptive of a proud, wicked, overpowering ‘‘ man’’ are quoted by the 
Fathers as illustrative of him, such as Ps. 109, 12, 14, 51, 52, 75, 94, 420, 
140, ete., also Isa. 11:4; 14:25; 10:18; Hab. 2:5; Ezek. 38, etc.), 
conveying the same idea of self-exaltation, greatness of power, violence and 
hostility to God. As these references will be alluded to under a following 
observation, it will be sufficient to observe that the distinctive marks of 
the Antichrist, as presented by the Spirit, are (1) the last and great adver- 
sary of God and Christ ; (2) the development of infidelity so that it results 
in a denial of Father and Son, both as it relates to their authority and 
redemptive work ; (3) the denial of the Messiahship of Jesus based upon 
that of His having come in humanity ; (4) the denial of the Theocratic 
position of Jesus, founded upon that He will not come again in humanity 
(i.e. as ‘‘ Son of man’’) ; (5) the retention of a religious element, which 
causes him to become the object of general worship ; (6) the claimer of 
attributes and honor belonging to God ; (7) the blasphemer by way of emi- 
nence, exceeding all that has hitherto transpired, being lawless and actuated 
by Satan, etc ; (8) the most astounding capacity and success in obtaining 
adherents ; (9) the obtainer of vast power over the nations ; (10) the leader 
of ten subordinate powers ; (11) the eulogized head of a sustaining power ; 
(12) the persecutor of the believers; (13) the overthrower of the whore ; 
(14) the slayer of all who will not worship him ; (15) the performer of signs 
and lying wonders ; (16) the direct antagonist of “‘ the King’’ at His Com- 
ing; (17) and finally, the last head or controlling polity arising out of the 
revivified fourth beast. or Roman Empire. No wonder that he who 
humbly receives the Word contemplates such characteristics with astonish- 
ment and dread ; and that, when locating this Antichrist still in the future 
(where undoubtedly the Scriptures place it), he regards this a subject well 
worthy of the closest attention and study." 


The careful student will observe, that while this Antichristian spirit is linked with 
the denial of the Incarnation, yet everything that materially aids in concealing or detract- 


700 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


ing from ‘‘ the Christship’’ of Jesus, is in so far aiding in the development of this 
spirit, or, to say the least, giving it ground for resistance. 

2This should also be a caution to a certain class of believers who, with an evident 
desire to honor ‘‘ the Christ” unconsciously and with a Gnostic element of opposition to 
matter, strip Jesus, the Messiah, of all humanity by a process of spiritualizing, so that 
when He comes again, it 1s not as the Son of Man, but as a purely spiritual being 
stripped of all human relationship. The Messiah that they present is not recognizable 
by covenant or prediction. While not denying His coming, they do deny the personality 
—as covenanted and predicted—of the Christ. (Comp. Props. 200 and 204.) 

3 We make Dan. 8 to be corroborative to Dan. 7, etc., and find the power of this Anti- 
christ made mighty by the means stated Rev. 13 :2; 16:13, 14; 17: 12,13; 19:19. 
His persecution of the Jewish nation is directly stated in these predictions (and in the 
70 weeks) as a special characteristic, which must not be overlooked. 

4 History points to monsters of cruelty, like Rodrigo Borgia (Pope Alexander VL), his 
son Cesar, and others, but famous as these are in the annals of infamy, this Antichrist, 
setting aside and overriding all law, will be still more abominable in his deeds. Owing 
to his power being greater, the effects of his sinfulness will be more extended, and his 
victims more numerous. Sin, the greatest and most revolting, will culminate in his life 
and actions. When we consider the fulness of transgression is still future, and that the 
corresponding energetic indignation of God is to be still manifested, the fearfulness of 
this may be partly realized by looking at the past transgressions of the nations and God’s 
past indignation providentially expressed : the former exhibited in oppression, persecu- 
tion, and cruelty almost incredible, and the latter in judgments the most terrible ; and 
yet all these lack the fulness of wickedness and vengeance which is yet to come: the 
former in Antichrist and the False Prophet, and the latter in the dreadful last plagues, 
the vials of an insulted God. Notwithstanding all this so faithfully portrayed by inspir- 
ation, many men persistently close their minds and hearts to such warnings! Yea more, 
they make them even the subject of jest and scoffing! But jesting lips and scoffing 
hearts will tremble and quake with fear when the predicted vengeance comes. God has 
declared it, and we believe Him. 


Obs. 11. When shall this Antichrist be revealed? 'This is a question of 
great importance, seeing the tremendous issues pertaining to His advent. 
The Spirit,has not left us without testimony on this point ; for while teach- 
ing us that the spirit of Antichrist from the days of the Apostolic Church 
has been in the world, and that all who corrupt the truth and oppose Christ 
(especially those great powers in a corrupted church, and beside it all that 
do this) deserve the reproachful name, He also directs us to the one great 
personal Antichrist, in whom wickedness shall culminate, and plainly tells 
us that the time of His coming is Jefore the open revelation of Jesus Christ 
from heaven. It is this Antichrist, with his confederated forces, that 
makes war with the King at His Coming and is overthrown by Him, a 
point so clear (Prop. 123), and almost universally held, that it requires no 
additional notice. This Antichrist is the last head of the fourth Kingdom, 
the Roman, which when again revived (Prop. 160) persecutes the saints, 
brings in the fearful tribulation, and makes war with the Lamb. And 
notice that in Rey. 14, the time of His gigantic power, cruel persecution 
and worship follows the resurrection and translation of the chosen 144,000, 
the renewed proclamation of God’s predictions and the fall of the Papal 
power (and State churches, etc). Antichrist, therefore, however developed 
previously, sacceeds the first stage (Props. 130, 166, 174) of the Sec. Ad- 
vent and the removal of a select body of saints, and flourishes in all his 
might, fierceness, and self-deification between the two stages of the Sec. 
Advent. 

Let the student ponder this statement, because it sets aside a large number of erro- 


neous interpretations and applications. This will be developed as we proceed. Seiss 
(Last Times), Brookes (Maranatha), Reineke, Newton, and many others of American and 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. TOL 


European prophetical writers take this view, which is most decidedly in accord with 
prediction and the order laid down by the Spirit. 


Obs. 12. Before the Antichrist is revealed something which hinders or 
prevents (2 'Thess, 2: 6, 7) his manifestation must be removed. We have 
already shown (Prop. 160, and see Prop. on Translation 130, Obs. 8) how 
utterly untenable the prevailing theories on the subject are. The removal 
of the Roman power (so Chrysostom, Jerome, and many others) is not 
meant, because he (Antichrist) rises out of and forms the controlling part 
of the fourth beast (it is not even applicable to the case of Papacy, to which 
it is usually applied, seeing that the Papacy, as taught in Rey. 17, is sup- 
ported and elevated by the Roman Empire) ; and that it cannot mean (as 
Bell, Seiss, etc.) the withdrawal of the Holy Spirit, both on account of the 
use of the neuter form of the word indicative of that which withholdeth, 
and from the predicted fact that the Spirit will sustain (not being with- 
drawn) the multitude of martyrs who die under the Antichristian persecu- 
tion. The later opinion of some (Ellicott, Alford, etc.) that the reference 
in the neuter form is to the restraining influence of human law wielded by 
the Roman Empire and then by other succeeding governments, thus in the 
latter form (i.e. as a State or States) meeting the masculine form of the 
phraseology. This view overlooks that this Antichrist springs out of the 
Roman Empire revived, and that human law, i.e. the laws derived from and 
under a civil compact, will, in so far as he also represents a polity, be in 
fullforce. He, in fact, regulates society in all its relations by the enactment 
of law, made, indeed, to suit his ambition, but still the continued regulations 
of acivil polity.’ After carefully considering the views hitherto given and 
the fact, stated in the previous Obs., that the chosen, elect number of 
saints (symbolized by the 144,000) are first removed, taken away before the 
revelation of Antichrist occurs, we find no better interpretation for this 
difficult passage than that suggestive one of Theodoret and Theodore of 
Mopsuestia (Smith’s Bib. Dic., ‘‘Antichrist’’), which gives a clew to a consis- 
tent one sustained by fact. It suggests (from their making that which 
withholdeth the determination, purpose, decree of God) that the Divine 
Purpose of God, relating to the number of these elect, chosen ones, must 
first be fulfilled (thus meeting the neuter form), and that this elect-body 
must be removed ; He who restrains (the Divine Purposer), or the election 
(thus represented and considered in its corporate capacity) hindering waded 
the predetermined number is completed and taken away—the masculine 
form being met by an allusion to Him who, by His Purpose in this direc- 
tion, restrains the coming of Antichrist, or by a reference to the election 
itself resulting from the Purpose of God, keeping back this mighty evil 
until its removal as predicted. Passing by several conjectures (such as that 
the withholding power was Paul, or his supplication, of the apostles, or 
the prayers of Christians, or Elijah, etc.) as wholly unsustained,* we may 
upon this obscure passage additionally suggest as favorable to the view pre- 
sented by us, that evidently that which withholdeth continues to withhold 
down to the present day, seeing that the personal Antichrist 1s not yet 
revealed. Besides this, it preserves the idea, mentioned by some (Lange, 
Olshausen, etc.), that this withholding is to be regarded as ‘‘ beneficent”’ 
and is performed by a ‘‘ beneficent power’ (which our view embraces) with- 
out making ‘‘the Roman Empire and the Roman Emperor presented in 
another relation, viz., its beneficent aspect”’ (so Olshausen) over against the 


702 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


express delineations of the fourth beast by Daniel and John as the reverse 
of beneficent through all its heads, culminating in the last one. ‘To make, 
as Olshausen and others, the emperors types of Antichrist and then in 
their official position the (masculine) restraining power is, as Lange asserts, 
“* too refined and artificial,’ and it may be added opposed to the impregnable 
position (Prop. 160) that it is really one of the last, the last, Rulers of the 
revived, but modified, Roman Empire (because it is to exist, with one or 
two periods of non-existence particularly asserted to avoid misapprehen- 
sion, down to the Sec. Advent) who becomes the predicted Antichrist. 
(Comp. Prop. 130, Obs. 8.) 


1 Guinness in Approaching End revives the old opinion that the Roman Empire is the 
hindering cause ; Olshausen makes it ‘‘ the moral and conservative influence of political 
states ;’ Alford, “the fabric of human polity as a coercive power ;’ Fausset, “‘ civil 
polity ;’ Lange (Herzog’s Ency. art. Antich.), ‘tthe moral or ethical spirit of the states— 
life,—the state in its highest meaning ;’ Ellicott, ‘‘ the restraining power of human law 
in the Roman Empire ;’ M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop. art. Antichrist, ‘‘ the Roman 
Empire ; Roos, who recognizes a single person, makes it the Imperial rule seized by the 
last Pope ; Schneckenburger, ‘‘ the Imperial power of Rome as the binding head of the 
polity ;” (the Rationalistic interpretation which applies it to this or that emperor, or the 
Jews, etc., we pass by as needing no references) ; (so we need not comment on such views 
as Koppe’s—that it is Paul and his intercession—or Diedrich’s—the Apostles generally 
and their work—or Calvin’s—the proclamation of the Gospel—or Schéttgen’s—the inter- 
cessary Church—or Ewald’s—coming and removal—etc.) ; all such evidently seeking a 
meaning opposed to the unity of prediction. On the other hand Dr. Tyng (He Will Come, 
p. 146), Brookes (Maranatha, p.191), Lincoln (Lects. on Epistles of St. John, p. 68), and 


many others, make that which hindereth or restraineth to he ‘‘ the Holy Ghost.” A _ 


writer in the Truth, vol. 3, on ‘‘ The Glorious Appearing,’’ says, that the Spirit is the 
One that hinders, and that when the Church is taken away, the Spirit no longer restrains. 
But as we have shown, this takes it for granted that no Church and no Spirit to convert, 
etc., then exists, which violates the order laid down e.g. in Rev.14. De Burgh (quoted 
by Fausset) makes it ‘‘ the elect Church and the Spirit,” both of which, however, bear 
testimony to the truth during the tribulation as evidenced by the number of the martyrs. 
Jiven the extraordinary manifestations of the Spirit, as evinced in the supernatural (e.g. 
Rey. 11) and in resurrecting power (e.g. Rev. 20), are not withdrawn. We are forced, 
therefore, to adopt as the most consistent view that the neuter form (katechGn) refers to 
the divine purpose relating to the gathering out of the first-fruits (which we know is to 
be antecedently realized), and that the masculine form (katechon) refers to the body of 
the first-fruits taken away. 

* Another, however, may be specified being advocated (Lange’s Com. 2 Thess. 2) by 
Hofman, Luthardt, Baumgarten, Auberlen, Von Oettingen, viz., that it is an angel 
prince (similar to the one mentioned Dan. 10 : 5, 18, 20), active in the assize of worldly 
affairs that withholds or restrains. This view while not meeting the neuter form but 
only the masculine, yet might, as the Agent by which the Divine Purpose is sustained 
and carried out, be incorporated with the one presented in the text. 


Obs. 13. A few remarks pertaining to the special partner of Antichrist, 
viz., the second beast of Rev. 13 : 11-18, are in place. This false prophet 
materially aids ifexalting and enforcing the authority of the last head of the 
first beast, and hence deserves our attention. Briefly, it may be said that 
as the last head of the revived Roman power (the first beast) 1s still future, 
so also is this second beast, seeing that all his acts, policy, etc., is directed 
to sustaining the last head of the first beast, and therefore falls in with the 
period presented in Rev. 14, viz., after the removal of the 144,000, the 
renewed proclamation of coming judgments, and the fall of Babylon, and 
continues to co-operate with this last head down to their co-joined over- 
throw, Rev. 19 : 19, 20. Being also a beast, he, like the other beast, repre- 
sents a polity (one, too, haying a twofold power symbolized by the horns) ; 


Y 


PROP. 161.] ' THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 703 


and yet attention is evidently called fo one person, the representative or 
head of this polity, who as ‘‘ the false prophet’? assists the personal Anti- 
christ and meets with his doom. This prophet is not the Antichrist him- 
self, as many have supposed, because he is not the one that is the leader, or 
that is worshipped, but occupies a subordinate position under the last head 
of the beast, and aids in causing him to be worshipped. (This is so 
plainly stated, that any other view is untenable.) This false prophet is, 
therefore, also not the Papacy, an interpretation adopted by many, even 
able, writers. The time (see above) when he arises, the subordination to 
the Antichrist, the activity in causing all to worship the last revived head 
(and the Papacy instead of being active in causing worship to the Empire, 
endeavored to divert such honor and worship fo ttsed/f'*), and especially in 
view of the extraordinary power and manifestations of this second beast 
after the downfall of Babylon (or the Papacy), it is impossible, consistently 
with the chronological position of the beast and its acts in behalf of the 
restored last head of the first beast, to apply it to the Papacy (unless incho- 
ately). It refers to a power still future, and which, as to its origin, from 
whence it will arise, is open to conjecture. ‘Taking the symbolical lan- 
guage into consideration, we can only say this: that if the first beast arose 
out of the sea, 1.e. out of the convulsions of the nations, the rising of the 
second one ‘‘ out of the earth,’’ indicates either his arising out of an empire 
or Kingdom having a more established form of government (so Lord, and 
others), or out of the Roman earth or Empire (so Faber, ete.), or out of 
the territorial limits of a Kingdom already established, or arising out of 
republicanism, etc. When compared with other phraseology, it somehow 
impresses us with the idea that it springs from a popular and general desire 
of the multitudes of a settled government pervaded by apostasy, which, 
now that the established forms of religion are overthrown, cannot free ttself 
entirely from what the Creator has indelibly implanted in man, viz., @ 
religious feeling. Hence this beast arises as the director of worship, to 
- meet a felt and acknowledged want, but, rejecting the Father and the Son, 
turns man into a public worshipper, under severe penalties, of a self- 
deified humanity. Disdaining as foolishness the Redemptive process by 
which God becomes man to reach and embrace humanity in salvation, it, 
as an expression of human wisdom, seeks for Redemption in making out 
man to be God ; thus seeking its highest good in man, and giving at the 
final end the most palpable proof that the often ridiculed temptation and 
fall in Eden is verified in terrible expressiveness. While it is idle to con- 
jecture in what way or in what particular locality he will arise, yet God has 
given us a sufficiency to fully identify him when he does come. The out- 
lines indicate a power not only devoted to the interests of a Humanitarian 
religion, but concentrating and enforcing the worship of such a religion in 
the person of the last head of the first beast. He is the chief miracle worker 
(Meyrick, art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’’ Smith’s 2b. Dic., overlooks e.g. Rev. 16 : 13, 
14, when he says that miracle working is not attributed to the first beast) 
in behalf of the first beast, exerts the power of the first beast on his pres- 
ence, deceives the masses by his miracles, erects image worship in laudation 
of the Antichrist, and causes all to be killed who refuse such worship.’ 


1 Besides this, with all the correspondence between the Papacy (inchoately perhaps, as 
some allege), and this beast, it is impossible to find in the past an accurate historical 
fulfilment to confirm the application made by numerous prophetical writers. Thus e.g. 
the publicly bringing down of fire from heaven, the universal reception of a mark in the 


704 THE THEOCRATIC’ KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


right hand or on the forehead, cannot be consistently applied to the past. So also its 
application to Mohammedanism must be rejected as untenable, for the simple reason 
—if many others did not exist—that Mohammedanism has always been a bitter, hating 
enemy of the first beast or Roman Empire, and instead of being a subordinate co-worker 
has dealt the most fatal blows to it in the past. ; 

2 Several additional things may be briefly noticed in this connection. (1) The Dragon. 
In Rey. 13 : 2, 4, and 16 : 13, he is mentioned as also a party in arousing the last confed- 
eration, but what is remarkable in Rev. 19 in the overthrow of the confederacy the beast 
and false prophet are alone mentioned and afterward separately the fate of the Dragon, 
Rey. 20. The most difficult problem, to the writer, is the giving an interpretation to 
the Dragon that shall not violate the chronological order, the symbolical language, and 
the continuation of the Roman Empire as given by Daniel. The leading interpretations 
are all open to the most serious objections. Thus e.g. (1) it will not answer to say that 
the Dragon denotes Satan personally. However much the latter may inspire the former, 
yet the description of the Dragon with heads, horns, and crowns, the bestowal of his 
throne and power to the beast, the worship tendered to him, the cojoining directly with 
other powers on earth, the defeat attributed to him, etc., is language expressive of, and 
can only be predicated of, an earthly power. This is admitted even by those who think 
that Satan is denoted, so that some make it both, which is inconsistent. This Dragon 
denotes some great earthly power or kingdom ; and the names Dragon and Satan are 
applicable even as Pharaoh is called a great dragon, and an adversary a Satan. The in- 
terpreter should maintain a firm position here ; having found this Dragon to symbolize 
an empire or kingdom, consistency requires that he should preserve such an interpreta- 
tion unimpaired throughout the entire prediction. (2) It cannot be made to mean 
Paganism or the Pagan Roman Empire because the Dragon exists down to the Millennial 
age, and bestows upon the Antichrist its throne and power, which cannot be said of 
Paganism nor of the Pagan form of the Empire (the seven heads, too, including the 
professedly Christianized forms). Besides this, the identity of this Dragon with Daniel’s 
fourth beast, as noticed by numerous writers, is too marked to allow its being thus 
contracted to a special phase or form of the Empire. (3) It is not allowable for the same 
reason to make the Dragon the representative of the unfaithful members of the Church, 
since it is representative of the Roman Empire or its rulers, five heads of which were 
fallen before the Christian Church was organized. (4) It is not the Papacy, because the 
Papacy instead of having these heads and horns was supported by the beast or dragon 
having (Rey. 17) them, and the Papacy is utterly destroyed by its supporter while the 
Dragon still continues. (5) It is not opposition to God’s authority personified, because 
the symbolical language directs us with too much preciseness to some power intended as 
actually existing during the period designated, and such a view is inconsistent with the 
falling of this Dragon, etc., without a diminution of opposition. (6) For the reasons 
assigned it cannot be representative of State churches, or of the Union of State and 
Church, or of Mohammedanism, or of the Greek Church. None of these meet the con- 
ditions imposed by the language. The remarks that we now make are merely suggestive 
and not presented as a positive elucidation of the difficulty of reconciling the prophetical 
picture presented by Daniel’s fourth beast ch. 7, the Dragon Rey. 12, the first beast Rev. 
13, and the beast of Rev. 17. The key, we apprehend will be found in regarding these 
beasts all descriptive of the same Roman Empire under its varied aspects, and hence 
with some variations in the portrayal, and yet sufficiently distinctive for the purpose of 
identification. Let the reader carefully notice these particulars. In Daniel the fourth 
beast is given and then there is a transition to the little horn which springs out of it, 
forms the controlling. element, and is, although diverse in some respects, therefore 
designated as the beast (in its last form or manifestation Dan. 7 : 11, 26) that is over- 
come and destroyed. This prepares us then to anticipate a great and radical change in 
the beast himself. Next, the Dragon of Rev. 12, continues down in a certain distinguish- 
able line until it reaches the definite allotted period of time, times and a half time, 
(during which the personal Antichrist is to exercise power, (Rev. 13), when just preceding 
it, there is a remarkable change in the ruling power, a descending from “ the heavenlies” 
the imperial rule to a kind of popular, republican, or democratic rule as the phrase 
casting into the earth (i.e. being supported, upheld by the popular suffrages, etc.), may — 
denote.* This specific period is still future, whatever inchoate fulfilment interpreters 


* We think that Lord (Apoc.), and others, are correct, when they make the mixture of 
irop and clay, and the intermixing with themselves of the seed of men, not to denote the 
intermixture of Gothic tribes, etc., and the intermarriage of royal families ; but that the 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 705 


may have engrafted upon it, seeing that it is the time predetermined for the last head of 
the beast. What the Dragon performs after its fall is done through this last head to whom 
it gives, Rev. 13 : 2, yields up ‘‘ his power and seat and authority,’’ and which makes 
war. Then follows Rev. 13 : 1-10, in which this change already intimated comes forth 
with greater distinctness, so great and vital in fact that it might be almost denominated 
another beast, but to guard us against such a view the Spirit takes up the same beast 
and shows us that under the last head (as we find by comparing with Rev. 17 : 10, 11), 
there shall be a revival of the beast from a state of non-existence (a headless state) but in 
such a form that it loses ils Dragon rulership aspect and is presented in another, more 
popular and attractive one, still retaining, however, the power, etc. of the Dragon. The 
Dragon aspect is really the foundation of the last head’s rulership, only that instead of 
an Imperial rulership (as exhibited in the past) this is far more viz., an Imperial by 
popular choice elevated to the position of a man-God, the sole object of worship under 
the penalty of death. The state of this last head is so peculiar, so far in advance of all 
preceding, so striking in its manner of rising up, and in its claims, that it well deserves 
to be distinguished from all that preceded, and yet, its true virtual relationship to the 
same beast be preserved. This therefore is more definitely done in Rev. 17, where we 
have this same beast represented as the supporter of the Papacy (and this history most 
abundantly supports, see Com. and writers on this point), and then afterward, after a 
period of non-existence, this same identical beast is to be revived and is the one, under 
its last head that goeth into perdition (the same that the world wonders at Rev. 13 : 8 
comp. with Rev. 17 : 8, thus teaching us at what period this is to transpire). But more 
than this, the Spirit indicates a marvellous transformation in the beast when he says ‘‘ the 
beast that was and is not, even he is the eighth” (the head still called the beast however 
much changed) ‘‘ and is of the seven and goeth into perdition,” i.e., great as the trans- 
formation from the former head this last one is, so that it may be called a separate, dis- 
tinct eighth head, yet it virtually grows out of and is supported by the seventh head. 
Our decided impression is, so far as a comparison of Scripture teaches us, and after a 
careful consideration of various interpretations, that the Spirit wishes to show us that 
the Roman Empire sustains this Dragon aspect down to this eighth head, at which timid 
such a fearful change will be made in the form of rulership that the ordinary civil aspect 
continued down to that time falls completely in the background and yet is, as to the 
claiined rights of government, appealed to and virtually forms the basis of Antichrist's 
claims to civil government. The language therefore of Rev. 20 : 1-3,.we must regard as 
symbolical. Antichrist, the personal one, being overpowered and the confederation 
destroyed, we have ‘‘ the beast”’ (viz., the personal head of the beast, comp. Rev. 17 : 11 
also called the beast) and the “ false prophet’’ taken and cast into the lake of fire. The 
personal head, culminated into the great Antichrist, being thus removed there remains 
the shattered remnant of the beast, the civil government without those Antichristian 
claims, and even this, in virtue of the Theocratic rule now to be introduced by the 
Messiah, is now also to be subverted, so that not only Antichrist’s most arrogant rule 
but even the accustomed Dragon rule is to be discontinued under the reign of Christ 
and His saints. This is symbolically represented. The angel (like the angels of Rev. 
14 : 6, 8, 9) is the representation of a chosen body (most probably the 144,000) under 
whose auspices this shall be done, viz., they shall so restrain and confirm it that it shall 
exercise no power over the nations. (Perhaps Zech. 5: 5-11, if we take the being 
wakened ‘as aman that is wakened out of his sleep” as an intimation that the events 
following are to be witnessed after his resurrection, may give us a clew to the place of 
confinement.) The objections that may be derived from the words ‘“‘ devil and Satan’’ 
have no force provided we allow that such opposing, hostile powers can be styled such 
as Scripture testifies, and that this by no means forbids but actually invites the opinion 


clay and the seed of men symbolize the people as a body, i.e. the common, people apart 
from the rulers and therefore the admixture of the clay and the seed of men with the 
other denotes “ the admission of the people to a share in the power and functions of the 
government,” the result being a certain weakness arising from clashing interests. It 
certainly is remarkable that precisely such a leavening is working among the nations of 
the Roman earth, so that there has been even a mingling of suffrage with Imperialism. 
Such indications show us how, in some respects, this last head may be so diverse from 
all preceding that it may be designated by a separate head, or form. Hence eminent 
writers (as e.g. Lange, Herzog’s Ency., art. ‘‘ Antich.”) think that the culminated Anti- 
christ will arise from a coalition of consummated Absolutism and Radicalism ; or,, as 
others, from a union of Imperialism and Democragy,, or a, Casaro-Republicanism:,. 


706 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


that because of Satan they become such adversaries. As to ‘‘ the bottomless pit’’ or 
‘‘ abyss’ it is sufficient to refer the reader to the comments of writers on Rey. 9:1, 2, and 
simple consistency requires that when once the symbolical meaning of “ the abyss’’ has 
been obtained to preserve it throughout, There is only one passage, so difficult of 
interpretation that but few preserve even the shadow of consistency in its explanation, 
that we cannot explain satisfactorily with this view, and we thus give it with the hope 
that some one may arise who shall be able to interpret it. We refer to Rev. 16 : 138, 
where the Dragon, the Beast, and the False Prophet appear to be represented as existing 
contemporaneously. The only possible way in which it can be incorporated in the view 
presented, is to suppose that when the Dragon is cast down, i.e., the seventh head, (for 
as we have seen a head can be called the beast and the beast a head, and so a head may 
be called the Dragon, etc.), it descends from its Imperial position and occupies during 
the ascendency of virtually an eighth head, above it and controlling it, a subsidiary position, 
If it be objected that two heads cannot exist at the same time without special mention it 
may be alleged that this is perhaps the reason of that remarkable hesitancy in Rev. 17: 
11 to call in another head, and of that revival of ahead in healing its deadly wound Rey. 
13:3. Atleast we do not fall into the confusion that abounds on Rev. 16 : 13, making 
one or the other of these three a power that is fallen before the end, or of making the 
Dragon the Eastern Roman Empire and the beast the Western which violates the unity 
of the heads, etc. Such is the difficulty pertaining to this point, that in all probability 
time must determine the correctness of interpretation. 2. Next, the number of his name, 
666, still pertains to the future, this is the number of the first beast and not of the 
second, thus again showing, against various interpretations, that the last head of the first 
beast is the Antichrist, and this number is evidently contained, as suggested by com- 
mentators in the numerical value of the letters of his name or title. Among all those 
hitherto presented as possible, the old one of Jrenzus seems to be the favorite one, viz., 
that of Lateinos. Time alone will reveal what the number really is, and it will be under- 
stood by the wise and believing owing to its numerical value. The student will find 
suggested names in Smith’s Bib. Dic., art. ‘‘ Antichrist,’’ Calmet do., Prof. Stuart, Com. 
Rev., Barnes, do., Faber’s Diss., Elliott’s Hore Apoc., Lords Apoc., etc., etc. 3. The 
image that was made to the first beast (again manifesting that the last head of this beast 
is the Antichrist), and causing the image to speak and issue authoritative commands is 
also future, and it may be premature to say what is denoted by it. The fact that the 
image itself is to be worshipped indicates that it forms, whatever it may be, an object of 
idolatrous worship. Faber and others may be correct when they deem it significant of 
actual idol worship, If the language is symbolical then it denotes something under the 
image that existsin connection with the first beast (some authoritative power co-operating, 
as councils, etc., under a leadership) but if to be understood literally, then idol worship 
is evidently meant. The latter conclusion is not to be rejected as unwarranted by the 
advance of civilization, seeing that other passages intimate such a return to image 
worship (Obs. fol.), and that we have indications even now that men of intelligence are 
not far removed from the same. (Thus, e.g. Gordon in Threefold Test, and Baxter in 
Louis Napoleon), narrate how Spear (1852) and other Spiritualsts endeavored to construct 
the image of a man at the High Rock, Lynn, Mass., with vocal apparatus which was to 
be manipulated by the spirits and form the grand medium of communications. It was 
to form ‘‘ the great Spiritual Revelation of the Age,” “ Heaven’s last best Gift to man,” — 
etc., but it failed to meet expectations and nothing more is heard of it. This incident — 
is suggestive, showing how, when the time is fully come, men may under some such plea 
succeed in palming off image worship—as a link between him and the spiritual—upon 
the masses.) Its symbolical or literal nature will be manifested in due time, and suffi- 
cient is revealed to cause its recognition in either case. 4. In reference to the two 
witnesses who are also embraced (Rey. 11) in this time, times and a half (as indicated by 
comparison of the predictions) of Antichrist’s great power, and are killed by him (comp, 
v. 7 with Rev. 13), it is scarcely necessary to pass over the opinions respecting them (see 
Bib. Dic., coms., Proph. writers). Being also still future, it is impossible to definitely 
determine who they are. The opinion so prevalent that it will be Elijah and some other 
prophet is exceeding harsh and inconclusive (for we cannot believe that one translated 
to glory shall come to experience death). The likening of them to ‘‘ two olive trees” 
and ‘‘ two candlesticks’’ rather directs us to conceive of them as two churches, classes, or 
bodies of men standing related to the Divine truth and testifying in its favor. These, 
whoever they denote, are specially raised up and favored at this period until finally they 
are overcome, followed by a resurrection, thus directing us, in all probability, to two 
classes of the martyrs who thus die for their witnessing and refusing the mark an 


PROP. 1615] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 707 


worship of the beast. Some characteristics must, in the way of proclamation (as e.g. 
Rey. 13 : 6-9) and resistance to the beast, distinguish them, or else, as others suggest, 
the number two is to be taken in the sense of completeness, a sufficiency of testimony to 
establish the truth (which seems however scarcely allowable by the reiteration of the 
two in trees and candlesticks). 5. In what ‘‘ temple of God’”’ does he (the Antichrist, 2 
Thess. 2) sit? Much has been written on this point, some taking the ground that he sat 
in the temple of God at Jerusalem (as e.g. the Romans, forgetting that the temple was 
burnt and no such exhibition took place etc.) ; or that this temple will be rebuilt by the 
Jews at the time of the end and be occupied by the Antichrist (but such a building by 
the Jews would not make it the temple of God any more (less) than the churches erected 
in God’s name and including the worship of Jesus) or that, as the Church is the temple, 
he arrogates to himself the power of lording it over the Christian Church (but this over- 
looks the predicted fact that instead of being in the Christian Church he is hostile to it, 
attacks, and overcomes it), What then does the temple of God mean? The key is 
found in the added language : ‘* showing himself that heis God ,” that is, just ashe professes 
to be God but is not, so he professes (as a God) to sit in the temple of God, which, how- 
ever, is really no temple of God as he isno God. The phrase temple of God is thus 
employed as the most expressive to indicate the worship (associated with the idea of a 
temple) which he claims, as explained, as God and points out that as an opposer of 
Christ, he also as one that is worshipped professes to occupy the temple of God. The 
phraseology is therefore simply descriptive of the false and arrogant claims of the Anti- 
christ and not to be allowed by us. It is illustrative of his success in constituting him- 
self the object of religious reverence and adoration. 6. We repeat in this connection, 
that the ten (not ‘‘ many” as Fulke, etc.), kingdoms are also yet future. They are asso- 
ciated with and support this last head of the beast, this personal Antichrist, and at some 
period three of them (a mark of recognition for the time to come) shali be uprooted 
Dan. 7), leaving seven remaining. Before this uprooting it is asserted that the ten 
horns together with the beast shall destroy the harlot woman (Rev. 17:16). It would 
be premature and presumptuous to designate those kingdoms, seeing that the number 
only is given without particularizing.* 7. In the text we have repeatedly taken it for 
granted that the Papacy is represented to us by the Babylon of Rev. 17. A few remarks 
may be added by way of enforcing such an interpretation. A host of able writers and 
coms. have fully identified the Beast of Rev. 17 with the fourth Beast of Daniel 7, viz., 
the Roman Empire, and have also shown that the harlot symbolizes a corrupted, aposta- 
tizing Church. Those two points are impregnable, and it follows that this Roman 
Empire is portrayed to us as supporting a corrupt Church. Now history gives us 
the fulfilment of particulars, so minutely and accurately, in that of the Roman 
Empire and the Papacy, that the student carefully weighing the evidence must acknowl- 
edge asad but unmistakable fulfilment, which no theorizing (such as Arnold’s making 
Rome the type of the world in his Interp. of Proph., etc.), can set aside. We have all the 
decisive marks in the Papacy, such as, its being fostered and elevated into power by the 
* aid extended by the Roman Emperors, the nations it influenced, the kings it led into 
corrupting ways, the vast control over the inhabitants of the earth by its spiritual 


* Writers who insist that the ten horns arose about the 5th century and continue 
down although changed to others, take an unwarranted liberty with the prophecy, although 
claiming (as e.g. Thomas in Elpis Israel, p. 291) that the prediction does not require the 
ten originally established, but simply ten when the image is smitten. But this is essen- 
tially modifying the prophecy, for by adopting its principle we might take the lberty of 
changing the beasts themselves. It is an interpretation made to suit a theory. Dan. 2 
and 7 and Rev. 17 say not that the ten horns are to arise and give place to other ten, and 
this successively, and then finally to come out ten again at the smiting, but ten arise and 
these same ten thus arisen, assail the harlot and destroy her, etc. Again, on this theory, 
so popular with many, in order to make out the Papacy to be the Antichrist, we would 
find, on account of the changes and succession of kingdoms not ten but over fifty or 
sixty horns or toes. Again, if the ten kingdoms arose in the fifth cent. as such writers 
assert, then the image is disproportionate as to time, for the toes endure longer than 
the feet or legs, thus occupying the most conspicuous portion of the image. Now the 
Spirit seeks homogeneousness in its figures and fulfilment, and, therefore, in Rev. 17 the 
toes or horns are limited to one hour ora brief period of time, and not, as these inter- 
preters claim, extending over thirteen centuries, Again, these horns that arise are to 
hate and destroy the harlot, but the horns that these writers enumerate, have in the 
past, sustained and built up the Papacy. 


708 THE THEOORATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


fornication, its representatives arrayed in purple, scarlet, gold, etc., its fearful blood- 
guiltiness in slaying ‘‘ the martyrs of Jesus,’’ the location assigned to the woman and 
the identification with ‘‘ that great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.” 
These, and others, are so conclusive that there can be no hesitancy in maintaining, with 
the multitude of expositors, that the Papacy is denoted ‘and that it is called Babylon 
because of its being the head (as ancient Babylon) of a powerful corrupting organization, 
etc. The reader is referred to commentaries and prophetical writers for an abundance 
of illustrations establishing such an exposition ; out of the multitude, we select one, as 
evincing the contrast between what the Spirit says and what the woman says, (taken 
from Bengel’s Gnomon, vol. 5, p. 343 and quoted from the Indiction for a Jubilee given 
by Benedict XIIL, a.p. 1725): ** To this holy city, illustrious with the memory of so 
many holy martyrs, and especially instructed in the doctrine of the blessed apostles, the 
princes of the Church, and hallowed with their glorious blood, flock together with 
religious eagerness of mind. MHasten to the place which God hath chosen ; ascend to this 
New Jerusalem, whence from the very beginning of the infant Church the law of the Lord 
and the light of evangelical truth has flowed forth to all nations. (Hasten to) a city 
honored with so many and so great benefits, loaded with so many gifts, that it is most 
deservedly called the city of priests and kings, built for the guide of ages, the city of the Lord, 
the Zion of the Holy One of Israel. Here in truth make confession unto God in the great 
assembly, praise Him among much people. Inasmuch as this very Catholic and Apostolic 
Roman Church, constituted the Head of the World, by the sacred seat of the blessed 
Peter, is the mother of all believers, the faithful interpreter of the Divinity, and the misiress 
of all churches. Here the unsullied deposit of the faith, here the fountain of sacerdotal 
unity, here the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the supreme power of binding and 
loosing, here, finally, that inexhaustible treasure of the sacred indulgences of the Church, of 
which the Roman Pontiff is the dispenser, is guarded.” * Butit must be added, that one 
clause in this prediction extends over the Church or churches wherever corrupted, viz., 
that this Babylon is “ the Mother of harlots,” the chief or leader in apostatizing, and that 
other harlots, on asmaller scale and not so distinctively marked as great, leading powers, 
exist outside of her communion, imitating her spirit and corruptions. What these 
daughters are, it is, perhaps, impossible to particularize, and yet history with its unspar- 
ing testimony does teach us that even in Protestantism the spirit of the Mother has too 
often manifested itself in enforcing legalized doctrines, in persecuting, etc. ; the same 
exclusiveness and arrogance extending even to the most numerically small sects. This 
is asad but alas too true portraiture, of the past and the present.+ 8. The Gog and © 


* We direct attention to a wonderful admission made by a Roman Catholic, Bh. 
Walmsley in his Exp. of the Apoc., p. 127, (quoted by Brooks, p. 346, Ap. to Hl. Proph. 
Interp.), who, while trying to save Papal Rome, admits that Rome is denoted, calling it 
however ‘‘ Pagan Rome.’ Thus: ‘* This same womanis further said ta carry on her 
forehead the following inscription: A Mystery: Babylon, the great, the mother of the forni- 
cations, and the abominations of the earth. Here is a mystery, or an enigma to be unravelled, 
viz., Babylon, the great, the fornications, and the abominations of the earth. The reader, we 
apprehend, is already prepared in great measure for the solving of this enigma. Babylon 
the great, is the great Imperial city of Pagan Rome. And she is the Woman, as we have 
just shown, who is the mother of the fornications and abominations of the earth. This is the 
explanation of the proposed mystery. But to make it more clear, that by Babylon the great 
is here meant idolatrous Rome, we appeal to the angel’s words : **‘ The Woman which thou 
sawest is the great city which hath kingdom over the kings of the earth, which, as we have 
before observed, plainly points out the great ancient city of Rome, that domineered over 
the greatest part of the kingdoms of the then known world. The woman therefore is the 
image of that city, and in the inscription on her forehead she is styled, Babylon the great ; 
consequently Babylon the great is here the same as the city of Rome. In the primitive 
ages this figurative name of Babylon was frequently given heathen Rome by the Chris- 
tians, on account of the resemblance of the character of those two cities, for their 
idolatry and for their oppressing—one the Jews; the other the Christians. St. Peter 
dates his first letter from Babylon (1 Pet. 5 : 13), that is, from Rome as St Jerome and 
Eusebius tell us. ‘ The appellation of Babylon (said Tertullian) is used by St. John for 
the city of Rome, because she resembles ancient Babylon, in the extent of her walls ; in 
her haughtiness ; on account of her dominion ; and in persecuting the saints’ (Lib. adv. 
Jud.). St. Austin also says, ‘Rome is a second Babylon and a daughter of the ancient 
Babylon’ (de Civ. lib. 22, c. 18). Babylon the great is therefore sufficiently distinguished.” 

+ The position of writers who include more than the Papacy in the word Babylon is 


ROP. 1672) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 709 


Magog of Ezekiel chs. 38 and 39, are supposed by many ancient and modern writers to 
be descriptive of the ravages of this last, great Antichrist, and correctly so, owing to the 
Similarity of character, invasion of Palestine, and final overthrow. The reader is 
referred to Bib. Dic. and Hncycls. for the various opinions respecting Gog and Magog, 
and to proph. writers and commentators for particular applications of the same. We are 
only now concerned to show that the name and prediction is applicable to the last head 
of the beast ; and that this power, delineated by the prophet may be found in the terri- 
torial limits of the Roman Empire, and not outside of it as in Russia, in the Turks, in 
distant Asia, etc. (1) The four kingdoms or empires are continuous to the Advent (with 
the exception of a non-existence or headless state of the last one for a time), but accord- 
ing to the theories that we oppose, another fifth kingdom under Gog and Magog is intro- 
duced previous to the Sec. Advent, which violates the chronological order. (2) The Anti- 
christ is only found in the last development of the Roman power and hence must be 
found, if Gog is delineative of him, in that power, for prophecy does not contradict 
itself. (3) This we find even in the name, for if we allow its original application to 
nations in Asia, we find these same nations emigrating into and inundating the Roman 
Empire, and becoming so predominantly the ruling force in directing the Empire, 
whence it seems appropriate to reproduce it. If the name is simply symbolical or indic- 
ative of unknown enemies (called after those that were known, as Babylon is used) 
then it also applies even to the signification of the name ‘‘ covered or hidden’’ or 
** exalted” (as given by Priest, etc., indicative of his concealed purposes, or character, 
dissembling, etc.), if that is to be received. The student will find, after a careful 
examination of authorities, that opinions entertained respecting the names given by 
Ezek. are based upon mere conjecture, and so far as these have any plausible foundation, 
are as applicable to the people who overcame and re-established the Roman Empire as to 
any other. If mere conjecture, without sufficient proof, is to decide the matter then 
against all the prevailing theories we must limit the rise etc. of Gog and Magog to that 
portion of Asia between the Black and Caspian seas. ‘The real truth in the case is that 
they are unknown nations and that a knowledge of them can only be derived from a 
comparison of other Scripture which more particularly specifies and traces this Anti- 
christian power. (4) And here we plant ourselves firmly upon Ezek. 38: 17,* which 
expressly says: ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord God, Art thou not he of whom I have spoken in old 
time by my servants the prophets of Israel, which prophesied in those days many years, 
that I would bring thee against them.” God described this identical Antichristian power 
previously in olden time, but not by the name of Gog (unless we take the Sep. and 
Samar. versions of Balaam’s Agag a name used similarly, viz., representative of an 
enemy) but (as comparison of previously given predictions show) under a variety of 
names expressive of his being a powerful adversary that shall arise in the last days. The 
mention of “ the prophets” shows that it was generally the subject of prediction (which 


thus far correct, but just so soon, whatever it may denote, as they make this Babylon an 
* equivalent of the last Antichrist and have this Babylon to fall at the same time with him, 
they violate the order of prediction. A writer of ability with signature ‘‘B” in Proph. 
Times, vol. 7, p. 61, 64, makes out Babylon to be partly a representation of civil govern- 
ment and in its last phase a universal monarchy, but that this is not meant is evident 
from its being supported by, and finally overturned by, civil powers, and that when 
fallen, civil power, and in its widest extent under Antichrist, still exists. 

* Hence we reject all theories which would distinguish Gog and Magog from the Anti- 
christ. Thus e.g. Lincoln (Lects. on Rev., vol. 2, p. 137,) takes the position that Gog of 
Ezek. 38 and 39 is not mentioned in Rev. and is an enemy that appears in “ Palestine 
some short while subsequent to Israel’s deliverance by the interposition of the Lord of 
Hosts.’’ This denial of identity with the last culminated Antichrist smitten at the Sec. 
Advent introduces unnecessary confusion and antagonism, as a comparison of Dan. 7, 
and 11, and 12; Rev. 13 and 17 plainly shows, seeing that the characteristics, invasion, 
and end of the one are precisely what pertain to Gog and Magog. The reason for such 
an inference by Lincoln, and others, is, that the description of the Jewish nation estab- 
lished in Palestine in unwalled villages, etc., does not fit with the theory of the interval 
between the two stages of the Advent being only seven years. Hence they are forced to 
make it later in time. We, however, make the interval not less than seventy-five years, 
and the seven years we date only from the time that a covenant is made by Antichrist 
with the Jewish nation. The interval (comp. Prop. 130, etc.), must be lengthy seeing 
that in it we have a renewed proclamation of the Gospel, the partial restoration of the 
Jews, the development of the Antichrist with the ten horns, the fall of Babylon, etc. 


710 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


excusés the references in the text to him, if any are disposed to object to their number) 
and we cannot for a moment doubt that Daniel, who also prophesied about this time, 
and was specially commissioned to predict the things pertaining to this Antichristian 
power (as his prophecies proclaim), would omit direct mention of this Gog. We insist 
from the corresponding marks given, etc., that he also portrays Gog to us, not as the 
Russian power, or as the Turks, but as the last head of the Roman Empire in its revived 
state (Prop. 160, etc.). With this tracing of the Antichrist, John the Revelator accurately 
corresponds, and hence to make Gog a separate, distinctive Antichrist is opposed to the 
analogy of prophecy. Instead of confining ourselves to conjectures respecting the name, 
we rather take a plain prophecy, which predicts his rise out of a certain empire, and 
accept it as certainly descriptive of him. The only valid objection that can be urged 
against this position must not be based upon the names (involved in obscurity) but upon 
showing that the acts of this Gog, his final end etc., are not in correspondence with those 
attributed to the personal Antichrist. (5) This Gog has not yet appeared (for to make it 
applicable to the Turks, as Prof. Bush, without such a predicted overthrow and restora- 
tion of the Jewish nation etc., is to violate all prophetical propriety) and from the tenor 
of the prediction will not appear until a partial restoration of the Jews to their land 
which corresponds precisely with (Prop. 160, etc.), the revelation of this last head of the 
beast. (6) The marks of identity are these: a confederation formed, an invasion of 
Palestine, Lybia and Ethiopia also connected with him, smitten by six plagues, comes 
against God’s ancient people the Jews (comp. Zech. 14), encamps upon and falls upon 
the mountains of Israel, this done through the power of God that He may be sanctified 
and magnified, the time specified in the latter years, the Jews shall recognize and the 
heathen acknowledge God’s power, the fury of God against this power, the shaking, 
sword, rain, fire, feast, spoil, subsequent outpouring of spirit, dwelling safely, etc., 
all accurately correspond with what attends and follows the invasion of Palestine by this 
last head of the Roman beast. So many points of coincidence are amply sufficient to 
justify its interpretation as entirely applicable to the Antichrist of Daniel and John.* 
7. The ancient opinion, before Paul and John wrote, was that the great opposer of the 
Messiah, the one whom the Messiah would overcome with vengeance was this Gog. 
(This opinion of the Jews that ‘‘ at the very end of time’’ ‘‘ Gog and Magog shall come 
up against Jerusalem and they shall fall by the hand of King Messiah,” etc., is noticed 
by numerous writers as e.g. Priest’s View, p. 39, Clarke’s Com., vol. 3, p. 646, Mede’s 
Works, Book 1, p. 374, B. 3, pp. 713, 751, Dr. Etheridge’s Transl. of Targums, p. 430, 
etc.) This resulted from their combining the prophecies of Ezekiel, Daniel, Zechariah, 
etc., as relating to one and the same power. Now if this view so generally entertained 
was erroneous, then certainly the apostles when actually adverting to the same subject” 
viz., the Anti-Messiah ought to have given us some intimation of the incorrectness of 
the interpretation. In place of this, they confirm the Jewish opinion by applying the 
destruction, etc., of this Anti-Messiah to the personal Sec. Advent (so e.g. 2 Thess. 2 ; 
Rey. 19) of Jesus Christ. 8. The mention of Gog and Magog after the thousand years 
seems to favor the idea that the names are, Jike Edom, Moab, Babylon, taken as repre- 
sentative of enemies. While making this allusion, we may refer to the effort made by 
some (as Bush, On the Mill.) to unite the overthrow of Rev. 19 before the Millennial age 


* Hence the view of Purdon (Last Vials, Dec., 1865), and Reineke (Proph. Times, 
May, 1866), that Gog succeeds the Antichrist after some interval of time is not allowable, 


seeing that it violates the order of events as given by Daniel and John, both introducing . 


the Millennial era with no second overthrow of another power. To thus distinguish and 
separate what the Scriptures unite destroys the unity of prophecy. The reasons assigned 
for such a view are readily met by the partial restoration of the Jews, that in addition to 
the Antichrist’s hostility to the truth he also seeks for spoil, that the phrase ‘‘all of 
them’’ (upon which so much stress is laid, v. 8 and 11) does not by any means prove the 
restoration of all the tribes or all of the Jews, but only refers to the fact that all of those 
who were restored supposed themselves to be safe, etc., in brief, they are too inconclu- 
sive to set aside the common and prevailing view that the Gog and the Antichrist are the 
same. ‘The latter part of the prediction shows that the restoration of ‘‘ the whole house 
of Israel”’ and the blessings resulting therefrom follow this invasion of Gog. So the refers 
ences to Antiochus, or the Turk, or the Pope, or Russia (in the past, e.g. Crimean war ; 
for as to the future, we have shown under Prop. 160 how only it can be denoted, if incor- 


porated, by conquest, as an integral part of the Roman Empire), must be discarded, — 


seeing that nothing commensurate in fulfilment has been witnessed, and that it violates 
the unity of prediction. Simple consistency demands the position taken by us. 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 711 


with that described after the same period as a singular and self-contradictory mode of 
interpretation. Who this Gog and Magog is, arising after the one thousand years, 
owing to the exceeding brevity of the description, we cannot determine. Conjectures 
abound (such as the confinement of some powers to an allotted territory during the 
thousand years and subsequent release, the resurrected wicked dead allowed to organize, 
etc.), but our subject does not require its elucidation, not being related to the Antichrist 
which precedes the ushering in of the Mill. Kingdom. This much, however, we can say, 
that whatever difficulties are connected with this last Gog, following as it does the 
Millennial glory, they are such which must attach themselves to any theory which accepts 
of a general, universal conversion of the world under the reign of the Messiah, whatever 
intimations of exception may be given. However inexplicable, resulting from concise- 
ness and lack of explanation, it must be received by faith, resting assured that when the 
time of fulfilment comes it also will be verified. Being an event predicted by the Spirit, 
it does not (like the Incarnation, resurrection, etc.), depend for its accuracy upon our 
ability to reconcile it with our ideas of fitness or propriety but upon God's power to bring 
it to pass. It is one of the things which does not affect us either in this dispensation or 
in the one to come (for it does not injure the restored Davidic Kingdom being speedily 
and terribly crushed), being an event far in the distant future, so that the slightest hint 
is only given, it being taken for granted that before the event itself occurs we shall 
receive more and abundant revelation upon the subject as co-rulers with the Christ. It 
does not stand related to our subject because we only have to do with the course of events 
down to the re-establishment of the Davidic Kingdom, and to the fulfilment of the 
covenants and the promises based upon them. It seems to be introduced in order to 
teach us the enduring prosperity and perpetuity of this Kingdom, notwithstanding a still 
future, and the final effort of the power of evil against it, and this should be sufficient 
for us, resting in the consciousness produced by what has been so remarkably fulfilled 
in thousands of instances previously that God knows the future and makes no statements 
concerning it that shall not come to pass. We are not of those who would limit God’s 
knowledge, or His ability to work, or His words as they stand recorded.* 


Obs. 14. Leaving some things which this Antichrist is to perform for 
the following Propositions, a few things relating to him may be introduced 
here. ‘The position assumed is that the apostasy—emphasized as the dis- 
tinctive great apostasy—precedes and introduces the Antichrist, and this 
only when the last head of the fourth revived Empire jis attained ; a head, 
too, so remarkable in its claims, etc., that it deserves to be called an eighth 
head, and yet, in virtue of tts connection with the seventh, really pertains to 
at. Therefore, neither the Papacy (which is the apostasy, i.e. the great 
one) nor the Roman Empire (however unchristian and under apostatizing 


* The Pre-Mill. doctrine, the covenanted Kingdom of the Messiah, etc., do not depend 
upon our ability to explain in detail the Gog of Rev. 20. It serves, however, to show us 
that the predictions that ‘‘ all are righteous,” etc., refer to the Jewish nation, and such 
nations as are incorporated into the Kingdom. The glory of the Lord covering the 
whole earth is a gradual work, extending itself, and evil will only be wholly eradicated 
from the earth after the little season following the thousand years. Several explanations 
sufficiently meet the difficulty, as that (Lange, etc.), distant nations—so intimated in 
prediction by ‘‘ the four corners of the earth—not as yet brought under the Theocratic- 
Davidic Kingdom, are denoted ; or that (Thomas, etc.), certain ones are left purposely 
to develop still further human schemes of self-aggrandizement, etc.—shut up in distant 
regions (Shinar, etc.), who then come forth to attack, under Satanic delusion, the Messi- 
anic Kingdom ; or, that (Perry, etc.), the resurrected wicked dead are thus led on, 
gathered from the ends of the earth, to such an attack (which receives e.g. some counte- 
nance from Ps. 59, etc.) ; or, that a combination of distant living nations and of the 
wicked dead are denoted. It is scarcely necessary to say that such theories as (Burchell) 
that evil spirits headed by Satan, or (Burnet) that a new race is specially generated, must 
be discarded as untenable. Being a subject independent of our doctrine, it has no 
special relation to it, saving that it suggests the limitation mentioned by us—a limitation 
which every Mill. theory must, more or less, preserve to meet the fulfilment. Its very 
relation to the supernatural is the key to its conciseness ; our inexperience would only 
increase the perplexities of an attempted explanation. 


712 _ THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


influences) until down to a particular time when it changes its form as inti- 
mated in the last head, is the Antichrist (Antichrists in Joln’s sense of 
**many Antichrists”’ they may be, but not the particularly predicted last 
Antichrist). For, as shown, the Papacy is destroyed by this Antichrist, 
and the Roman Empire does not dev elop it wnéil this last, final modifica-_ 
tion takes place. Attention is called again to this point ‘to indicate that 
this Antichrist is a civil head, the absolute ruler over a vast government, the 
Imperial Lord over an extended Empire which embraces in it subordinated ~ 
but too willing civil agents. Connected with this purely civil relationsiiip| 
there is also the religious claim of power to direct the worship of the 
nations, and it is this especially which gives him the title of Antichrist. 

Both are combined, and it is this combination which makes Him so fearful to 
contemplate ; the former giving him the ability to enforce the penalties 
relating to the latter. Now, to understand the prophecies pertaining to 
him, it must be allowed that the Spirit describes him under his several 
aspects. Thus e.g. in one place, as 2 Thess. 2, he is portrayed to us more 
in his religious aspect and hostility to Christ, but linking him by his over- | 
throw through the Advent of Jesus with the virtually eighth head of the | 
fourth beast, , which has the same characteristics and fate ; in another place, | 
as Rev. 17, he is represented more in his civil aspect, who makes war with 
Christ and is overcome ; and in still another place, as Rev. 13, he is de- 
scribed as combining these in himself. It is only therefore by a compari- 
son of Scripture that we can arrive at the full description—for purposes of 
recognition and warning—of this gigantic power, concentrated and directed 
in a single person. ‘This feature makes a regular ascending scale in his 
portraiture, having him first of all presented simply as a man of great 
wickedness ‘(as in “the Ps.), then as a powerful ruler (as in Isa.), then as 
identified with the fourth Empire (implied in Dan. 2 and amplified in 
Dan. 7. Comp. Irenzus, b. v., ch. 25), then respectively we are directed by 
Paul and John to additional particulars respecting his religious and civil 
relationship ; all of which clearly and unmistakably presents us with a per- 
sonage, excelling all that has ever yet been manifested in the way of arro- 
gance and sinfulness. ‘The picture presented is too circumstantial, and the 
results in the blood shed, etc., too horribly particularized for us to believe 
that it is overdrawn or exaggerated in the least particular. Let the world 
say what it will, let professed believers explain away as they may the testi- 
mony of the Spirit, yet such an Antichrist will, must come. ‘The apostatiz- 
ing does include a falling away from the truth in those who profess to be 
in the Church (and this history verifies in that of the Church), but this is 
only preliminary, preparative to the emergence of the Antichrist. The 
Antichrist is nowhere asserted to be even a professed member of the Chris- 
tian Church (see note to preceding Obs. and (5) ) ; his open and unsparing 
hostility is too apparent to admit of it, but he is the virtually eighth head 
of the Roman beast, and designated as ‘such, because in this very respect he 
differs from the immediate pr eceding head which professed to be still Chris- 
tian. Yet we must ever keep in mind, as the tenor of prophecy proclaims, 
that he is one who knows the truth of God as it is recorded (which he 
opposes), but positively and obstinately rejects it, and sets up another stand- 
ard for the truth. ‘Therefore he is no heathen, in the sense of one who 
has never heard the Word, but is one conversant with Bible doctrine and 
determined upon crushing it. Keeping, therefore, in view these several 
aspects of the Antichrist, we are the better prepared to recognize and 


° 


PRopP 1614] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 713 


appreciate the Scriptures appertaining to him. Thus e.g. who else but 
this Antichrist is denoted (Ps. 52) in the “‘ mighty man’? (Luther : Tyrant) 
who “ doasts himself in mischief,’’ denies (as implied) the providence of 
God, deviseth mischief and deceit with his ‘‘ tongwe’’ (with ‘‘ the tongue’? 
will he prevail), loves °‘ evil,’’ ‘‘ lying,” and ‘‘ devouring words ,’ whom 
God is to “* destroy,’’ “‘ take away,” ‘‘ pluck out. of his dwelling place,’’ and 
** root out of the land of the living ;’’ and of whom it shall be said: ‘‘Zo/ 
this 1s the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in the abun- 
dance of his riches, and strengthened himself vn his wickedness ?’’? To con- 
fine its fulfilment simply to Doeg the Edomite, is to weaken the descrip- 
tion, impair its force and propriety, and immeasurably exalt the standing 
and power of Doeg. In the light of other predictions the Fathers were not 
mistaken when (Ps. 140) they applied ‘‘ the evil man,’’ ‘‘ the violent man,”’ 
‘* the evil speaker’ or *‘ a man of tongue,’’ who purposes to overthrow the 
believer in the most insidious manner, and upon whom vengeance is de- 
nounced, to the Antichrist. The allusion (Isa. 51 : 12) to ‘ the man that 
shall die’’ and to ‘‘ the Son of man that shall be made as grass,’’ also styled 
‘‘ the oppressor,’’ is sufficiently significant when taken in its connection 
with the promised deliverance. Indeed, by observing that the Spirit, while 
not passing by the preliminary antichristian development, specially de- 
scribes the culmination, as seen by the relationship it sustains to certain 
results (the deliverance of God’s people, the restoration of the Jewish 
nation, the introduction of Mill. blessedness, etc.), we will find allusions, 
scattered here and there, which otherwise would escape the notice and 
comparison that they richly deserve. , 


However significantly in the past certain divine declarations have been realized, the 
same will stand forth with far greater force and power when Antichrist is crushed. 
Thus e.g. Prov. 21 :30: “ There is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against 
the Lord.” Prov. 29:16: “ When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth ; 
but the righteous shall see their fall.’”’ So also Prov. 1 : 24-32; Ps. 92:7; Prov. 
ees 12, -and.19,- 21 > Ps. 387 32, 7,:9,,10, 12-15, ete, 


Obs. 15. This Antichrist will be destroyed before the re-establishment of 
the Davidic throne and Kingdom. ‘The plain predictions of the Word 
absolutely require it. ‘The reader, even in a cursory examination of the 
prophecies, must be struck with the fact that nearly all Millennial descrip- 
tions, either in the text or context, incorporate this idea of some great power 
being suddenly and overwhelmingly overcome by the exertion of Divine 
interposition and power. Having already abundantly shown (Prop. 123, 
etc.) this feature of the subject, it is unnecessary to repeat it, seeing how 
conclusively this is asserted in Rev. 19, 2 Thess. 2, Dan. 7, etc.’ The 
identity of the man of sin (Paul), the little horn (Dan.), the eighth head of 
the seven-leaded beast (John), the last Wilful King (Dan.), is abundantly 
shown in the same claims, the same characteristics, the same end at the 
same time and by the same means, so that it is impossible, without incon- 
sistency, to reject the overwhelming testimony. With these agree various 
other predictions already specified, and that will be advanced in following 
propositions. To indicate how largely the Spirit describes this overthrow 
of this culminated antichristian head, we, by way of illustration only, 
present a few passages. Thuse.g. in Ps. 72, where the blessed and most 
glorious reign of Jesus, the Messiah, is delineated, it is represented as 
having broken ‘‘ in pieces the oppressor,’’ and in saying the poor and needy 


714 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 161. 


(Justin, Dial. with Trypho, ch. 34, says, ‘* from the man of power’’) from 
** deceit, violence, and bloodshed’’ (for the expression ‘‘ precious shall their 
blood be in His sight’’ 1s indicative of a previously experienced martyr- 
dom). The Assyrian of Micah 5 : 5 has been held by many (as e.g. Victo- 
rinus, Com. on Apoc., etc.) to be descriptive of the Antichrist. Notwith- 
standing the diversity of translations and the conjectures engrafted upon 
the passage, the student will find that some propriety pertains to this sug- 
gestion, because in point of time, as the context shows, it stands related to 
the Messianic reign over the restored Jews which is effected by the destruc- 
tion of the Assyrian (the name of the present enemy being used to desig- 
nate a coming one—a principle advocated by Jews, commentators, and 
prophetical writers). It at least, whatever difficulty appertains to a correct 
explanation of a portion of it, pertains to some power who is, at the time 
when this reign is to be inaugurated and the Jews are to be restored, to 
invade Palestine, etc., and must, in view of its obscurity, be interpreted i in 
the light of more extended predictions. Again, it is the might of King 
Jesus that overcomes this “ Assyrian.” Isa. 66 : 15-24 is descriptive of 


this period, as a comparison with other Scripture unmistakably proves, for — 


we have the Coming of the Lord to deliver His people, the fearful destruc- 
tion by fire and sword of a gathered multitude, followed by the restoration 
of the Jewish nation, the conversion of the nations that are spared, ard the 
setting up of the new heavens and new earth. In Isa., chs. 25 and 26, the 
Millennial era is immediately preceded by the violent downfall of some 
great oppressing power (which was as ‘‘ the blast of the terrible. ones’’) 
called ‘‘ the branch of the terrible ones’’ (the Anti-Branch). And this 
retribution, with the Kingdom and blessings wmmediately following, 18 
pointedly ascribed to the spocial manifestation and might of the Lord who 
comes for salvation. Such references could be multiplied,” expressively 
enforcing the wnity of prophecy in describing the last times cmmediately 
preceding the restored Dayvidic Kingdom under Jesus, the Christ. 

1 Some, who apply the Antichrist of 2 Thess. 2 to the Papacy, lay great stress on the 
phrase ‘‘ shall consume with the spirit (or breath) of his mouth,”’ as indicating a gradual 
wasting or consumption of his power (finding a fulfilment in the past history of the 
Papacy). But we have to remind such, that many critics read, as the New Revision : 
** shall slay with the breath of His mouth,’’ which accords fully with the parallelism, 
with the action ascribed to Jesus at His Coming, and with other parallel passages as e.g. 
Rev. 19 : 15; Isa. ‘11 : 4, ete. 


2 The reader may refer to Ps. 21, where the exaltation of the King i is specified (which 
can only apply to David's Son, the Christ), and the destruction of his enemies “ in the 


time of anger,’’ because “ they intended evil against Thee ; they imagined a mischievous - 


’ 


device, which they were not able to perform,” ete. Or, to Isa. 11 : 4 when the smiting of 
the earth and the slaying of the wicked (applied by the Jews to Antichrist and rendered 
in Chald. ‘‘ impious Roman'’)is done for the deliverance of His people from their 
power, and which stands related in precedence:to the incoming Millennial glory. Or 
again, to Ps. 110 where this King is represented conquering his enemies because the 
Lord will “ strike through kings in the day of his wrath” (the confederated forces of Anti- 
christ Rev. 19) and ‘‘ wound the heads (many have it in the singular, “the head’’ so 
Luther, “das Haupt,” etc.), over many (or great) countries.’’ So plain are many of 
these references, that it isa matter of surprise that any should fail to notice them. 
Cocceius, Treatise on Antichrist, thinks that Isa. chs. 13 and 14; Ezek. chs. 23 and 27, 
etc., are applicable to the Antichrist, and so many others have thought on the ground 
that such fulfilments are only typisal of a greater one in the future. Whatever truth 
there may be in this, we need not employ them by way of argument because of the 
abundance of direct prediction. 


Obs. 16. The subject of the Antichrist teaches, if we. will only receive it, 


= 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. Flb 


that we must come to the interpretation of the Apocalypse in a manner 
very different from that usually hitherto presented. We find it to be a 
distinguishing chronological mark and test of various interpretations. 
Only that mode of explaining the Apocalypse (whatever inchoate fulfilment 
some may be pleased to engraft upon it) which preserves the Antichrist as 
the last head of the beast (Rev. 13), and raises up no conflict or contradiction 
(as to characteristics and final end) between Paul and the Prophets, is alone 
worthy of our acceptance. The plausibility of interpreting an isolated por- 
tion of the Apocalypse, etc., by finding remarkable concidences in history, 
must, if true, be corroborated by a comparison of prophecy as given through 
all of the prophets. ‘The crucial test is found here, and sets aside (what- 
ever of merit, ability, and valuable information may be connected with 
them) a host of prophetical writings. Let the student, e.g. find the Anti- 
christ overcome by Jesus in Rev. 19 (which all admit), and then let him 
trace this beast, and he finds at once that by it is denoted the last head of 
the first beast in Rev. 138. What necessarily follows? First, that this last 
head is no representative of the Papacy (and neither the false prophet) 
because the harlot (Papacy) is previously destroyed by this last head and 
confederated kings. Secondly, that this last head persecuting (Rev. 14) 
after the fall of Babylon, all of which is still future in fulfilment, has then 
to experience the outpouring of God’s wrath (Rev. 14:10). Now the 
wrath of God is contained in the seven ‘‘vials of the wrath of God’’ (Rev. 
15:1, and 16:1). I¢ follows, therefore, since this last head, arising in 
his might only after the fall of Babylon and slaying the martyrs of Jesus 
who refuse his worship and image, ts ste] future, that the outpouring of the 
vials 7s also futwre, for the first one is poured out upon *‘ the men which 
had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image’ 
(Rey. 16 : 2), and which can only be done when this last head of the beast 
has arisen. ‘The conclusion irresistibly comes upon us, that these vials, at 
least, are all yet to be fulfilled. ‘Thirdly, the Spirit, as if to guard us against 
holding a premature fulfilment (as exemplified in otherwise valuable works, 
Elhott’s Hore Apoc., Faber’s Diss., Lord’s Apoc., Barnes’s Com., etc.), 
shows us the relationship that this last head of the beast sustains to prior 
events (considered in most schemes mentioned as the most satisfactorily 
‘ proven by history). Thus in Rey. 11:7, the two witnesses are killed by 
the beast of Rev. 13 (this 1s admitted), and a comparison of the time men- 
tioned, etc. wnmistakably shows that this too ts only done by this last head 
of the beast still future. ‘The prediction hence refers to scenes that are yet 
fo be realized ; the proof being irresistible, if we allow the force of compart- 
son logically applied. We are assured (Rev. 11 : 14) that this is included 
already in ‘‘ the second woe,’’ from which we conclude either that we have 
not entered into it, or that the scenes to be enacted under its duration have 
not yet been realized, and, therefore, at least from this point, it 1s prema- 
ture to engraft a consecutive series of events as fulfilled in the remaining 
trumpet and vials. Fourthly, the chronological order or regular consecu- 
tive series of events upon which so great stress is laid by the Preterist 
Expositors (although they materiallv differ as to the events really denoted, 
e.g. comp. Hlliott’s seals with Lord’s Exp., etc.) is hereby shown to be 
defective, and that they therefore do not merit the degree of confidence 
that so many extend to them. The only possible way to reconcile these 
‘schemes with the future fulfilment is to allow that the Spirit has so framed 
them as to permit a kind of partial, inchoate fulfilment (which position 


716 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


some, as Baxter, etc. take). Whatever of truth there may be in such a 
mode of double interpretation, our subject is one that demands no special 
exainination into its merits. Neither affirming nor denying that some of 
these predictions may have been inchoately fulfilled, we feel constrained to 
declare that such aregular, consecutive fulfilment, extending down even to, 
and through most of, the vials, has no foundation in any fulfilment that 
history has recorded ; seeing that, as shown, many alleged to be past fall 
within the allotted period of the Antichrist, the virtual eighth head of the 
beast. Fifthly, this finds its strongest corroboration in the fact that the 
identity of this last head corresponds with all the other predictions, giving 
the same time when he exists, attributing the same self-deification and acts, 
and describing the same Divine agency in his destruction with the subse- 
quent blessings resulting from his removal. In addition, let the expounder 
of Rev. obtain once the proven position stated by Christheb (Hssay on 
Mod. Infidel.), that ‘‘ the Antichrist, who denies the Father and the Son, 
can be destroyed, not by men, but only by the Lord in the brightness of 
His Coming,”’ or attributed by Schmid (L7d. Theol., p. 510) to Paul, ‘* the 
idea that the appearance of Antichrist will immediately precede the mani- 
festation of Christ,’’ ¢hen it materially changes the interpretation of a large 
portion of the Apocalypse. The Advent of Rev. 19, instead of being 
spiritualized away as something merely providential, etc.; the Millennium, 
instead of being transformed into a period when the martyr spirit is to be 
revived ; the reign of Christ and of the saints, instead of being regarded 


and treated as the ordinary operations of grace, etc. ; ¢hen stand forth with © 


a vividness, reality, and power which again finds its confirmation in the 
plain, grammatical meaning of the Prophets combined. Whatever faults 
in details may be noticeable in such interpreters, they at least preserve the 
distinctive outlines in their consistency, and do not mistake when they dis- 
tinguish (e.g. like Dr. Gess, Proph. Times, vol. 5, p. 130) the Antichrist 
as belonging to the beast, to which we have applied it in its last head, and 
as different even from the corrupt Church which it overthrows, and who is 
to be destroyed by “‘ the second visible manifestation of Jesus’’ ‘as the Son 
of Man in His glorified body and accompanied by His saints,’ preparatory 
to *‘ the reign of a thousand years,”’ etc. 


A work has recently appeared, most confidently reaffirming the Papacy as the great 
Antichrist of prophecy, and really making it the pivotal point of the book and its calcula- 
tions, that deserves some attention. It is Guinness’s Approaching End of the Age, and it 
contains some excellent suggestions, being thoroughly Pre-Millennial. But it is 
unfair in some of its statements, and classes all Futurists (i.e. those who locate the 
culminated Antichrist still future) among those few who interpret the symbolic language 
of the seals, trumpets, and vials literally.* Much that Guinness says respecting progres- 
sive revelation and interpretation and the symbolic language, Futurists, with some limita- 
tion, also receive, but without necessarily coming to the same conclusions. Much that 
he says respecting the Papacy, we also heartily indorse seeing that we regard it as the 
great apostasy and in its organized form Antichristian, but this does not force us to apply 


* For among the Futurists are those who regard much of the portraiture of Rev. as 
symbolical, and insist upon it, that not every particular of a representative picture is to 
be pressed literally, or find a corresponding fulfilment, but that the main leading idea (as 
under the seals, trumpets, and vials), is only to be received and urged. The symbolical 
language is fully recognized, and the meaning of the representation as a whole is to be 
received, thus according with the laws of language. Some excellent writers have—as 
must be sadly acknowledged—marred their interpretations and applications by literaliz- 
ing much that is evidently symbolical. If they were consistent in their theory, then the 
same principle might e.g. be applied to Dan. 0, Nev. 13, ete. 


———— a 


—— — 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 117 


the same prophecies to it that he asserts are applicable. And, when he declares that we 
make nothing of the Papacy as an Antichrist, and thus oppose the almost uniform Protes- 
tant interpretation and application of the Apocalypse, he affirms what is not correct, 
seeing that nearly all, if not all, based their view of the Papacy being delineated upon 
the portraiture of the harlot in Rev. 17, which we also receive and hold forth most promi- 
nently. His work in making the Papacy to cover the predictions relating to the Anti- 
christ, involves itself in numerous difficulties, some of which are herewith appended. 
1. He makes the Papacy the eighth head of the beast of Rev. 13, and in order to do this, 
he has seven heads passed away before its rise. Now to make out the seventh head he 
takes the unwarranted historical liberty of dividing the sixth imperial line or head into 
(p. 162) two classes, ** military emperors,’ and ‘‘ despotic emperors,’’ when Roman law 
and history pronounce them a regular succession (Prop. 160). 2. He entirely ignores 
the historical continuation of the Roman Empire ; the revival of the Western portion 
before the Hastern fell ; the continued Imperial headship and its acknowledgment (Prop. 
160). 3. He properly concedes that all the previous heads were civil heads, and then 
attaches the Papacy which never was a civil head of the Empire, never was so recognized 
but actually received its small temporal authority exercised over a portion of Italy from 
the hands of the recognized civil head of the Empire. 4. He properly makes the harlot in 
Rev. 17 supported by the beast to be the Papacy, but immediately turns around and 
converts the harlot into the beast by making the former the latter’s leading, controlling 
head, thus presenting them as identical, when the prophecy and history show that they 
were separate and distinctive, onesupporting the other. 5. The end likewise of the beast 
and of the woman are distinctive, showing unmistakably that the Papacy is not a head of 
the beast, for the beast and the horns destroy the woman, while the beast and horns 
continuing on are destroyed by the judgments of the Sec. Advent. 6. Ignoring funda- 
mental historical facts in relation to the Empire, he assumes—without seeing the pal- 
pable contradictions—that the Papacy becomes that Empire, and then to prove this 
assumption again assumes that the ycar-day system (applicable to some predictions, as 
the seven times, etc.), must apply to all time announced in prophecy pertaining to this 
Empire, and seeks by a series of correspondences in chronological calculations to sustain 
his position. 7. He makes this assumption respecting the Papacy to become (p. 223) 
** the key to the whole system of times and seasons, natural and revealed.” But to make 
this ‘‘ key” open the times, he must resort to calculations based on lunar, calendar, and 
solar time, so that one or the other may fit, giving himself the widest possible range by 
(p. 475), declaring ‘‘ that all the prophetic periods have double, and some of them triple, 
and even fourfold, eras of commencement and conclusion.” 8. The year-day system is 
dogmatically asserted in reference to the Apocalypse (not as an inchoate fulfilment but) 
as a final one, without the least attempt to meet.the serious and fatal objections (except- 
ing in some small matters as to excessive literalism, horn denoting a dynasty, etc., much 
of which corresponds with our own ideas) urged against such an application as final. 
Aside from the variety of such year-day interpretation in the application to the Church 
or to the world etc., it is sufficient to point out only two things which alone amply refute 
it. No events commensurate with the sixth seal have ever taken place upon earth, and 
to apply to it the downfall of Paganism (which did not interfere with the existence of the 
beast) is simply to caricature ‘‘ the great day of the wrath of the Lamb.”’ (Comp. e.g. 
Dr. Keith’s Appendix, pp. 430-439 in Harm. of Proph.).* Again, the vials have never 
been poured out—although Guinness places us under the sixth, and the proof is positive. 
Examine the order of events in ch. 14 (see Prop. 130) and see in ch, 15 the saints 
removed before the vials are poured out upon the marked and worshippers of the beast, 
and we are assured that before the vials are poured out the first stage of the Advent must 
necessarily have preceded. A system or theory which can pass by an order indicated by 
the prophecy itself is, to say the least, open to grave suspicion. 9. In his eagerness to 
make the Papal chronology ‘“‘ the key to times and seasons,” he reverses the order of 
prophecy. Thus, e.g. he assures us that ‘‘ the little horn’’ of Dan. 7 is also the Papacy. 
Now according to the plain prediction it arises after the ten horns, but according to his 
own estimates the Papacy (e.g. A.D. 533), arose before the ten horns were in existence, 


* Comp. also the reasons assigned by Dr. Seiss, Lects. On the Apoc., Tregelles On Daniel, 
Brookes, Maranatha, ete. However largely used as a weapon against the Papacy (e.g. In 
the 1260 and 1290), numerous writers are returning to the early Church view of the literal 
day interpretation (some admitting an inchoate fulfilment, others rejecting it). Elliott 
Horw Apoc., Faber Diss. On Proph., ete., give the reasons for holding the year-day system. 
Tregelles discusses these in detail, to which discussion the reader is referred. 


718 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


thus flatly contradicting its origin. 10. But Dan. 7 assures us that of those ten horns 
which existed before “ the little horn” arose, three fell on account of its power, but Guin- 
ness informs us (p. 174) that these horns must be found in powers that followed succes- 
sively one after the other when the Papacy was already established, and were really 
destroyed, not by the Papacy, but by the civil head of the Empire. 11. He does not 
observe that the ten horns of Rev. 17 resist and overcome the Papacy, which he cannot 
reconcile with his theory, owing to three being rooted up and the time when he locates 
the rise of those kingdoms. Without proof, or the least attempt to enumerate the ten 
kingdoms, he assumes their existence as well known, when the fact is, that all attempts 
to enumerate them has led to the utmost diversity, and in some instances to real 
absurdity. If so easy of historical verification, he ought to have presented them. 12. 
In order to obtain coincidences of dates he apples to the Papacy a status which does not 
historically belong to it. Thus (p. 466) he refers the 1260 years to a period between the 
decree of Phocas and the downfall of the temporal power of the Pope, claiming an exact 
fulfilment. But unfortunately for the theory, the decree of Phocas did not bestow 
temporal power (which he admits in another place was bestowed long after), hence there 
was no 1260 years of temporal power, and when the temporal power was taken away it 
left the Bishop of Rome in the identical ecclesiastical position and power which he had 
under Phocas. 13. He admits (p 479), that it is not ‘‘ easy’’ ‘in the light of historic 
fulfilment” ‘‘ to affix the exact limits of these 490 years’’ (Daniel’s 70 weeks), and yet 
without the least attempt to show how the latter part of it has been fulfilled, coolly 
appropriates the whole as fulfilled in the past, and bases upon it the notion (which his 
own chronological calculations require) that an accurate fulfilment as to time is not 
requisite. 14. He appropriates 2 Thess. 2 as undoubtedly applicable to his theory of the 
Papacy, owing to a similarity of Antichristian traits found in it, but admits (p. 171) ‘it 
is not denied that the Thessalonian prophecy gives the impression, on a cursory perusal, 
that it predicts a single individual.” We thinks this necessary (after Paul had privately 
informed them respecting the Antichrist) in order that under a false interpretation and 
hope they might be induced to “ watching and waiting for the Lord’s return.” 15. After 
admitting thus (and in several other places) the Futurist idea of a personal Antichrist in 
the early Church, he attempts to bring reproach on the view by (p. 303) linking it with 
the interpretation of ‘‘ Ribera and other Jesuit writers,’’ and complains here and there 
in his work that we forsake Protestant principles and incorporate a defence of Romanism, 
when the fact is that we delineate the Papacy in its relation to the Empire, as to moral 
and religious characteristics, just as he does, and delineate its doom as given in Rev. 17, 
so that our views are in direct antagonism to and severely deprecated by Romanism. 
16. Because we apply certain predictions to the Papacy (which are overlooked, and the 
impression made as if we did not regard it as a great apostasy and Antichristian power), 
which we deem legitimate and sustained by history, and refuse to interpret others, which 
he thus applies, in the same way (owing to order and result as predicted being diverse, 
and the inability of finding a satisfactory historical fulfilment) he charges us (p. 304) as 
follows: “ We believe the Futurist view to be an erroneous and mischievous one ; it 
precludes any adequate conception of the majestic range of the predictions of Scripture ; 
it deprives the Church of the guidance of Divine prophecy, as to the character and 
doom of the great Apostasy ; and of the stimulus to faith and hope, afforded by the true 
interpretation.” It would be easy, from our standpoint, to make similar charges against 
his view, but such statements, appealing to personal opinion and prejudice, have no force 
as arquments. 'They certainly (Pref. p. 15) do not spring from “the enlightenings of the 
Holy Spirit,’ for such enlightenments will accord only with an interpretation that is in 
harmony with the order of prophecy and the fulfilment of history. 17. Because we will 
not receive his chronology of the Papacy but look for an Antichrist which will destroy 


the Papacy and persecute the Church of Christ, and be overthrown at the open Parousia: 


of Jesus, he asserts (p. 490) that we diminish the certainty of Christ’s speedy Coming. 
But the uncertainty of that Coming is not made a particle more certain by chronological 
applications which are opposed both by the tenor of predictions and the facts of history. 
Besides the intervention of definite dates, does not, by any means, enforce the com- 
manded posture of constant watching. 18. To oppose our idea of an Antichrist, culmi- 
nated, after Babylon is fallen, he (p. 96) reflects upon the early Church view of a future 
personal Antichrist under the plea that their views must necessarily be imperfect owing 
to progressive interpretation, but just so soon (p. 164-5) as he finds anything in the early 
Church which he can incorporate into his own application, then the Fathers were correct, 
for “there is the strongest presumption that they were right, for how could Ireneus and 
the Fathers invent such an improbable notion ;” “ Paul says to the early Church ‘ ye 
know,’ the early Church (though not the identical generation) tell us what they knew, 


————— 


a 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 719 


and who are we, that we should say they are mistaken? How can we be in a position 
to correct their error?” We have every reason to believe that under the guidance of 
inspired men who founded the churches, the broad outlines, including the personality 
of the Antichrist, were given, while the exact details, order, and time were left to future 
study and comparison. 19. Again and again he charges our position to be such, that it 
does not sufficiently warn the Church. How can this be so, when he points only to an 
Antichrist that is past as to persecuting power, that is at present in consumption and 
from whom the Church, according to his own statements of decline, need apprehend no 
more danger, while we hold up an Antichrist still future, who shall dreadfully persecute 
the Church, shall rule over the nations, and array himself against Jesus the Christ— 
Christians, Romanism, and the Jews feeling the power of his arrogance? Who is it that 
warns the Church of coming danger, and who assumes the responsibility of declaring 
that the power of the predicted Antichrist, to be destroyed at the Sec. Advent, has power- 
fully waned. Which class of motivgs are best calculated to warn believers? 20. Under 
the plea of the year-day fulfilment respecting the Papacy, he again and again pretends 
that it most effectually disproves the future existence of an Antichrist, and implies that 
all who indorse this year-day system entertain his own opinion on this point. Now the 
facts are, that some of the most eminent writers (as G. 8. Faber, and others), who have 
adopted and defended the year-day system, have also held that the last Antichrist is not 
the Papacy but some other power that arises ; others (as Baxter, etc.), who adopt the 
same have a kind of double fulfilment, one on the year-day principle applicable to the 
Papacy and the other on the literal day interpretation to be applied to another and last 
Antichrist. Thus the adoption of his own principle, does not necessarily asi he asserts, 
lead to his own conclusions. 21. His work being largely taken up with chronological 
calculations, he eulogizes chronology (which has approximatively its value, and ought not 
to be discarded by the students), and (p. 297) he indorses the view that chronology is far 
above signs to excite ‘* the liveliness of our expectation of the Lord’s speedy return.’’ 
We regard both as valuable, and cannot exalt the latter above the former, when our 
Master, to call forth such expectation, Himself lays special stress on the signs. 22. After 
denouncing (p. 97) ‘‘ the Futurist scheme’ as a view which rejects the light thrown on 
the purposes of God by Providence, which exalts the ignorance of the early Church over 
the wisdom and mature judgment of the Church now, he declares : ‘‘ The Futurist view 
denies progressive revelation ‘ and asserts that the early Church understood the 
Apocalypse better than the Church of after times, which is contrary to the analogy of 
Scripture, and to the apparent purpose of God.’’ Suppose we take this position of his, 
and what is the result. Because the Church almost en masse, after eighteen hundred 
years of matured wisdom, believes that the Apocalypse, teaches the conversion of the 
world before the Sec. Advent and a spiritual Millennium, are we to receive this testimony 
that the early Church was mistaken? No! an extreme is to be avoided. On some essen- 
tial points, the grand outlines of Eschatology, the early Church under teachers who were 
inspired was conversant, but on details, the exact order or time, they were left, as we 
are, to study, comparison, signs, and fulfilment of prophecy. We do deny “‘ progressive 
revelation’’ in the sense implied above (not the idea of having been progressively. given 
in the Word), viz., that every one who thinks that his interpretation and application of 
prophecy is the result of enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, and hence ought to be 
accepted as a divine revelation. The world is full of such claims, and prophetical inter- 
pretation especially, has many who deem their special theory or system the child of 
prayer and an answer from God, when it is the outgrowth of their own speculations and 
imaginations. Every student of God’s Word will, of course, ask His guidance and the 
Spirit’s influence, but he knows that such are only available and practical in so far as he 
accommodates himself to the guidance already given in the Holy Scriptures and to the 
utterances of the Spirit aready recorded therein. If we find any interpretation directly 
opposed to the tenor of prediction, and the effort made to accommodate such an inter- 
pretation by the application of accommodating chronological eras, we cannot be widely 
mistaken in our estimate concerning its human origin, These and other objections 
cause us to dissent from many of Guinness’s conclusions. He plainly denounced our 
view ; we as plainly point out his shortcomings in self-defence, as he has invited us to 
do, if it were possible. We have, however,.not repeated his terms against us and applied 
them to his system, believing that reasons rather than reproach are required in sucha 
reply. Believing his work on several points to be misleading and to present a mere 
caricature of our views, yet, owing to its strong Pre-Millenarian bias, and to its utterance 
of valuable truths in connection, and to its suggestiveness on some chronological points, we 
deem it worthy of a candid perusal, and trust that as the author himself desired, it may 
cause others to give the whole subject more attention and study. 


720 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


Obs. 17. Something may appropriately be said respecting the tendencies 
which must necessarily exist previous to, and aid in the development of, 
this Antichrist. It is evident that such a powerful and wicked personage 
can never arise and gain the ascendency over the nations as predicted, 
unless there is a previous preparation for him. ‘This inquiry becomes the 
more important, seeing that the period of his manifestation is not far 
distant. 'The same reasoning that we have applied to the Sec. Advent in 
this respect, will also teach us that the coming of this last head cannot be 
long delayed, with the exception that the Advent (in its first stage, Prop. 
130) may occur at any time, while that of the Antichrist will follow certain 
events (Rev. 14), and will be so recognizable that a previous proclamation 
to that effect will be general among believers. If the position that is 
assumed in this work is correct, then we ought to see tendencies leading 
toward the recognition of such an antichristian power, a drifting of the 
nations into such a state of unbelief that the way is gradually but surely 
preparing for this monster manifestation. ‘'he predictions of men on this 
point differ very materially from that given in the Bible. Thus, e.g. 
Castelar, in the series of able papers on ‘‘ The Republican Movement in 
Europe”’ (Harper’s Mag.), declares that ‘‘ the education of the human race 
must end in the Universal Republic.’? The inspired Word, on the other 
hand, pronounces this an idle dream, pointing us, as a resultant of human 
nature, to a@ monarchy more arrogant, far-reaching, encroaching, and 
tyrannical than the world has ever yet witnessed. Haton (Perm. of Chris- 
tianity, Lect. 5) argues that scepticism is but transient, and will, by the 
present use of means, ultimately pass away, being but ‘‘ a definite stage, a 
passing phase in the process of intellectual growth,’’ and approvingly 
quotes Carlyle as saying that ‘‘ this darkness is but @ transitory obscura- 
tion ; these ashes are the soil of future herbage and richer harvests,’’ ete. 
But God’s Word warns us not to receive such predictions of improvement 
based upon the coming culture, refinement, civilization, science, etc., of 
man, but to believe that the self-relying efforts of man to exalt humanity 
will result in his degradation—a degradation, too, so debasing that it falls 
down to the worship of man in the person of Antichrist—that it even stoops 
to image worship enforced by the death penalty, and that it imbrues its 
hands 77 the blood of a vast number of martyrs. Let the reader study the 
characteristics of this last head and of the period in which he rules, and 
prominently stands forth the self-deification of the Antichrist and the worship 
tendered to him. Men may say this is impossible; but let them look 
around and see the seed now sown, the opinions now entertained by multi- 
tudes respecting the greatness, power, and glory of humanity. Are not 
Compte, Bauer, Renan, and a large number of writers, landing and magni- 
fying the incoming ‘‘ Church of Humanity ?’’ are not to-day a vast body 
of the leading minds of the world aiming at the overthrow of Christianity 
and the substitution of the boasted ‘‘ Religion of Humanity?’ Is this an 
Antichrist? Are there not literally masses who glory (as e.g. the Nat. 
Assoc. of Spiritualists that met in Chicago September 17, 1873, and through 
one of the speakers declared : ‘‘ We are called Spiritualists, but we have 
another name for our sect, ‘ Antichristian’’’) that they are Antichristian in 
principle and practice? Does this Antichrist set himself above God and all 
divine law? What does this necessarily imply, but that which is directly 
taught, viz., that men, in foolishness and wantonness, will reject the idea of 
a personal God—a God who has the claims of a Creator and Redeemer. 


‘ 
ee 


i i a ee 


Prop. 161.] ‘THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 721 


Look around and behold men of the greatest influence, of acknowledged 
scientific and literary ability, deliberately engaged in the destructive work 
of setting aside the personality of God, the foundation of all law. Is it 
not a sad fact, that literally masses among the nations, led on by intelligence 
and learning, are already discarding the God of the Bible as one who has 
no existence and to whom, therefore, no man is responsible. Infidelity, 
guided by the much-lauded scientific learning, is now doing what it never 
before was able to accomplish, viz., ¢o elevate this rejection of a personal 
God from its former lower and almost isolated condition into a higher and 
more dignified position by the artful blandishments of human reason con- 
trolled by a proud dislike to the humbling doctrines of the cross. Its 
advocates can be counted by the million, and occupy the most favorable 
places to influence the multitude.* What in the day of David (Ps. 53) was 
true in particular instances, and has more or less been seen repeated in 
history, now under the plea of enlightenment and progress, has become so 
general that it is unblushingly asserted and defended by numerous writers 
and lecturers of literary and scientific ability. Dr. Auberlen has well 
remarked that one of the distinguishing characteristics of the Antichrist is 
‘‘ antellectual culture.’’ In the very nature of the case this must be so, for 
it is only under the guidance of professed intelligence that the foundations 
of moral obligation can thus be removed, and that the nations, so far ad- 
vanced in civilization, can be induced to receive him as the Ruler over them. 
A just Nemesis seems to bring retribution 7m the line of offence ; for reject- 
ing God as unworthy of homage and worship, they, exalting Nature and 
Humanity, are led by the insidious doctrine of natural development (the 
direct opposite of the Bib. doctrine) and by the removal of the restraints 
imposed by faith in Holy Writ, to honor and worship man himself as the 
highest embodiment of law and order ; and the result is, that they impose 
upon themselves the most tyrannical and cruel tyrant that ever yet trod 
the earth. Let no one turn away from such predictions, and say that it is 
ampossible for intelligence to sink so low in the scale of worship, etc., for, 
as if purposely to meet this objection, it is expressly foretold, to account 
for such a fall, that God, ‘‘ because they received not the love of the truth,’’ 
‘* shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie,’’ etc. (2 
‘Thess. 2 : 10-12), owing to their having ‘‘ pleasure in unrighteousness.”’ 
God will permit human nature to carry out the principles now at work to 
its legitimate end, and will so order it in His Providence that it shall have 
the liberty and power to culminate, to bring forth the fruitage of its 
devices, and to abundantly harvest the too faithfully cultivated seed so 
diligently sown by the multitude of sowers. God’s purpose is that man, in 
his efforts at regeneration in his own way and not after God’s plan, shall 
experience in bitterness and sorrow the falsehood of his own obstinacy and 
pride, and this, too, by God’s ordering, in the adoration of a blasphemer. 
Having already alluded to the principles at work in this direction (Props. 
123, 147, 160, and see Props. 162, 163, 174), it is unnecessary to detain the 
reader upon a point that must be, in view of abundant existing facts, self- 
evident. The representations of Antichrist are fearfully dark—*‘ the god- 
less, self-deifying ruler of worldly Empire,’’ the Restorer of a worse abomina- 
tion than the ancient emperor worship, the instigator and propagator of 
the most seducing, blasphemous, and persecuting falsehoods—but they are 
sustained, not merely by their being God’s faithful and true portraitures, but 
by the appalling facts already presented in the dark history of the preced- 


722 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


ing and preparative apostatizing from the truth which teaches us that when 
man is cut loose from the Gospel truth, and follows his own imaginings, 
there is no iniquity and no crime too great which he is not ready to commit. 
The threats already uttered against Christianity by representatives of large 
classes of men ; the hatred with which the Bible and its doctrines are re- 
ceived ; the fanatical following of reason when its deductions are palpably 
founded upon unproven premises; the laudation and glorification of 
humanely concocted schemes for the amelioration and exaltation of the 
race ; the widening denial that the world needs Divine interposition and a 
Divine Redeemer ; the elevation of Materialism, Naturalism, Spiritualism, 
Humanitarianism into the commanding posture of promising Redemption ; _ 
the sure and steady breaking down of the religious barriers by the inter- 
position and substitution of natural law and the consequent increase of laxity 
of morals—these are just the indications that we ought to see, if Anti- 
christ’s approach draws nigh. It is folly to deny these things or to lessen 
the value of their warning.? Riggenbach (Lange’s Com., 2 Thess. 2, and 
Comp. his quotations from Auberlen, Huebner, etc.) justly observes: ‘‘ It 
is weil worth while ¢o give heed to the prophetic word, and that so much the 
more, as the day comes nearer ; not throwing it into the shade with a shrug 
of the shoulder, as if it were a matter of fanaticism.’? The refusal of man 
to believe does not alter the predictions or change God’s purpose in their 
fulfilment ; and the fact, aside from the greatness, etc., of this enemy, 
that the Spirit so largely enters into the description of this personage, 
ought certainly to influence the reverent believer into a careful contempla- 
tion and study of this subject. The false faith, now already so prevalent, 
in man as his own Saviour, when once supported by the predicted wonder- 
working power of this Antichrist and his associate, the False Prophet, will 
have no difficulty in accepting of and acknowledging the Antichrist in his 
most daring of claims, for it will conclude that such faith, attested to and 
proven by ‘‘ lying wonders,”’ is pre-eminently worthy of being entertained, 
especially when it falls in with the carnal desires of the heart and tramples 
upon the detested Biblical repentance and self-sacrificing faith. Plausi- 
bility and human desires enforced by mzracles, finds the masses so well pre- 
pared that the man coming in the name of Humanity (Comp. Jno. 5 : 43, 
which extends beyond the Jews, although the Jews, too, are to be prepared 
by an adherence to ‘‘ the new religion of Humanity,’’ which many now in- 
dorse, to receive its highest exponent, the Antichrist as their Messiah) will 
find, as predicted, a mighty host of adherents, which will be only too ready 
to do his bidding. Men are already busy proclaiming a ‘‘ New Religion,” 
a °*‘ new order of things’’ which is to supersede Christianity ; and when we 
turn to the Bible to inform us in what this boasted Religion and Order shall 
consist, we shudder at the fearful exchange made, at the horrible transmuta- 
tion experienced, feeling assured that it can never, as God’s Word teaches, 
be introduced without a previous falling away from the truth, and without — 
the superadded agencies of a most astounding nature. ‘Theories and 
words flattering to man, the unification of sonie ideas congenial to the 
corrupt nature of man, the specious promises of deliverence to humanity 
in religion and government, the tenders of beguiling enjoyments and 
pleasures, the cry of a common and universal brotherhood under one cen- 
_tral headship to meet the longings of ages, and all this under the manipula- 
tion of the wonderful prophet, leads to the culmination of the sin of Adam 
to be like God in a headship which theocratically only belongs to God and 


Prop. 161. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 723 


His Christ. Antichrist is the last step in the development of Satanic influ- 
ence and power in and through man, and we are assured that this last 
phase shall be specially pervaded by his energy in order to resist the 
incoming Messianic Kingdom. Amazing climax! so astonishing is it, 
that (Rev. 18:3 and 17:8) “all the world wondered after the beast,’’ 
excepting only those who are believing and wise.* 


1 Alas! its advocates are to be found in professedly Christian pulpits and Christian 
colleges, and lauded by numerous followers in and out of the Church. The books writ- 
ten, contained in Religio-Infidel Catalogues, and widely circulated, establish the sad 

fact. 
- 2 The present danger is not so much in that class of infidels who Tom Paine or Barhdt- 
like openly (as Train, Frothingham, Ingersoll, etc.) blaspheme Christianity, great as 
their number and ability may be, because such a course is repellent to many. ‘The real 
danger comes from another and more powerfully influential class, viz., from those men of 
influence and power who change the mode of attack by transforming themselves so much 
into ‘‘ angels of light” that they profess a certain regard for the Scriptures (while under- 
mining its authority), a degree of respect for the Church as a necessity in its time 
(while bent upon its destruction), and a laudation of Jesus as a man (while denying Him 
as the Divine Saviour). This attack ¥s correctly understood to be preparative to a new 
reformation, etc., and not being so gross and repelling as the former, it succeeds in entic- 
ing a multitude that could not be seduced by the other. Clad in glowing language, 
glittering generalities, and ashowy philosophy, and engaged in flattering human nature, 
it gains its host of admirers. How widespread this has become must be evident to the 
observing student. Compare the testimonies of Arch. Thompson, Bh. Wilberforce, 
Dean Mansel, Dean Goulburn, Prof. Mozley, Canon Liddon, Farrar, Tholuck, Van Ooster- 
zee, Christleib, and, in brief, numerous writers in their works. The multiplicity of 
books in attack and defence issued for the last twenty years, indicate its extent, aside 
from the boastings of the West. Review, Contemporary, etc. And this, we argue in the text, 
is indicative of that which is yet to come ; in the words of the Bishop of Winchester 
(Pref. to Reply to Essays and Reviews) it is ‘‘a widespread movement of the mind, indic- 
ative of the first stealing over the sky of the lurid lights which shall be shed profusely 
around the great Antichrist,’’ or, in the language of a statesman, the Marquis of Salisbury 
(speech at Liverpool, Ap., 1872, West. Review, Jan., 1873), there are ‘‘ hosts mustering and 
fields clearing for the greatest struggle which Christianity has ever had to face.” 

3 Men even now rebel against the Theocratic idea, and proclaim it. Christlieb (Mod. 
Doubt, p. 421) shows how unbelievers are indignant that Jesus should dare to bind the 
whole course of the world to His person, and should call allmen, even Dr. Strauss, before 
His judgment throne ; and quotes Bruno Bauer (Crit. of the Evang. His. Pref.) as feeling 
‘“‘injured, offended, and angered’’ by the prominent dignity and claims of Jesus. 
*“ because one man is always set up as a model against the wickedness and stupidity of 
all others.” And (p. 13) he refers to a student’s Congress at Liege, where it was declared 
amid applause that ‘‘ their aim was to do away with all religions, to destroy all churches, 
and to eradicate every thought of God from the consciousness of their fellow-men ; and 
that in their opinion Atheism was the ultimate aim of all human science.” The same is 
found in the “‘ Manifestos’’ of the Commune, International, and other organizations. 
Thus e.g. Gustave Flourens, leader of the Red Republican party, writes in his journal 
La Libre Pensée, Oct., 1870: ‘‘ Our enemy is God. Hatred of God is the beginning of 
wisdom. If mankind would make true progress, it must be on the basis of Atheism. 
Every trace of religion must be banished from the education of our children,” ete. So 
Christlieb speaks of ‘‘ a well-known representative” of the German people, who has laid 
-down the task “ to educate in Atheism personal enemies of a personal God.” Feuerbach 
(a so-called philosopher) says: ‘‘ There is no God; it is as clear as the sun and as 
evident as the day that there is no God, and still more that there can be none.” “‘ For 
if there were a God, then there must be one ; he would be necessary. But now if there 
-is no God, then there can be no God; therefore, there isno God. There is no God 
because there cannot be any’’ (a logic which instantly reminds us of Ps. 53:1, ‘* The 
fool hath said in his heart, There is no God”). Frothingham (Address to West. Conf.) 
remarks that ‘‘our creed is creedlessness ; our organization is disorganization’’ ; and 
Garnet (same) eulogizes free thought as far greater than faith in God. Multitudes of 
such utterances might be produced. Even women largely aid in this effort ; not merely 
that low class allied with Spiritism, Free-loveism, but many who delight to be designated 


724 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


‘* Liberal’’ and *‘ Brozd’’ in their views. Thus e.g. one of the best of these, Sara S. 


Hennell, in her work Thoughts in Aid of Faith (p. 106), says : ‘‘ As a systematic whole, it 
is essentially true, that Christianity has passed away from us and has left us only an 
inheritance out of its influences ;’’ and (p. 55) ‘‘ it has become a thing of the past, buried 
with the past, for any share that we have in it.’” Sometimes on the ground of feeling or 
need, she seems to regret the change, but on that of reason and philosophy she claims 
that it must be received, and in place of Christianity we must be satisfied with a vague 
feeling of natural religion, and the hope of an ultimate lapse at death into ‘‘ The Universal 
Being,” if such an one exists and Pantheism is a truth. Spencer’s philosophy, as to 
influence, can be illustrated by a thousand painful references. We refer to one as an 
example. This same 8. 8. Hennell, in the work alluded to, eulogizes Spencer as bringing 
in ‘‘ the proper beginning of Intelligence,’’ by which Creation and a personal Creator 
are discarded for “ the Unknown,” and gives us a sample of this intelligence by saying : 
** Religious Science sees the mind of man by means of its highest faculties, painting 
itself in the image of God—forming a vast and shadowy representation of human linea- 
- ments thrown out before it upon the surface of the Unknown.”’ The student who desires 
to notice how talented minds, discarding Christianity, fall into a worship of pure Natural- 
ism allied with Pantheistic notions, consummating in the exaltation of Humanity, and 
in the rejection of the Supernatural and a belief in ‘‘ the Unknown,” can see it exempli- 
fied at length in an art. in the North Brit. Review, August, 1860, entitled ““ Modern 
Thought —its Progress and Consummation.’’ Such sentiments are widespread. Ponder 


e.g. Dr. Draper’s article, ‘‘ Political Effect of the Decline of Faith in Continental 


Europe’ (Princeton Review, Jan. 1879), in which he refers to ‘‘ that black thundercloud 


Nihilism, now lowering over Eastern Europe. The most despotic of all civilized govern. . 


ments looks on it with alarm ;’’ to ‘‘ that blood-red sceptre Communism threatening 
Western Europe; to ‘‘ Socialism in Central Europe. It lifts its head defiantly in 
Germany. If it cannot have its way, it threatens revolution and civil war ;” and by ‘‘ the 
International’’ which ‘* gives a bond of union’’ and “ harmonizes their plans to a common 
end.’’ He says that ‘‘ their supporters are counted by millions—a host rapidly increasing 
in number and power,” so that ‘‘ Society itself is in peril,” etc. He gravely and in 
detail informs us that these result from a ‘* widespread religious unbelief,’’ ‘‘ the total 
extinction of religious belief,’’ and that this ‘‘ mental unsettling’ is going ‘“‘ steadily 
forward,” ‘‘ increasing,” until ‘‘it has now not merely religious intentions ; it affects 
politics and even the basis of society.” It is saddening to find such men as Bunsen 
(‘‘ Bunsen and his Wife,’’ Littell’s Liv. Age, Dec. 23, 1876), swell the crowd of unbe- 
lievers, when he would have even the Apostle’s Creed removed as an impediment and 
containing the mythical, and declares: ‘‘I more and more feel it to be an axiom, that 
Christology, as taught by the churches, cannot be brought into union with the right 
interpretation of the Scripture ; the historical views, speculative thought and moral 
consciousness of the times we live in.” Even professed defenders of Christianity 
against the materialistic tendencies, by conceding too much to mere hypothesis, fearfully 
undermine the Scriptures. Thus e.g. Martineau in his able replies to Tyndall leaves the 
orthodox ground of a divinely inspired Word containing an infallible record of Divine 
truth, and while making the Bible sacred—in the sense of sacred as applied to other 
sacred books of various religions, embodying ‘‘ the great pieties of the world ’-—teaches 
that itis fallible, and that parts (as e.g. the Old Test. cosmogony, etc.), of it may be 
rejected without injury to the rest. This is evidence of great weakness, a yielding up 
unnecessarily and prematurely an important fortress, and confirms the unbelief of multi- 
tudes, and draws others into-its vortex. Unbelievers (as evidenced in The Pop. Science 
Monthly, Apr., 1876, p. 748) seize upon such concessions as decided ‘‘ heterodoxy,”’ and 
triumphantly declare that if this is all that the Bible presents, a sacredness similar to 
that appertaining to other religions, then it is open to scientific exploration, for the 
phenomena of the religious become the phenomena of nature. The concession of impor- 
tant error on some points, leaves it a question whether it may not be also in error in 
others, and thus unsettles the faith of many. Such defenders are numerous and 
producing a sad fruitage. But eminent divines, not realizing the destructive tendencies 
of such popular and prevailing teaching, even condescend to fraternize with it as some- 
thing required to bring forth the truth. Thus Beecher (inthe sermon ‘‘ The True Test,” 
Christian Union, Sep. 19, 1877), after a caricature of orthodoxy, says: ‘‘ They (i.e. these 
orthodox) think the Goths and Vandals are upon us in the shape of Huxley, and Spencer, 
and Tyndall, These men are in the hand of God, and, though they know it not, they 
are Evangelizers, John the Baptists, clearing the path for the Messiah, who is to bring in a 
more glorious development of the nature of God to men ; and yet thousands of persons 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 725 


are up in arms against them.’’ To compare such men, who are steadily opposing Chris- 
tianity, to Evangelists and John the Baptists, is an estimate very different from that 
given by the Spirit in the Word. To say, by way of apology for such, that they live 
better lives than some of the orthodox, does not mend the matter, for the Bible equally 
condemns such ‘‘ orthodox” as rejecters of the truth. The prediction too as to the final 
result, is just the opposite of that given by the Scriptures, for, instead of ‘‘ clearing the 
path for the Messiah,’’ their teaching is to cause a general rejection of His claims until 
it culminates into the great Antichristian persecution and war. Influential religious 
papers and numerous pulpits are engaged in aiding this destructive work. Brookes 
(Maranatha, p. 435-6) observes : ‘‘ Whatever, therefore, tends to degrade Christ as the 
divine and only Saviour, and to exalt and deify man, is essentially Antichrist in its spirit 
and aim, whether it pe found in the Roman Catholic or Protestant body. But this is 
precisely the tendency of the popular preaching of the day.” He then refers to the 
preaching of “ the gospel of manhood,” ‘‘ the development of the Divine element in every 
human soul,” etc., and adds: ‘‘ Nearly every religious journal furnishes painful proof, 
in one way or another, that the Church is drifting rapidly from the ancient landmarks 
both in doctrine and practice, to be speedily wrecked upon the fatal coast of the Laodi- 
ceans, while the secular press is helping the minister it most admires to ripen the fruit of 
the world’s boasted progress in the appearance of the Antichrist.’’ If any protest is pre- 
sented, those who urge it are denominated “ alarmists,’’ ‘‘ croakers,’’ “old fogies,’’ 
‘* behind-the-age men,”’ etc. 


Obs. 18. The worship of Antichrist evidences that man, however atheistic 
some of his utterances are, cannot divest himself of some conception of 
religion, the necessity of worship, and the superiority of some being. For, 
constituted by the mercy and love of the Creator a religious being, he can- 
not, as Luthardt justly observes in his Apolog. Lectures, ‘‘ get rid of the 
idea ;’’ because a belief in something higher than his individual self natu- 
rally arises from his moral constitution. This universality and indestructi- 
bility of religion is most forcibly developed by Dr. Sprecher in his G'rownd- 
work of Theol., and in relation to it he (p. 280) remarks: “* It is a univer- 
sal fact of human life, of man’s existence as an individual and as a society. 
In every individual there is subjectively, and in every community objec- 
tively, the element of religion. This is now very generally acknowledged, 
even by the opponents of Christianity. It is now seen that religion in 
some form always has existed and always will exist. It may be neglected 
and practically ignored ; men may stupefy themselves into habitual indiffer- 
_ence to it, but they can never destroy its existence. HKven Idealism with its 

pantheism, and Materialism with its Atheism, are now seen to be forms of 
religion. Andeven absolute Nescience, which denies the valid being of the 
knower and the known, and recognizes only the knowing as real, must yield 
itself to ‘ the theory of knowledge,’ asits God. That it has always and every- 
where existed, is now acknowledged as an indisputable fact.’’ Now this 
very innate adaptability and susceptibility of man to religion and worship 
will be taken advantage of in order to pave the way for a recognition of the 
Antichrist, aided by the infernal machinery set in operation by the False 
Prophet. Christlieb (Mod. Dowbt, p. 148), after showing that the rejec- 
tion of God is ‘fan arbitrary act of the will,’’ adds: ‘‘ It was therefore a 
perfectly correct instinct which led the Greeks to look upon atheism as a 
moral fault. And every moral fault avenges itself. The refusal to ac- 
knowledge which is, and absolutely is, and is directly certain to every 
heart, leads to the acceptance of that which is nothing but a deceptive 
shadow. Man must have a God. If he rejects the true God, he must 
make a God for himself, and this is of necessity a false one.’’ Already we 
see the signs of religious concession from many able unbelieving pens, 


726 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


for, passing from the purely materialistic idea which makes man a mere 
‘sentient automaton,’’ they argue that man in course of development 
must have, in correspondence with what nature has bestowed, some kin 
of religion adapted to his circumstances. 


Prominent writers of unbelief insist upom a still higher development of man into 
natural religion. ‘Thus e.g. Goldwin Smith (The Ascent of Man, in the Eclectic Mag., 
March, 1877) remarks: ‘‘'The battle of criticism and science against superstition has 
been won, as every open-minded observer of the contest must be aware, though the rem- 
nants of the broken host still linger on the field. It is now time to consider whether 
religion must perish with superstition or whether the death of superstition may not be 
the new birth of religion ;’’ and then proceeds in detail to advocate a new religion as 
a moral necessity imposed by development into a higher life. The difficulty of giving up 
religion entirely is exemplified in F. W. Newman (illustrated in his Phases of Fuith and 
The Soul), who, after yielding up, step by step, the distinguishing doctrines of the Bible, 
and finally even Christ Himself, still retains a sort of religion, viz., ‘‘religion is a state 
of sentiment toward God’ or “ the intimate sympathy of the pure and perfect God with 
the heart of each faithful worshipper.’’ Many hold to such asentimental religion, from 
which everything evangelical has been carefully eliminated. Potter (Christianity and its 
Definitions) reduces Christianity to the level of a natural religion, and speaks of it as 
simply ‘‘ provisional, preparatory, educational” to a higher natural religion of the future, 
to be reared under the fostering influences of science and philosophy, while Jesus, the 
Messiah, is to be regarded as a ‘‘ naturally endowed man” who ‘‘ will stand by the side of 
other great religious teachers and prophets, with no authority different from theirs.” 
Rey. Chadwick, in his sermon, The Essential Piely of Modern Science, makes Modern 
Science the foster mother of piety and the producer of the purest religion. Fred. Harri- 
son (‘‘Symposium’’ in the Nineteenth Century), rejecting the supernatural in theology, 
still insists: ‘‘ Those who trust that the future can ever be built on science and civiliza- 
tion, without religion, are attempting to build a pyramid of bricks without straw. The 
solution, we believe, is in a non-theological religion.” Then, after making religion sy- 
nonymous with a scheme explanatory of human relations to the soul, man, and world, 
and which calls for some object that must be obeyed, loved, and adored, he adds: 
«What is new in our scheme is merely that we avoid such terms as ‘Infinite,’ ‘ Abso- 
lute,’ ‘Immaterial,’ and vague negatives altogether, resolutely confining ourselves to 
the sphere of what can be shown by experience, of what is relative and not absolute, and 
wholly and frankly human.” What have we here but the exaltation of the mere human, 
and elevating it to the place of power and worship. Renan, in a recent dialogue (Art. 
«* Realism in Unbelief,” Littell’s Liv. Age., May 5th, 1877), declares that after a re-organiz- 
ing of society in the interests of science, etc., then the next duty of thinking men will 
be ‘‘to organize God.” A multitude of writers ignore the supernatural, Divine Provi- 
dence, etc., in favor of Nature and its laws, sneering and scoffing at prayer to, and faith 
in, a personal God, but loud in their eulogies of humanity (e.g. Art. ‘‘ Natural and Super- 
natural,” in the National Quarterly Review, July 4th, 1877). The National Reformer, Physicus 
On Theism, Morgan’s Ancient Society, Michelet’s Bible of Humanity, and Fowle’s Science and 
Immortality, and, literally, thousands of other works, some coarse in attack (as Bradlaugh, 
Ingersoll, etc.), others more refined and philosphical (as Huxley, Spencer, etc.), but all 
leading to the same goal—are at work exalting Humanity asthe great and paramount 
outcome of Nature, thus paving the way for its ultimate worship. In order to remove every 
obstruction, and place Humanity on a solid basis, the Christian religion is under a pro- 
fessed ‘‘ scientific method” placed under the category of ‘‘ natural religions,” thus at one 
blow getting rid of the Supernatural and miraculous. While eminent men are, with ill- 
concealed levity and delight, engaged in this destructive work, they still see that the re- 
moval of all religion would be a dreadful innovation, overriding all moral restraint, and 
breaking down the foundations of society and State, and hence substitute the worship of 
Nature and of Humanity as Nature’s highest production. 

The highest intellects devoted to unbelief unite with Spencer (Sociology, p. 313) in say- 
ing that ‘‘ a religious system is a normal and essential factor in every evolving society.” 
Darwin, Tyndall, Huxley, and many others, admit this as a fact. Spencer, in “The 
Theological Bias’’ of The Study of Sociology, clearly contends that the religious element 
can never be radically removed ; that ‘‘ while its forms are temporary, its substance is 
permanent ;’ and predicts a transformation ‘to a higher and better form,” so that 
even the ‘‘ Religion of Humanity,’’ which so many speak of as ‘‘ the religion of the future,” 
will only be a temporary religion. In his “ Replies to Criticism” (Pop. Science Monthly, 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 727 


Y 


Jan., 1874) he distinctly affirms that his teaching ‘‘supplies an indestructible basis for 
the religious sentiment,” and approvingly quotes Grotz as affirming respecting his system : 
‘*Mr. Spencer, by standing on the ground of logic and psychology, without recurring to 
supernatural intervention, has established the legitimacy, the necessity, and the everlasting 
permanence of religion itself.’’ ‘The editor of the Pop. Science Monthly (May, 1878), in 
his reply to Godwin, after informing us that ‘‘ Spencer is a profound believer in relig- 
ion,” then laudatory of Naturalism and its religious training, says: ‘‘ When the method 
of science is raised to its rightful supremacy in the human mind, and the rule of science 
is recognized as supreme throughout the sphere of the phenomenal, and when the dis- 
tractions of theology become unbearable, it will then be found that Mr. Spencer has 
proved that Science, so farfrom being its destroyer, is itself the promoter of the profound- 
est faith, while the central truth of all religion is saved to humanity. Malignant zealots 
will probably continue to secrete their vitriolic criticism, as, if stopped, they would prob- 
ably die of their own acidities ; but there are not wanting indications that many relig- 
ious men of candor and discernment are already recognizing the claims of Mr. Spencer’s 
system upon the serious consideration of their class.” Then he predicts : ‘‘ We believe 
that the time is not greatly distant when even theologians will seek it as a shelter against 
the rising tide of materialism and atheism.” ‘The religion thus advocated is a kind of 
Naturalistic-Pantheism, finding its highest expression in man. The Pop. Science Monthly 
has especially, and in detail, rejected as untrue the charges of atheism against eminent 
scientists, and as a specimen of the manner of defence, we append the following expla- 
nation. One party (as Haeckel, observed by Prof. Wynn in Wittenberger, Oct., 1877) de- 
clare that Darwin ‘‘has proved the purposelessness of nature,’’ etc.; another party think 
him too much affiliated with the old idea of creation and purpose; now the editor 
(‘* Editor’s Table,” Dec., 1875, p. 236) refers, explanatory, to Darwin as follows: ‘ Mr. 
Darwin is made out to be untheological by an exquisite bit of logic. It is true that he 
appeals to supernaturalism for the starting point of his doctrine, and gives exactly the same 
account of it that theology has offered, speaking of ‘ life with its several powers having 
been originally breathed by the Creator into a few forms, or intoone.’ But Mr. Darwin’s 
science is saved by the charitable imputation that he used these words ina sort of Pickwick- 
ian or poetical sense, and was willing to conciliate the theologians by ‘a slight difference 
of style’ in referring to the origin of life.” The editor defends Spencer against the at- 
tacks of The Nation and Chauncy Whright in German Darwinism, saying that Spencer 
‘*holds that the order of the Universe is not without its cause, although the nature 
of that cause is a mystery past finding out, and from the very nature of intelligence must 
forever transcend the human understanding.” This cause, he terms, not God, but, as an 
indication of ‘‘his own sense of humility,” <‘ the unknowable.”’ This does not, the writer con- 
tends, ignore religion, but makes it ‘‘the most exalted object of religious feeling, though be- 
yond the grasp and analysis of intellect.’’ Here is a loophole by which to affirm ‘that 
there can be no radical or fundamental conflict between religion and science,” provided, 
however, that religion is left in this vague and indistinct manner (viz., a reverence for 
what we do not know) and science is limited to tae phenomenal. Hence evolutionists 
are unwilling to be designated ‘“ atheists,” claiming a religion, as e.g. seen in Savage’s 
Religion of Evolution, where the God of Evolution is constructed, viz., the creative power 
or force, or whatever it may be, to which the Cosmos owes its existence, is to be venerated. 
So the writer in Macmillan’s Mag. on ‘‘Natural Religion,” sets up Nature, or rather 
that which evolves nature, as a God worthy of love and worship. While some may rest 
‘in this vagueness, the majority press beyond it, for they clearly see that the masses, far 
below their level in thinking, must have ideas impressed by representative forms ; and 
hence, as we have shown, advocate the training of religious thought and feeling by ex- 
ternal or representative signs relating to the laws of Nature or of Humanity. Just asCompte, 
when he first expounded his system of philosophy, excluded religion as superstition, but 
afterward, urged by the nature of man, admitted it as a necessity of society, and framed 
a corresponding humanitarian worship, so these, finding religion natural, are carefully 
seeking for some outlet—hostile to the personal Creator and Redeemer of the Bible—by 
which it may manifest itself consistently with the teachings of science, having, if possible, 
a scientific God, scientific worship, and scientific feeling. Fiske, in his Oullines of a 
Cosmic Philosophy Based on the Doctrine of Evolution, brings forth religion as ‘the highest 
“physical phase of life,” a natural product ; for (as Youmans informs us) it is ‘‘ the manifes- 
tation of that striving after complete harmony of physical life with its requirements, 
stimulated by the sense of sin or moral shortcoming, for which the analogy is furnished 
by that striving for mere physical adjustment throughout the animal world, to which the 
sense of pain is the prompter.’’ Hence Bixby, Art. ‘Science and Religion as Allies” (Pop. 


728 _ THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


Sci. Monthly, Oct. ,1876). argues that the removal of the supernatural and miraculous,and the 
guidance of science, does not produce irreverence, but even something greater, reverence 
for the known, and adds, over against the Scripture prediction : ‘‘The more clearly we 
discern the path on which Science has led the world, the less fear shall we have that it 
is all a preparation for precipitating us into some godless abyss.” Murphy (The Scientific Bases of 
Faith) and many others see no danger, such as the Bible portends in the future, and 

confidently prophesy a glorious harmony between Science and Religion with a resplen- 
dent future. Dr. Le Conte, in ‘‘Modern Biological Inquiry’’ (Pop. Sci. Monthly, 
Jan., 1876), presents the hope of many that scientific culture and the purifying and re- 
modelling of existing religion will introduce the Millennium, saying: ‘In this manner 
alone may be realized the hope of the philosopher, the dream of the poet, and the ex- 
pectation of the theologian—a universal science and a universal religion, co-operating 
harmoniously for the perfection of man and the glory of the Creator.’’ But this hope is 
futile, for the Word of Inspiration, which has never yet failed in any of its predictions, 
declares to us that human depravity, guided by intelligence, will sink into greater depths of 
wickedness and godliness, and manifest a terrible and persecuting malice and hatred 
toward Christianity. 


Obs. 19. This antichristian religion and worship culminates in the 
deification of man and his worship, It is strange that Christianity should 
meet as a final struggle the deification of humanity which it met when it 
started on its mission of gathering out the believers. In the beginning 
the apotheosis and worship of the emperors was a serious and strong 
opponent, and became the test of faith and perseverence. Uhlhorn (Con- 
flict of Christianity with Heathenism, p. 56, etc.) shows in detail how im- 
portant and extended this worship was, saying: ‘‘It would be a great 
misapprehension to regard the worship of the emperors solely as an indica- 
tion of the extent to which human folly can go, and as deserving only 
ridiculeand scorn. In reality it exerted the greatest influence not only upon 
the religious, but also upon the social, life of that time ; and became of 
the greatest importance in the conflict ‘of Christianity and Heatbenism.”? 
He proceeds to show how deeply rooted this was among the ancients ; how 
it extended over the provinces and became a duty, an act of patriotism, 
and an expression of gratitude ; how it ‘‘ gained great political and social 
importance’’ in provincial assemblies and fraternities ; how it supplied a 
worship common to the whole Roman Empire, and thus introduced a 
unity ; how ‘‘ the worship of the emperors eclipsed all other worships’’ 
(quoting Melito as saying: ‘‘ The statues of the emperors are more rever- 
enced than those of the ancient gods’’); and how it became a test of the 
faith and religion of the subjects. This religious development, culminat- 
ing in imperial worship, will be repeated on a more fearful scale. The 
deification of man will bring forth a more dreadful fruitage at the close 
of this dispensation. 

Let the student ponder Compte’ s ponderous (6 vols.) Course of Positive Philosophy, 
and in his ‘‘ Church of the Future,” his ‘‘Church of Humanity’’ containing a Hierarchy 
to give it unity, we have, among other things indicative of this tendency to worship man, 


a ‘Positive Calendar” designed to regulate ‘‘the Systematic Worship of Humanity.” 
Some prominent person that lived in the past is allied with each day of the year, but 


Jesus Christ is totally ignored as unworthy of a position, although Confucius, Moses, and. 


others are duly recognized. The North Brit. Review, May, 1851, contains some specimens 
of this calendar with criticisms. M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., Art. ‘* Compte,’’ epit- 
omizes this worship of humanity: ‘‘The new divinity is humanity.” ‘It isa com- 
plete deification of man, a complete resolution of divinity into humanity. It is a 
strange counterpart to Pantheism which is produced in this scheme of thorough-going 
Pan-humanism. The new divinity was to be adored, to be approached with prayer, to 
be honored with an appropriate ceremonial, worshipped with due rites, and served by a 
numerous army of priests,’’ Compte feels that a reconstruction of society without some 


. 


Prop. 161.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 729 


kind of religion would be incomplete and opposed to the needs of manand the impulses 
of nature. Hence he givesa natural religion in which Humanity is dressed up and 
paraded as a divinity to be idolized. Around this idealized form is placed a singular re- 
vival and transformation of doctrine and practice taken from Christianity and Paganism. 
It establishes a regular priesthood anda rigid Hierarchy—an authoritative ‘‘ Sociocracy’’ 
to which all must bow in reverence. This mixture of Naturalism, Pan-humanism, Ro- 
manism, and Paganism, is tendered as the deliverer of society, the purifier of the moral 
relations, and the means of “the systematic glorification of man.” We give an illustra- 
tion of this worship of Humanity, taken from “The Positivist Strike for a Liturgy” 
(Littell’s Liv. Age, Ap. 19th, 1879, taken from The Spectator). In a liturgy that was 
used ‘‘on the Festival of Humanity, 1st Moses, 91” (i. e. Jan. 1st, 1879), we have the 
following order laid down: ‘‘ Holy and Glorious Humanity, on this Thy High Day, at 
the beginning of a new year, we are met in praise, in prayer, in thanksgiving, to cele- 
ae thy coming, in the fulness of time, for the visible perfecting of thy as yet unseen 
work. 

Priest. We bow before thee in thankfulness, 

People. As children of thy Past. 

Priest. We adore thee in hope. 

People. As thy ministers and stewards of the Future, 

Priest. We would commune with thee humbly in prayer ; 

People. As thy servants in the Present. 

All. May our worship, as our lives, grow more and more worthy of thy great name.’’ 

We append the benediction : “The Faith of Humanity, the Hope of Humanity, the 
Love of Humanity. bring you comfort, and teach you sympathy, give you peace in your- 
selves and peace with others, now and forever, Amen.” This imitation of, or parody 
on, Christian worship is fully exemplified by the reading of the Imitation of Christ by 
Thomas a Kempis with the following substitutions: ‘*‘We substitute Humanity for 
God ; the social type for the personal type of Jesus; our own inward growth in good- 
ness for outward reward ; the innate benevolent instincts for grace ; our selfish instincts 
for nature.’”’ Men of intelligence advocate such worship and substitutions. In an ar- 
ticle in the North Brit. Review, July-August, 1878, entitled ‘‘An Advertisement for a 
New Religion,’’ the writer declares that past and present religions ‘‘ are waxing old and 
must soon die;’ that this is the belief of ‘‘advanced thinkers ;” and that as nearly all 
admit the religious element cannot be eliminated from man there must be, of necessity, 
a new religion substituted for the present, He discusses the nature of the religion 
which is to take the place of the preceding, because ‘‘as man must have a religion, and 
the old religions are sick, dying, or dead, so we must have a new-born religion.’’ He de- 
clares that the new religion ‘‘cannot have a God living and personal ;” it ** cannot in- 
sist on a personal immortality of the soul ;’ it cannot have ‘‘ terrors drawn from a day 
of judgment ;’ it cannot have ‘‘sanctions or motives derived from a supernatural power 
or a world to come,’’ etc., and then unhesitatingly affirms that this religion should have 
‘Humanity for its God,” with festivals in his honor,a Sunday (‘‘once in ten days”), 
lectures, ‘‘ hymns in honor of the great mother Nature,’’ dances, and withal ‘‘ with this 
there might be idols representing in symbol the great world powers, such as Evolution, 
Persistence of Force, Heredity, Panzoism, and Physiological units. Around the places 
of worship there might be groves, like those dedicated in old time to Baal, the powerful 
fire-god,’’ ‘*This new religion must come. The conditions are ready.’’ ‘The world 
is ready to receive it.” Is it not surprising that after Christianity has done so much 
for humanity in morals, relation of woman, slavery, civilization, literature, etc., 
Humanity should proudly and arrogantly attempt to crush its best friend and arro- 
gate to itself all honor and power? Cicero once said, in reference to human character, that 
if perfect excellence could exist in-one person, the world would bow down and worship. 
But, as has been remarked (by Lord, Blessed Hope, p. 15), this was not verified in the 
Advent of Jesus, when perfect excellence had visible embodiment. The world is not 
inclined to such worship ; human nature finds it too reproachful and self-denying ; the 
proof is found in the ultimate and general worship of Antichrist, in whom are embodied 
the grossest and most sinful imperfections. Ambitious men have (e.g. Pressense’s 
Religion and Reign of Terror, B. 4, ch. 1) employed religion ‘‘as an instrument of govern- 
ment, a means of controlling and winning the masses,’’ for, as Bonaparte (p. 334) de- 
clared, ‘‘a nation must have a religion ; this religion should be in the hands of the 
government,”’ being ‘‘an affair purely political.’’ This will be repeated on a wider and 
grander scale. Unbelievers may nowsmile at the credulity of poor fanatics who have 
professed divinity and themselves as proper objects of worship ; they may e.g, pity the 


9 


730 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 161. 


delusion of the Devil-temple priest (Art. ‘‘ Demonology,” Ee ectic Mag., Ap., 1876), who, 
victim to a self-imposed bath of melted lead, exclaimed at the very last : ‘‘It is, indeed, ] 
who am the true God!” but a far more extended and imposing delusion, as a punishment 
for humanity in the line of its greatest sinfulness, shall visit and scourge the nations. 
It is a matter of amazement and profound regret that a multitude of intelligent and able 
men are engaged in a revival of ancient heathenism, eulogizing its spirit, morals, adherents 
far above Christianity. Uhlhorn closes his Conflict of Christianity with Heathenism with 
these impressive words: ‘‘For though outwardly conquered, Heathenism was not yet 
completely subdued within ; but as in each of us ‘the old man’ perpetually fights 
against ‘the new man’ so in the history of the Church the ancient Heathenism is ever rising 
from the depths of the natural man to do battle against the new life of Christianity. 
This conflict is not ended. The history of the Church is only the story of this conflict. 
Therefore the peace which the Church won is as yet no perfect peace, but only marks a 
new phase of the struggle which is not yet fought out. Indeed, to-day we are in the midst 
of it; for stronger almost than ever, the heathen spirit in modern gnise is wrestling 
against Christian thought and life, and it almost seems as if the questions of the time 
should be gathered up in the question: ‘Shall we remain Christians, or become Heathen 
aga ?’” His trust (which is ours also) is ‘‘the victory which the Lord will bringin His 
great day.” Dr, Arnold (Zects. on Mod. His.) calls attention to the fact that a distin- 
guishing sign of modern times is the disposition to discuss religion in its political rela- 
tions, and this is repeated by many recent writers. Humanitarians, while predicting the 
decay and fall of theological literature, the overthrow of the Christian religion, etc., still 
firmly hold to a belief that religion of some kind must be accepted (as e.g. Wasson, 
Longfellow, Johnson, Weiss, Potter, Abbot, Frothingham, Chadwick, Higginson, Cheney, 
and others, in Freedom and Fellowship in Religion, and hence advocate that religion as a 
social and political force, as a natural development of man’s moral and social nature, as 
a factor of universal complexion, as a resultant of past and present history, must (as we 
have shown under previous observation) in some form or other be retained. Von Ger- 
lach (quoted by Riggenbach, Lange’s Com., 2 Thess., p. 138) says: ‘‘In our days there 
has actually been made a beginning of a worship, in which humanity is deified and 
adored ; and the complete dissolution of the Christian Church into the kingdoms of this 
world is already expected by many.” Numerous writers refer to this strange return 
to Heathenism and its worship, with a plea of symbolistic meaning attached, adapting 
it to modern progress, 


' 
4 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 731 


Proposition 162. This Kingdom will be preceded by a fearful 
time of trouble, both inthe Church and the World. 


This already follows from the preceding Propositions. The rise 
and progress of the Antichrist, the acts performed by him, the 
persecution experienced under him, and the outpouring of God’s 
judgments, allembrace a series of trial and trouble unexampled in 
the history of the world. 

We say unexampled, for the declaration of Jesus, Matt. 24: 21 (‘‘For there shall be 
great tribulation, such as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, nor ever 
shall be”), must not be confined to the destruction of Jerusalem, which (as the parallel 
reference of Luke clearly shows) forms only the sad and awful beginning of ‘‘the days 
of vengeance’’ that extend over the captivity among the nationsand the treading down 
of Jerusalem, until it culminates (Zech. 14, etc.) in the direful persecution of the Anti- 
christ. Jesus, in a comprehensive way, applies that which Daniel (ch. 12: 1, 2) specifi- 
cally refers to the time of the wilfulking. The unprecedented tribulation is continuous, 
as the prophets predict, and reaches its climax just before the appearing of the Messiah 
and His saints. The general analogy of Scripture teaches (comp. e.g. Cox’s Thoughts on 
the Com. and Kingd., p. 40, Brooks’s Essays, p. 12, etc.) that a special period of universal 
trouble, trial, and sorrow is associated with the culminated Antichrist and the open Pa- 
rousia of the Messiah, 


Obs. 1. Coming now to specify more particularly the persecutions that 
shall arise, a few introductory remarks are in place. Some, when the 
subject is mentioned, are at once ready fo discredit, and even (as the 
writer knows from experience) ¢o ridicule, it, presuming that human nature 
so enlightened and civilized cannot and will not break forth into such 
acts of persecution and cruelty as are predicted. But God knows human 
nature better than we do, and can assuredly foretell its depraved mani- 
festations. It has often been remarked, taking the evidence given by the 
sad history of the past, that the most cruel enemy of man is man himself. 
The same old man still exists, and, under favorable circumstances, will 
manifest himself. When men like Bossuet, Massillon, and a host of 
others, equally famous, can indorse the persecutions and tortures inflicted 
by fanaticism ; when misguided zeal and unenlightened piety can, without 
pity, bestow as an alleged act of self-protection the most fearful deaths ; 
when men and women can, in the supposed interest of their rights, pass 
from violence to murder ; when M. Venillot (Harper’s Mag., Ap., 1874, p. 
784) in the Univers can say: ‘‘ For my part, I frankly avow my regret not 
only that John Huss was not burned sooner, but that Luther was not burned 
too. And I regret, further, that there has not been some prince sufficiently 
pious and politic to have made a crusade against the Protestants ;’’—all 
this, and much more that columns of any newspaper will afford, teaches 
us what confidence to place in human nature. The latter, without the 
superadded grace of God, is (however learned and wise) wicked and ready, 
when interest prompts, to do evil; and even with that grace in a measure 


732 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 162. 


added but not wholly controlling the man, it may, as alas! too many cases 
attest, fall into a spirit of persecution that is antichristian.’ It was prob- 
ably this view of the incorrigible nature of man that causes even a Renan 
to despairingly say (Ded. to St Paul): ‘‘ 1am fearful that Fate has stored 
up xo good for us in this world,’’ in direct contradiction to his dreams of a 
golden future. In the discussion of this subject we plant ourselves firmly 
upon the Word of God ; what that. Word says respecting it we receive, and 
believe, andteach. (1) It will not do to say, as some, that the progress of the 
Gospel forbids such an enactment of bloody scenes, for the Bible does not tell 
us that down to the Sec. Advent the Gospel will be accepted by the masses, 
but exactly the reverse (Prop. 175, etc.). Thetares exist down fo Christ’s 
coming, and at the time of His Advent in such abundance, too, that they 
form a mighty array in contrast to the wheat. The simple fact that the 
great confederation 1s arrayed against Christ at His coming is. sufficient 
proof of the correctness of our position ; and that human nature, notwith- 
standing the privileges and mercy enjoyed, is capable of any act when 
under the influence of passion and selfishness. Finding this recorded, we 
receive it. (2) Well-meaning and pious persons, by an expression of 
affected humility which makes it only the more deceptive, coolly inform us that 
although recorded we can know nothing about it. Thus e.g. that other- 
wise excellent writer, James (The Church in Earnest, p. 289), although 
he can in his way know and tell us of the triumphs of the Church, says : 
‘* What vials of wrath have yet to be exhausted upon the world, or through 
what tribulations the Church has yet to pass on her way to her Millennial 
and to her triumphant state, it 7s not for us even to conjecture. Perhaps 
there are conflicts for her to endure, of which she is now happily ignorant.”’ 
‘* Perhaps !’’ ‘* Conjecture !’’ is it possible, in the light of so much Scripi- 
wre, and the exhortations to take heed thereto, to make such an utterance ? 
Allow that there is symbolical language and details difficult to explain, yet 
a child even can comprehend that this very language is descriptive of fear- 
ful tribulation to the Church under some gigantic power. ‘There is no ‘* con- 
jecture’’ and ‘‘ perhaps’’ in the meaning intended, and the man, whoever 
he is, and however pious, who implies that the future trial of the Church 
is one of doubt, is to that extent responsible of concealing the truth from 
the people.? (3) Another class are found who know the severe ordeal 
through which the Church is to pass, but refrain from expressing them- 
selves. ‘Thus e.g. Dr. Clarke, in closing his comments (Com.) on Dan. 7, 
employs the following language: ‘‘ In considering these things and look- 
ing at the evils that shall come upon the world before those auspicious times 
can take place, I may say with Daniel: My cogitations much troubled me, 
and my countenance changed in me, but I keep the matter of my 
conjectures and consequent feelings in my own heart.” Dr. Clarke, how- 
ever, has not concealed, as many places show, the fact that the church and 
world is yet to endure great tribulation ; but there are literally a great 
number who know that the fact is wnmistakadly predicted and yet make no 
mention of it, speaking ‘‘ peace and safety’’ to the people. They receive 
and believe, but do not teach, for fear of being regarded enthusiastic, or 
fanatical, forgetting that they will be held responsible by the Saviour for 
withholding the Divine warnings.* (4). Simple honesty and candor, with 
a reverence for God’s faithful Word, and a desire to warn others, wrge us 
to direct attention to these last times, and to conceal nothing which God has 
deemed proper to reveal, and which He has commanded us to read, study 


~ 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 733 


and proclaim (2 Tim. 4 : 6, Rey. 1 : &, Luke 11 : 42, etc.). We dare not, 

with our convictions of duty, do less ; and hence, therefore, even those who 

may not be willing to receive what is here asserted, will, at least, credit us 

with being deeply impressed by @ sense of responsibility in this matter, 

seeing that in the immediate connection of this Antichrist the Spirit (Rev. 

13:9) says: “Jf any man have an ear, let him hear,’’ —a phrase most 

expressive that the matter in hand is one of special importance and deserv- 

ing of our closest attention. We constantly feel too, that we are not so 

much writing fer the present time as for the time of tribulation to come. 

When the true Church finds herself struggling amid the thickest gloom, 

and the false predictions of peace, safety and prosperity are found delusive ; 

when the world instead of being converted, is found arrayed against the 

truth, reason holding the sway in place of faith, and the Word of God is 

abjured and derided as unworthy of enlightened man; when the multi- 

tude follow wondering after the revived beast, the Antichrist, and a bloody 

death, or a dastardly forsaking and denial of Christ is presented as the 

only alternative ; when there is no hope or way of escape, and the godly 
among men are to cease amid the penalties of image-worship, then a 

as that anything and everything that can throw any light upon the pain- 

ful situation well be eagerly accepted and pondered. ‘The Bible will be read 
and searched with increasing interest—intensified by actual trial and 
suffering—and everything illustrative of the times then existing will be 
most carefully examined. Zhen it is that such a work like this—perhaps. 
now derided and sneered at by some professed believers—will be thankfully 
perused and its deductions from the Scriptures -gratefully contrasted 
with the then existing manifestations and the Divine originai. It is both 
an honor anda privilege to write for such a period, thus becoming, by 
God’s grace, instrumental in upholding the faith and consoling the hearts 
of martyrs, of sustaining men and women under Antichrist’s cruel rule by 
the assurance that this very trial shall redound, if faithful, to their ever- 
lasting honor and glory (Rev. 20: 4,6). The same can be said of the 
faithful warnings given of this period by various writers of ability and 
eminence in England, Germany, Holland, America, etc., whose works, 

now appreciated by the few, will be specially read and studied by all the 
pious (when Antichrist comes) to give them strength and comfort amid 
the terrible incoming trouble. The very fact that this tribulation has 
been predicted, that reverent students of the Word insisted upon its fulfil- 
‘ment, ete., will have no little influence in confirming the martyr faith of 
many.* God help them to suffer and to triumph. 


-1In preceding Prop. some writers are quoted as predicting ‘‘ peace and safety’’ in 
place of coming antichristian persecution. Such prophets compose a multitude ; and 
they are found in the Church predicting the speedy conversion of the world, or outside 
of the Church prophesying progress, etc. Reliance either upon Christianity, or Nature, 
or Man, causes men (like Buckle, in Mill on Liberty, Mis., vol. yn 22) to take it for 
granted that the reign of open persecution for uttering religious sentiments is at an 
end and will never again be revived. Writers, like Draper (His. Civ.), contrast the past 
with the present, and, congratulating themselves upon the decrease of persecution (ascrib- 
ed to a humanitarian progress), predict an entire removal of the same for the future. 
These are merely the assumptions of man ; over against such deceptive predictions are 
the prophecies of God. a 

2 Such is the plain complexion of the predictions, that even Dr. Brown, writing 
against us (Ch. Sec. Coming, p. 356), is reluctantly obliged to admit this future trial : 
‘“But we prophesy not. There has been too much of this. The whole horizon of Chris- 
tendom may yet be overcast, and the safety of the truth and cause of God be brought 


734 . THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 162. 


into such peril that ‘men’s hearts may fail them for fear and for looking after those 
things that are coming on the earth.’ But ‘when these things begin to come to pass,’ 
we are taught to look and lift up our heads, for ‘our Redemption draweth nigh.’’’ So 
even a Roman Catholic, Dr. Rutter (Life of Christ, Kelly's Ed., p. 414, foot-note), refers to 
this future Antichrist and persecution as ‘‘ dreadful beyond description, and executed in 
every part of the world,” to last ‘‘three years and a half,” referring to ‘‘for in those 
days shull be such tribulations as were not from the beginning of the creation which 
God created, until now, neither shall be,” and to Apoc. 13: 7, Dan. 7 : 21, Augustine in 
De Civ., B. 10, ¢. 11. 

3 Alas! they are afraid to endure the reproaches, innuendoes, sarcasms, if not worse, 
of their fellow-ministers or laymen. For it is notorious that just so soon as a man re- 
ceives the Primitive Church view on these subjects, he becomes the object of contemp- 
tuous pity or scorn, and the most uncharitable construction is put upon his belief and 
piety. The writer has had sad experience in this direction, but itis the experience, 
more or less, of every true believer. 

4 It is gratifying that from all sides come forth the sober words of warning, God not 
leaving Himself without faithful witnesses. As the names of many have been already 
given, it is unnecessary to repeat. Deep thinkers, critical students, and able commen- 
tators of the Bible, the most remote from fanaticism, agree in proclaiming the coming 
of this sore tribulation under the great Antichrist, repeating the early Patristic exhorta- 
tion (The Pastor of Hermas): ‘‘ Happy ye who endure the great tribulation that is coming 
on, and happy they who shall not deny their own life,” etc. Many enter their hearty 
protest against the seducing development theory, which promises still higher and progres- 
sive stages through existing means, until the world is overcome and ‘ transformed by the 
preaching of the truth into a temple of Christ,” and point, as sufficient rebutting 
testimony, to Antichrist and his confederated hosts. Many are sounding the alarm that 
the tendencies of the age, both in the Church and the world, are indicative of a falling 
away trom the truth, and thus preparative for an incoming Antichrist. (Thus e.g. 
Delitzsch, in Ser. to Ap. of Bib. Psyc., says of the coming persecution : ‘‘ But these suf- 
ferings also will, as in the first centuries, break out again over the Church of Christ ; 
and if our Christianity were less conformed to the world, we should even now experience 
sufficient preludes of them.’’) That there is a time of great trouble still future is 
admitted by those who are most inclined to spiritualize, as e.g. Barnes Com., Fairbairn 
On Proph., p. 391, etc. The Reformers gave no uncertain sound, and after the Refor- 
mation, many writers, however diverse in other respects, agreed in this, that most 
violent persecutions were still future, such as Nicolai, Hoe, Doelingius, M. Hofmann, 
and others. Von Dollinger, Essay on the Prophs., gives many instances derived from the 
Middle Ages. This may be truthfully stated, that, whatever diversity there may exist 
among writers of a Millenarian tendency, they are a unit in proclaiming a still future 
persecution awaiting the Church. Bickersteth (Promised Glory, p. 82) speaks of ‘the 
certainty and nearness of the last great tribulation” as ‘‘a most seasonable truth in this 
day ;’ and points out (p. 91) that ‘‘the future tribulation was also distinctly referred to 
by our Reformers,” directing attention to the utterances of King-Edward VI.’s Catechism, 
Becon, the chaplain of Arch. Cranmer, and Latimer. Having already presented such 
testimony, it needs no additions. It mey be added, however, that the vengeance of the 
2d Psalm was understood by Luther (so Michelet, Life of Luther, App. p. 411, Hazlett’s 
Ed.) to be future. This has an important bearing on other Scripture. 


Obs. 2. That fearful times are immediately to precede the open mani- 
festations of Jesus Christ was so distinctly taught in the Old Test. by 
various prophets and especially by Daniel, that the Jews universally held 
to a great time of trouble preceding the times of the Messiah. 'They antici- 
pated, as Lightfoot, Berthold, and others, remarked : ‘‘ Dolores Messia, or 
calamitous times to precede the reign of the Messiah,’’ (comp. views of 
Rabbins, Lange’s Com. Matt. 2 : 3, etc.) and which O]shausen (Com. Matt. 
24 : 6-8) states the Rabbins called ‘‘the birth pangs of the Messiah.’”' 
Even such passages as Isa. 59 : 19 were thus interpreted by them — upon 
which verse Clarke (Com. loci) remarks: ‘‘ This all the Rabbins refer to 
the Coming of the Messiah. If ye see a generation that endures much 
tribulation, then {say they) expect Him according to what is written, 


PRopP. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 735 


‘when the enemy shall come in as a flood,’’’ etc. As is well known, these 
predictions were not verified at the First Advent ; no such hostile power 
as was predicted was overcome by Christ, and no such glorious reign 
followed (the reasons for this have already been given), and to avoid mak- 
ing this an objection to the Messiahship of Jesus we find that in the New 
Lest. these predictions are incorporated and applied. in their fulfilment to 
the Sec. Advent of this same Jesus. Instead of a denial of them, or an 
effort to spiritualize them away to mean something else, the Jewish faith 
is retained, explained, amplified, and referred to the period precedin g and at 
the open revelation of the resurrected and ascended Lord. The confirma- 
tion of the Jewish belief is found in the utterances of Jesus (Matt. 24, etc.) 
in the warnings of the Apostles, and especially in the Revelation of John. 
*“ The terrible one that is brought to naught’ (Isa. 29:19, 20. Comp. 
Alexander’s Version) at the Coming of ‘‘ the Holy One of Israel’? because 
he oppressed the people of God, is applied to the last head of the beast at 
the Advent of King Jesus; and the wonderful healing of the people fol- 
lowed by continuous blessings but preceded by the Coming of the Lord in 
anger toward the nations and in confining the King (the head) in the 
ordained Tophet (Isa. 30), is in the New Test. referred to that virtually 
eighth head of the revived beast who is taken at the Coming of the Lord 
and cast (Rev. 19) into the Lake of Fire. Such adoption and continued 
amplification of Old Test. prophecies engrafted wpon the Sec. Advent are 
indispensable to preserye the unity of prophecy ; and we most: gratefully 
receive and adopt them as essential to the consistency of Revelation, how- 
ever much some may sneeringly call them ‘‘ Jewish fables.’’ Satisfied with 
the grammatical sense of these prophecies—a sense abundantly sustained 
by past and present fulfilment—and fortified by the Jewish and Primitive 
interpretation ; sustained by a long series of the most eminent divines and 
expositors, we receive as eminently Scriptural the following clause (quoted 
by Dr. Seiss in A Question in Eschatology, p. 3%7—see his references in 
same connection to other confessions and especially to Melanchthon’s views 
respecting ‘‘ the last times, immediately before the end of the world,” etc.) 
taken from the Latter Confession of Helvetia (1566), XI Art., “ Out of 
heaven the same Christ will return unto Judgment, even then, when 
wickedness shall chiefly reign in the world, and when Antichrist, having cor- 
rupted true religion, shall fill all things with superstition and impiety, and 
shall most cruelly destroy the Church with fire and bloodshed.’”? 

1 Farrar (Life of Christ, vol. i. p. 105) refers to this, saying : ‘‘ There was a general 
expectation of that ‘wrath to come,’ which was to be the birth-throe of the coming 
kingdom—the darkness deepest before the dawn.” 

2 The early church belief has been repeatedly given, as well as that drawn from Jew- 
ish and Apocryphal sources (showing how extensively the view of great tribulation 
before the incoming Kingdom was held), but an illustration from Augustine (City of God, 
B. 16, s. 24), owing to its singularity, may be appreciated by the student: Alluding to 
the ‘‘ horror of great darkness that fell upon Abraham,’’ he says it ‘‘ signifies that about 
the end of this world believers shall be in great perturbation and tribulation.” And of the 
smoking furnace, etc. he adds: ‘This signifies that at the end of the world, the carnal 
shall be judged by fire.’? He appears to regard the sun setting as typical of the drawing 
nigh of the end of the world, and that Abraham’s fear, horror, etc. was typical of what is 
to be ‘‘ expected to take place under Antichrist.’’ 


Obs. 3. The careful reader of the Bible must have observed this remark- 
able peculiarity connected with it, viz., that in a multitude of places it 
speaks of the vengeance poured out upon the nations of the earth by God at 


736 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRopP. 162. 


His Coming in wrath after long delay, and the prayer ts offered up, most 
fervently, that God should thus come. 'This feature has been seized upon 
by unbelief and urged as an objection against the Word itself (as breathing 
a cruel spirit, etc.), and even some Christians (as Stanley, His. of the Jew. 
Ch., p. 170) misapprehending its propriety, have pronounced it ‘* a defect”’ 
as exhibited e.g. in Psls. 18, 69, 109, 137, etc.). Infidelity sneeringly 
calls it ‘‘ a vindictivé spirit,’’ that (Gibbon, ch. 38) nourished the savage 
breast of Clovis,’’ and weak faith either feebly attempts to apologize for it, 
or, as stated, acknowledges it as (mildly worded) ‘‘ a defect.’’ The truth 
is, that it needs no apology, but it is precisely the language that we ought 
reasonably to anticipate, provided it is true that, after the long extended 
mercy and love of God in Christ Jesus, the nations and the kings of the 
earth will be arrayed against the truth ; that they will exalt a@ monster of 
aniquity over them as their chief Ruler ; that they will proceed to martyr 
all true believers ; and that they will even dare to oppose the Lord Jesus 
Himself. These Psls. are prophetical. TheSpirit, by anticipation, speaks 
for the believer, and puts forth the prayers that time will prove are. pre- 
cisely those that true piety, oppressed by a terribly vindictive power, can 
consistently utter. (Comp. Prop. 115). 

This presents a very different outlook for the church of the future from that pre- 
sented by Schelling (Schaff’s Prin. of Protest, p. 175), who has the Romish Church con- 
verted and united with Protestantism under a St. John stage or development ; philosophi- 
cally preaching ‘‘peéace and safety,’’ and ignoring, as if unworthy of credence, the Divine 
portraiture of the future tribulation and vengeance. We only add, to guard the obser- 
vation, that another reason why God is thus appealed to in connection with coming 
vengeance is that, after such vengeance, not only deliverance, but glorious redemption, 
Millennial blessedness, etc., are to be realized. It is also true that such a depression 


of the Church and such a temporal prosperity of Antichrist is allowed to realize the dec- 
laration of Ps. 92: 7, etc. 


Obs. 4. Without endeavoring to present the order of events (which is 
elsewhere intimated), let us from the Scriptures ascertain who shall endure 
the tribulation of the last days. The Jews shall not escape. Sufficient 
and interesting data exist showing that they, too, will feel the terrible 
scourge of the Antichrist. That which is more obscurely stated by other 
prophets is plainly presented in Zech. 14, implying that a partial restora- 
tion (which many writers attribute to this Antichrist, others to some other 
friendly power) of a portion of the nation has been previously effected. 
Here the prophet predicts an overthrow of the city of Jerusalem which 
has never yet taken place. The events that follow, the Divine interposi- 
tion, the Coming of the Lord with all the saints, the fighting and success 
of Judah, the plague that strikes the nations fighting against Jerusalem, the 
peaceful and happy restoration, the general worship—all forbid any interpre- 
tation, than that of a still future devastation of the city by some great power, 
which in turn is met and destroyed by the Lord Himself miraculously interpos- 
ing. ‘'Thestudent will not consider this prediction isolated, but immediately 
seeks out the parallel prophecies which serve to illustrate and confirm this 
statement. These are found without difficulty in various places. Thus, e.g., 
Zech. begins with the destruction of the city without mentioning the power 
that does this, as if it were a matter already well known, or at least previ- 
ously predicted. 'This is the case, for he begins with the latter part of Dan. 
ch. 11, and first part of ch. 12. Daniel tells us that this last king shall 
enter Palestine and occupy the glorious holy mountain, without specifying 


—_- 


o —————— a _ 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 137 


particularly what he does to Jerusalem (which Zech. gives) ; and that this 
alludes to the same period is evident from the identical results following, 
viz., “a time of trouble such as never was since there was a nation even to 
that same time,” the Divine interposition, the deliverance of God’s 
people, including a resurrection of the dead. Indeed Faber, and many 
other writers, have so conclusively proven that Daniel, Zechariah, Joel and 
John, all describe the same last culminated Antichrist, accompanied by the 
same overthrow through supernatural interference, and the same restoration 
of the Kingdom of God, that it is superfluous to dwell longer upon the iden- 
tity of description. Besides these, there are other predictions that specify 
acrisis in the history of the Jews at the very time of their deliverance, 
Let the reader consider the context and text of Millennial descriptions, and 
notice how the prophet, without the least indication of a change from Jew 
to Gentile, speaks of the rejection of the Jewish nation long continued, of 
their fallen condition and oppression suddenly followed by an astonishing, 
marvellous deliverance and exaltation. Thus, e.g., in Isa. 49, and as indica- 
tive of the same, the question is asked, ‘‘ Shall the prey be taken from the 
mighty ? (or as Lowth, Clarke, Syriac, Vulgate, etc., read : ‘‘ Shall the prey 
seized by the terrible be rescued ?’’) and then comes “‘ the prey of the 
terrible shall be delivered ; for I will contend with him that contendeth with 
thee, and I will save thy children. And I will feed them that oppress thee 
with their own flesh ; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as 
with sweet wine; and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am the Saviour 
and the Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.’’ Various utterances intimate 
the same, as in Ps. 50, when ‘‘ God shall come’’ ‘‘ to judge His 
people’ and ‘‘a fire shall devour before Him,”’’ etc., the assurance, imply- 
ing existing trouble, is given ‘‘ And call upon Me in the day of trouble; I 
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me.’’ Abundance.of illustration 
can be found in Isa. chs. 41, 24, and 25, 33, etc., so that Jeremiah, in 
view of the condition of the same nation that is oppressed, and whose 
restoration is predicted by him in the context, exclaims: ‘‘ Alas! for that 
day is great, so that none ts like it ; 1¢ 1s even the time of Jacob’s trouble ; 
but he shall be saved out of it.’ . 


We again refer to this trouble, specified as the greatest that the world has ever wit- 
nessed, and add to the explanation given under Prop. 160 and note 1, the following, to 
reconcile it with Matt. 24: 21, etc. That interpretation of Matt. 24, which in some 
way links the coming of the Lord Jesus with the destruction of Jerusalem, is the most 
consistent with both the text and the previous predictions of the prophets. But we find, 
on a comparison of Scripture, that there is still a future destruction of Jerusalem foretold, 
at which the Lord with all His Saints is to come, and we find that the overthrow of Jeru- 
salem is united in Matt., Mark, and Luke with this Advent of Jesus. Christ and His 
Saints did not thus come, and, as Jesus himself teaches us, by speaking of a long contin- 
ued treading down of Jerusalem by the Gentiles and scattering of the nation, is to be 
referred to His future coming as foretold. Hence the peculiarity of these predictions in 
the Gospel, which can only be comprehended in their fulness by observing that they stand 
related to a continued course of tribulation upon the city and nation, running through 
the times of the Gentiles, and finally culminating in the state specified by Zech., Dan., 
etc., followed (as in the Gospels) by the Advent of the Lord Jesus. The trouble, 
therefore, spoken of by Jesus only began with the destruction of Jerusalem, extends down 
through a long period, and finally reaches its crisis as predicted under the Antichrist. 
Jesus Himself thus leads us not to confine the prediction to one event, but to a series, 
culminating in that immediately preceding His Advent, the point of contact being the 
distress and destruction of Jerusalem. Such a gradation and climax is even taught in 
adopting the Jewish belief respecting the pangs preceding Messiah’s coming, and speak- 
ing of ‘the beginning of pangs’’ (Matt. 24: 8; in Greek, comp. Olshausen loci). 

Rationalistic interpreters endeavor to show that the Second Advent and Kingdom, 


738 THE ‘HEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


being allied to a destruction of Jerusalem, never took place, and the prediction thus fail- 
ed. Some Apologists, in replying, not seeing how Jesus connects ‘‘the days of ven- 
geance” with “the times of the Gentiles,” and not recognizing the still future ter- 
rible oppression of Jerusalem under the Antichrist as predicted, blunder most lamely 
in their interpretations. 


Obs. 5. All believers in Jesus Christ then existing shall endure a sharp 
and excessively severe persecution under Antichrist. Many predictions in 
the Old Test. plainly teach this, when we consider that the Bible regards 
all such as adopted Jews, engrafted and accounted as the seed of Abraham. 
Therefore it is, that many prophecies pertaining to this period which 
describe the sufferings and oppression of God’s people, include not 
merely the elect Jewish nation but also the adopted faithful from among 
the nations—a continuation of the elect people. Having already pre- 
sented much Scripture bearing on this point, it is only necessary to direct 
the attention of the reader to a few passages directly teaching the greatness 
and universality of this tribulation under this last head of the beast, and 
this too attirmed of the faithful in Christ Jesus. The time is surely 
coming, whether men credit it or not, when this Antichrist, in the 
greatness of his power and the wantoness of his will, shall reproduce the 
edict of the ancient King of Babylon, and the compelled worship of the 
golden image on the plains of Dura will be reasserted in the homage 
demanded for Antichrist and his image. All men are required to worship 
the beast and ¢o receive, as evidence of it, his distinguishing mark, or 
else forfeit life itself. The description is too precise and simple to allow 
us to mistake its dreadful meaning. Turn to Rev. 13, and read what is 
to be done under this last head, how he shall ‘‘ blaspheme’’ God, “* make 
war with the saints and overcome them,’ ‘‘and cause that as many as 
would not worship the image of the beast should be killed’’ (comp. Rey. 
14: 9-13, and 17: 10-14). Then when we turn to Rev. 20: 4, and 7 : 14, 
we find that a multitude of persons have, rather than forsake the worship 
and honor of Jesus, refused to yield obedience to the cruel edict in 
reverence to the self-deifying Antichrist, and have laid down their lives in 
martyr faith and grace. Alas! man again will so hate the truth, the 
humbling but elevating truth, as it is in Christ Jesus, that he will be 
satisfied with nothing less than a denial of Him who exhibited His costly 


love for us on the cross, and in the shedding of precious blood consecrated — 


to God through His Son. Alas! it stands recorded that ‘‘ all that dwell 


upon the earth shall worship, whose names are not written inthe book of — 


life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world.’’* Wonders, of 


which Spiritualism may give the faintest earnest, connected with Humanity — 


following out its fleshly desires and sustained by the powerful civil and 
military power of the beast, will so impress the minds of the masses that, 
notwithstanding the impression and even terrific warnings (Rev. 14 : 9- 
11) of God, they will not only receive the mark of the beast and worship 
his image, but even carry out his sanguinary edicts and stain their hands 


with innocent and righteous blood. Thanks be to God, that many, on 


the other hand, upheld by the Word and the Spirit, urged on by the 


promises of, and love for, the Saviour, shall not be deceived by the 


miracles *—shall not quail under the demands of worship—shall not sacrifice 
their honor and glory to abject fear and transitory pain—shall not refuse 


to tread in the bloody footsteps of their Master who loved them also unto 


death. We rejoice to-day while writing, that, if faithful ourselves, we 


| 
i 


PRop. 162. ] _ THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 739 


shall have the honor and pleasure of seeing, in the Coming Kingdom, that 
glorious multitude, stripped-of their bloody garments and arrayed in 
white, and of hearing from their own lips the story of trial, of sustaining 
faith, and of triumph over Antichrist. When these scenes transpire ; 
when death or man-worship is the alternative ; when Christ or the Anti- 
christ is to be chosen, then, more impressively than ever, will such Scripture 
stand forth to bestow encouragement and warning to decide for Jesus, as, 
oo., Matt. 10 : 39 3.16 : 25; Mark 8:35; John 12 : 25, ete.’ Then, too, 
that class of passages which exhort us to endure persecution, as e.g. 2 Tim. 
erste; John 15:20; Acts 14% 225 1\'Thess, 3:3; 1 Pet. 4 29, ete.— 
which encourage us to meet it, as e.g., Phil. 1 : 8, 28, 2931 Pet.1:6; 
2 ‘Thess. 1: 4, 5:1 Pet. 4: 12, 18, ete—which stimulate us to suffering by 
the promise of blessing, as e.g., Matt. 5:12; Rom. 8: 18; 1 Pet. 1:7; 
Luke 6 : 22, 23, etc., will all be deeply pondered and cherished in loving 
hearts.* The warning given by Arch. Usher (see statement in detail, 
Brooks’s H/. Proph. Interp., p. 168), just previous to his death, ‘‘ that a 
very great persecution would fall upon all the Protestant churches of 
Europe” adding ‘‘ I tell you, all you have yet seen hath been dut the 
beginning of sorrows to what is yet to come upon the Protestant churches of 
Christ, which will erelong fall under a sharper persecution than ever,’’ is 
only one of a multitude that might be quoted from eminent men—all 
based upon the decided teachings of the Word. When conservative men, 
like Usher, are forced to make such acknowledgments; when the most 
able and learned divines, the leading commentators and expositors have 
no hesitancy (comp. Olshausen, Lange, Alford etc.) in repeating the 
same, and exhorting to observation, etc.; when the Spirit has presented it 
to us in a form that leaves no possible doubt (saving in unbelief) of its 
occurrence, it is folly and rashness in us to turn away from the subject. 
If we have no regard for ourselves (not deeming ourselves in danger of 
experiencing it) let us consider those who may and will experience it, 
peradventure our own children or children’s children. Love for these, love 
for the Church, love for our fellow-men, love for the truth and the 
Redeemer, should influence us neither ¢o neglect these things nor to keep 
silence respecting them. Allow that we are mistaken in the minor details, 
that we have misapprehended this or that particular statement in the 
description yet there remains the broad and distinctive outlines of a coming 
dreadjul, persecuting power under which believers shall fall as the wheat 
before the reaper. If there is a truth recorded in God’s Word easy of 
comprehension, and abundantly confirmed by revteration, it is, that, just 
before the open revelation of Jesus Christ, the Antichrist, whoever he 
may be, shall terribly persecute the people of God. While deprecating that 
precise fixing of time which so many, to the injury of the cause, adopt in 
their writings, yet it is true (as Rieneke and many others have very ably 
shown) that the precise time, during which this persecution is to last, has 
been pointed out in Rev. 13 : 5-8, comp. Rev. 11 : 3-7, etc. The double 
assurance is thus given that this Antichrist has his time limited, and that 
the persecution is to be a short one.* This persecution too shall be “ sud- 
denly’’—after ‘** the secret counsel of the wicked and “the privily laid 
snares’? have been concocted—sprung upon the righteous to take them if 
possible unawares, and just as ‘‘ suddenly’? (Ps. 64, comp. Rev. 16:15; 
1 Thess. 5 : 3, etc.) shal] God ensnare the persecutors in destruction. No 
doubt too, one cause of the exceeding bitterness and animosity manifested 


740 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


toward the followers of Jesus, will be the previous proclamation (see Obs. 
below) that this last revived head will be the Antichrist. The personal 
hatred toward believers is thus easily accounted for; naturally, it will be 
excited by the faithful portraiture which, by way of warning, Christians 
will extensively circulate. We can well imagine, when contemplating 
the extent of the bloodshed which is to be inflicted by ‘‘ the throne of 
iniquity” ‘‘ which frameth mischief by a law’’ (Ps. 94), and causes its 
upholders to ‘‘ gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous 
and condemn innocent blood’’ how then the prayer (same Ps.) shall ascend 
‘“O Lord God, to whom vengeance belongeth ; O God, to whom vengeance 
belongeth, show Thyself. Lift up thyself, Thou Judge of the earth ; render 

a reward to the proud, Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the 
wicked triumph? How long shall they utter and speak hard things? and 
all the workers of iniquity boast themselves? they break in pieces Thy 
people, O Lord, and afflict thine heritage. They slay the widow and the 
stranger, and murder the fatherless. Yet they say the Lord shall not see, 
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.’’? 'Then comes the response (same 
Ps.) that God does hear and see, and that ‘* He shall bring wpon them 
their own iniquity, and shall cut them off in their own wickedness ; yea, 
the Lord our God shall cut them off.’ Yes, and even before the vials of 
God’s wrath are poured out upon this last great enemy we find those 
delivered who ‘‘had gotten the victory’’ (strange but glorious victory 
through death) ‘‘ over the beast and over his mark, and over the number of 
his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God,’’ etc. (see 
Rey. 15 : 2-4 and, comp. e.g., with Rev. 16:2). They, owing to faith- 
fulness, shall see their prayer answered—shall behold the outpouring of the 
judgments ‘* upon the men which had the mark of the beast and upon them 
which worshipped his image,’ and “‘ upon the seat of the beast’’—shall 
witness the awful overthrow of the once mighty enemy forming “ the 
supper of the great God’’ for the fowls of heaven (Rev. 19:17). What an 
astounding change from persecution to inexpressible glory, and in glory to 
behold the burning, devouring wrath of a justly incensed God descend 
upon a self-exalted, self-deifying and vilely murderous Humanity.° 


1 Lincoln (Lects. on Rev.) and some others make this fast persecution too exclusively 
that of the earthly Jewish nation, as if the entire Christian Church was removed and 
none existed during this interval. Now, while the nation will be dreadfully persecuted 
by Antichrist (as a punishment for rejecting Jesus and receiving him), the Church that is 
left (comp. e. g. Props. 130 and 181), as seen in the order of Rey. 14, will also incur the 
persecution. Lincoln too much overlooks (1) the continued election of the true be- 
lievers based on an engrafting into the nation (as shown by us e. g. Props. 59-65), and 
(2) that only after a special translation of favored ones does the Church arise to a full 
consciousness of its chronological and eschatological position, resulting in many coming 
up out of the tribulation. 

* Some regard these miracles, as Lange (Rev., p. 35), ‘‘illusive wonders, magical mira- 
cles.’’ Others, as Dr. Craven (in foot-note to same), regard them as real miracles, 
Craven e. g. says: ‘‘Do not the words of our Lord, Matt. 24: 24, and those of Paul, 
2 Thess. 2: 9, imply that the miracles are to be real? ‘The terms employed on both these 
occasions (semeia and terata) are those used to indicate the miracles of our Lord Himself. 
The phrase, miracles of falsehood of 2 Thess. 2: 9, does not necessarily mean aught else 
than miracles to confirm the ‘lie,’ which (v. 11) the apostle declares that those who are — 
deluded shall believe ; and this seems to be its most natural interpretation. There can 
be little doubt that the sign and wonders (Sep. semeion and teras), of which Jehovah 
warned his people, Deut. 13 : 1-3, were real miracles, which God would empower false 
prophets to work for the purpose of proving Israel.’’ So Riggenbach (Lange’s Com., 2 
Thess., p. 131) says: ‘‘ We also expect, as counterparts to the miracles of Christ, real 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 741 


operations, which yet are called miracles of falsehood (Roos), because men who regard 
them as proofs of the divinity of the unrighteous one are thereby miserably deceived. 
Performed by dark, gloomy powers, they are indeed at bottom nothing really creative 
but assumptions, imitations, manifestations of a sham strength, which at last is a 
wretched impotence, monstrosities without any saving object, but not, therefore, mere 
Juggleries.”” (Comp. Alford, Olshausen, etc., on 2 Thess. 2). 

3 May we add, by way of encouragement, if men of the world have gladly sacrificed life 
for earthly honor (as Greeks and Romans)—if they have cheerfully laid down life for 
country and glory (as history repeatedly attests)—if they have even met death with sing- 
ing, triumphing over the retention of faith in some idea (as during the French Revolu- 
tion), surely believers in ‘the Christ’’ should not deem life so precious as to sacrifice 
for it the highest and noblest gifts of heaven and eternity. No! the saying of Jesus 
will be verified : for every one who attempts, by a denial of Jesus, to save his life, shall 
lose it, and every one who for Christ’s sake is willing to lose his life shall save it. If 
Jesus died for us, surely, if demanded, it should not be so terrible a matter to die for 
Him, especially when honor and glory shall be the joyful portion of all who thus manifest 
faith and hope. May God, in mercy, enlighten and sustain His dear children in this 
coming trial, and may they have the unspeakable happiness of rising in glorious honor 
and witnessing with their own eyes (comp. Rev. 14, 15, and 16) God’s vengeance upon 
their arrogant and bloody enemy. 

4 That is, in reference to the persecution under this last head of the beast. The Jewish 
tribulation, which shall be ‘‘even unto the consummation” (Dan. 9 : 27), isa lengthy 
one, corresponding with thetime predicted by Jesus and mentioned by Paul, running 
through the period of the times of the Gentiles and the blindness of the Jews, until the 
fulness of the Gentiles has come in—thus embracing ‘‘ the consumption determined” 
(Isa. 28 : 22). When ‘‘the consummation,” the end, comes, then this brief but dis- 
astrous career of the Antichrist is witnessed, Even if we take Lincoln’s (Lects. on Rev., 
vol. 2, p. 31) idea of the ‘‘one hour” being equivalent to ‘‘one time,” over against the 
generally received view, yet the general teaching on the subject still makes it the last 
outbreak of wickedness, enduring but a short time. 

5 We are glad that able men. sound this warning to the Church ; that Auberlen, 
Riggenbach, Huebner, Luthardt, Von Gerlach (comp. e.g. Lange’s Com. Thess., p. 138, etc.), 
Alford, and. many others, give no uncertain teaching ; that here and there, in almost all 
denominations, some of the pious ponder these things and tell them to others. It is 
eratitying to find such menas G. Miller (Sermon preached at Mildmay Park, June 29th, 
1879) pointedly refer to this coming trouble, and exhort believers in view of the crisis ; as 
Rev. Dr. Wordsworth, Bh. of Lincoln (Chris. Herald, March 27th, 1879), calling special 
attention to *‘ The Coming Persecution ’’ of the Church because a plainly revealed fact ; 
9s various German, English, French, Dutch, Swiss, and American writers, who fully in- 
dorse the dreadful nature of the incoming tribulation, some likening (as Epp) the initia- 
tory toa ‘*Gethsemane of the Church,” and its climax to a ‘‘Golgotha of the Church.”’ 
Works more or less specifically devoted to bring forth with prominence this idea of 
future tribulation are presented to us by Millenarian writers of ability, such as Seiss, 
Brooks, etc. Essays calling attention to the serious character of the predictions relating 
to the subject are circulated, as e.g. Rev. Parson’s before the Proph. Conf. at New York, 
on ‘‘ The Present Age and Development of Antichrist.’’ Recent commentators clearly 
teach it, as e.g, Fausset (Com., Dan, 7 : 24) holds to a future terrible persecution of the 
Church under a personal Antichrist, saying : ‘‘The Church has endured a pagan and a 
papal persecution ; there remains for her an infidel persecution, general, purifying, and 
cementing. He (Antichrist) will not merely, as Popery, substitute himself for Christ in 
Christ's name, but deny the Father and the Son (1 Jno. 2; 22). The persecution is to 
continue up to Christ's second coming (v. 21, 22); the hour of blasphemy cannot there- 
fore be past ; for now thereis almost a general cessation of persecution,’’ Indeed, the 
view is sometimes expressed in the most unexpected quarters, as e.g. Pressense (The 
Early Days of Christianity, p. 285) says of Paul’s teaching: ‘‘ Before this (the glorious 
consummation of the Kingdom of God), however, a terrible conflict will take place 
between the Church and Antichrist personified in the ‘man of sin,’ 2 Thess. 2 : 3-8, 
and the close of this conflict will be the return of Christ in the clouds to judge the world 
and to raise the dead, 1 Thess. 4 ; 14-18.”’ 


Obs. 6. The Papacy too, however faithless and unchristian, however 
apostatizing and antichristian in the past, and future, shall also fall 


742 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


beneath this Antichrist. The Papacy, with all its arrogant claims and its 
persecution of the saints, is too Christian even for this lawless, godless 
Leader. Whatever aid (as many believe) it may at first extend in paving 
the way for the development of the Antichrist, it is in antagonism with 
his ambitious projects and his personal claims to universal homage, and 
it, too, finds in him a deadly enemy. ‘The proof of its downfall and destruc- 
tion is distinctly given in Rey. 17: 15, 16, and having already called 
attention to it, a repetition of argument is unnecessary. The line of 
punishment falls in with that of previously committed offence ; strenuously 
opposed to ‘‘ religious liberty’? and ready, wherever it had the power, to 
crush it as a dangerous and deadly crime, the Papacy now in turn feels 
the effective and crushing blows of a Tyrant who also will not tolerate 
“* religious liberty.’”’ Instead of the Pope as the vicegerent of Jesus Christ 
on earth, now One arises claiming to be God, who will not permit any such 
claimant to honor and power to exist contemporaneously with himself. 
The Papacy, therefore, 1s doomed to perish ; the beast and the ten horns 
(so Bengel, Stuart, etc.) shall hate her, shall make her desolate and naked, 
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. This, we are assured, too, is 
fully determined (Rev. 17 : 17) by God Himself. 


The critical student, when comparing Rev. 14: 8; Rev. 16: 19 and Rev. 18 : 15-18, 
will find that the overthrow of the Papacy (and State churches) begins and is consum- 
mated under the Antichrist, the dregs being drunken when vengeance itself begins to 
fall upon Antichrist and his followers. It certainly is completed in its most destructive 
form before the Antichrist and his co-laborers are met by the open Parousia of Christ. 
The divine portraiture of the future is very different from that presented by Rev. Burke, 
in his lecture, ‘‘ The Pope’s Tiara: its Past, Present, and Future,” where he most confi- 
dently predicts the restoration of the regal power of the Pope and its vast extension over 
the nations. 

* 


Obs. 7. The world, the nations, shall not escape this tribulation. #Led 
on by their rejection of the truth, they willingly place themselves under the 
yoke of this Antichrist, and the result is, that they shall feel the tyranny 
of their received master, be participants in the reception of the avenging | 
vials, and finally fall under the contest with the Lamb. Jesus tells us, 
Luke 21 : 25, that there shall be ‘‘ upon earth distress of nations, with 
perplexity ; the sea and the waves roaring ; men’s hearts failing them from 
fear, and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth ; for 
the powers of heaven shall be shaken.’’ With this the prophets all agree, 
giving us when brought together a most gloomy and fearful portrayal of 
wickedness, misery, suffering, and punishment.’ If any desire to look at 
the Divine description, let them read, e.g., the pouring out of the vials— 
Rev. 16, or the overthrow by Christ Rev. 19, or the opening of the sixth 
seal Rev. 6, or the utterances of the prophets Isa. 24 ; Ps. 2; Zech. 14; Joel 
3; Zeph. 3, etc. Having already referred to Scripture (Props. 147, 133. 
Obs. 8, (11) 160, 161, 130, etc.) relating to this matter, it is unnecessary — 
to repeat what is so plain. Itis pre-eminently the day of God’s vengeance, — 
the period of God’s controversy with the nations, the time when God rises — 
up to the prey, the season when G‘od’s anger and fury and indignation 
shall be poured out, when fire and sword and plague and all manner of evil 
shall find its affrighted victims, and when the once weeping, dying, — 
loving Jesus shall come with His mighty messengers ‘‘ in flaming fire taking — 
vengeance on them that know not God and that obey not the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.’? Let men say what they please, God is abundantly 


ERRORS 16255, THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 743 


justified in thus exhibiting a dreadful day of vengeance. Behold the 
situation as the Spirit describes it. Here upon this very earth created by 
God, the people, for whom He even provided a Redeemer, rebel against and 
actually disown him, contemptuously reject His Son, the Son of His love 
whom He designs as the Theocratic Ruler, and proceed to manifest this 
disregard and hatred by elevating a man into the place of God, and brutally 
putting to death all who will not worship him. Js it any wonder that 
God is angry? Is it a matter of astonishment that ‘‘ the earth shail be 
devoured with the fire of His jealousy,” seeing that another is exalted to His 
place? Should it be a matter of surprise, that the Theocratic King—the 
One to whom the honor of ruling the nations justly belongs—should 
come im wrath against this arrogant and boasting claimant and his 
adherents? No! it is only a matter of wonder that the long-suffering 
of God, the patience of Jesus, should endure so long, and allow such 
encroachments upon the Divine prerogatives. The solution of this, we are 
told, is found in God’s desire to complete the number of His elect, to test 
the faith of His people, to permit human nature for its own punishment 
to set up and try its saviour, to indicate more strikingly the impotency of 
man and the greatness and majesty of His own power, to teach the race 
the impressive lesson that He 1s a Covenant-keeping God, who has merci- 
fully held that Convenant in abeyance for purposes of mercy but who, 
when men in the highest of earthly relations deny Him and substitute 
another to be their God, vindicates His own sense of justice by destroying 
those enemies and fulfilling His Covenant promises both to the Son and 
the Son’s brethren. An expressive declaration that also teaches how des- 
perately blinded and wicked the nations are when entering under the 
judicial visitations of God before the final catastrophe, is found in the 
words : ‘* they repented not to give Him the glory’’—they ‘‘ repented not of 


theor deeds,’’ but continued on in “ dlaspheming the Name of God.’’ For | 


the destruction of such unmitigated rebels, God needs no justification ; if, 
in justice and love to the martyrs, to His Son and to Himself, He did not 
do so, then and then only might we question both the justice and love of our 
God.? | 

1 The critical student is referred to Delitzsch’s rendering of Isa. 63 : 3, where, instead 
of having the English version ‘‘and of the people there was none with me,” he gives, 
‘*and of the nations no one was with me,’’ which is in accordance with the general analogy 
of the Word, (1) that no nations are converted in this dispensation, but only individuals 
out of them ; (2) that at the time of the Second Advent all nations, as such, are op- 
posed to Christ ; and (3) that the saints are with Him at this coming vengeance. This 
also shows, what able writers have insisted upon, that such highly favored nations as e.g. 
England and the United States shall not escape. The simple fact is, that no nation, aside 
from its sinfulness, ete., will be willing to give up its own government and submit tothe 
incoming Theocracy under the Messiah. Hence it is, as we shall show under Prop. 164, 
that Gentile domination, under its varied forms, will utterly come to an end. 

2 Our over-sensitive brethren (who can consign men to perdition throughout ‘ the eter- 
nal ages” without any qualms of conscience and exhibition of undue feeling on the sub- 
ject) are wonderfully excited at ‘‘the dreadful picture” presented by us of Christ and 
the saints. They object to such passages as are contained in Rev. 19; Ps. 119: 6, 9; 
Ps. 58 : 18, etc., and boldly assert it to be ‘‘ outrageous and shocking” to say that Jesus, 
and the saints with Him, should come to pour out a long-delayed vengeance in behalf of 
God’s own people. They can even sneeringly speak of it as ‘‘ congenial and blessed em- 
ployment for the risen, changed, and glorified saints.’ Do such consider that ‘the 
dreadful picture” is that drawn by the Holy Spirit; and do they reflect that, perchance, 
they are uttering sarcasms against God’s own ordering, and denouncing His ways as 
‘‘ shocking,” etc. ? We simply follow the Divine Record ; there the predictions stand unre- 
pealed, and they shall most assuredly find their mates. It is no small matter to thus 


744 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRop. 162. 


stand in judgment over the future actions of Christ and His saints, and to denounce them, 
if they conform to the plain grammatical sense, as wrong, outrageous, etc. Such an at- 
titude may suit unbelievers, but is unfitted for believers in the Word. (Comp. Prop. 
115.) Sufficient is given to abundantly justify God’s proceedings ; a sufficiency is pre- 
sented in the past history of the Theocracy, the employment of angels in destruction, the 
proceedings against the Jewish nation and other nations, to show that God will, if the 
circumstances demand it, resort to violence, to the pouring out of His wrath and ven- 
geance, in order to overwhelm His enemies. The principle announced in Isa. 50: 11 holds 
good down to the present, and will be most fearfully verified in the last days, and then 
how great the ‘‘sorrow!’? Wemay appropriately quote Alford : ‘If it be said, that this 
is somewhat a dark view to take of the prospects of mankind, we may answer, first, that 
we are not speculating on the phenomena of the world, but we are interpreting God’s 
Word ; secondly, that we believe in Onein whose hands all evil is working for good— 
with whom there are no accidents nor failures—who is bringing out of all this struggle, 
which shall mould and measure the history of the world, the ultimate good of man and 
the glorification of His boundless love in Christ ; and thirdly, that no prospectis dark 
for those who believe in Him. For them all things are working together for good ; and 
in the midst of the struggle itself, they know that every event is their gain; every appar- 
ent defeat, real success; and even the last dread conflict, the herald of that victory, in 
which all who have striven on God’s part shall have a glorious and everlasting share.” 


Obs. 8. The reader need not be detained for us to prove that this tribu- 
lation immediately precedes the re-establishment of the Davidic throne and 
kingdom. ‘This has been done under various Propositions and in numerous 
Observations. It is sufficiently clear that immediately after the tyranny 
and persecution of this last head of the beast, and that after the overthrow 
of the confederation under this Antichrist, the Kingdom of the Lord 
Jesus appears with its Millennial blessedness, and extends itself over the 
nations of the earth. Leaving the abundant Scripture already presented, 
we confine ourselves to a solitary illustration, which forcibly describes this 
period of the enemies’ triumph, their overthrow, and the peaceful king- 
dom that succeeds. ‘Take Ps. 46 and consider how the Spirit describes 
the confidence of the true believer in a time of unparalleled trouble and 
commotion, precisely such as attends this period of tribulation. Itisa 
time when ‘“‘ the heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved,’’ and God helps 
His people amid the waving, troubled and swelling waters ‘‘ when the 
morning appeareth’’ (marg. reading, comp. Prop. 139) and He breaks to 
pieces the warlike equipments of the nations, exalting Himself among the 
heathen—that ‘‘ a river (i.e., a kingdom), the streams whereof shall make 
glad the City of God,’’ appears and is firmly established, because ‘‘ God 7s 
in the midst of her.’’ (Comp. other versions which, with some change, even 
make it more expressive as e.g., Luther’s, that.the City of God, in which 
are the holy habitations of the Most High shall be joyful, etc.). The testi- 
mony on this point is overwhelming, and to an extent too that leaves every 
one who rejects it inexcusable. There is no doubt whatever that so much 
is said respecting it, that when the hour of the sorest trial comes to the 
Church, she may console and encowrage herself by the glorious prospect 
before her. 


The Church will come out of this tribulation radiant with glory, honoring her living 
Head with a love stronger than death. While the development and the culmination of 
Antichrist is permitted in order to evidence the outgrowth of human reason unaided by 
divine grace (thus corroborating the results as portrayed so depreciatory in the Scriptures), 
and to show that human depravity makes it impossible for civilization, without Chris- 
tianity, to produce the highest morality (the unbelieving boast—not seeing that Grecian 
and Roman civilization is repeating itself in entailing corruption as the outcome of a 
modernized heathenism), this brings with it asevere and galling tyranny and punishment 


PROP. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 745 


under which the nations themselves groan, wishing for deliverance. While the Church, 
owing to her highmindedness, pride, departure from truth, and sins, is allowed to pass 
under this terrible rod, she comes out of it purified, refined, and exalted, securing the 
admiration and allegiance of the nations, for she will participate in the honor, power 
and glory of her mighty Theocratic King. 


Obs. 9. This subject now so much neglected, even despised by many, will 
at a future time be made the special subject of preaching. Holy Writ 
informs us that on the withdrawal of the 144,000 (Rey. 14), the Church 
will then so definitely know its nearness to the tribulation under Anti- 
christ, will be so profoundly impressed with the greatness and imminency of 
danger—will so accurately realize what are the cruel demands of the Anti- 
christ, that the most extensive proclamation is not only made (vs. 6, 7.)- to 
fear and worship God because ‘‘ the hour of His judgment is come ;’’? but in 
the plainest of terms (vs. 9-13) the Antichrist is pointed out, and men are 
exhorted by the most powerful of motives not to worship the beast or his 
image and not to receive his mark. Then believers, instead of neglecting 
these prophecies and ridiculing those who engage in their study, will 
earnestly investigate and compare all that the Spirit has mercifully given, 
and will acknowledge the wisdom of those who honored God’s Word in 
accepting of the testimony. The preaching will give no uncertain sound ; 
the classes symbolized will faithfully proclaim the message, and, thank 
God, with so great success that they will persuade a multitude not to engage 
in the worship of Antichrist but to lay down their lives in honor of the 
truth, in love for their Redeemer, and in hope of speedy and glorious 
deliverance. By faith, we now see that noble band of preachers and hear 
the burning words of warning fall from their hps: “‘ Jf any man worship 
the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, 
the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out 
without mature into the cup of His indignation ; and he shall be tormented 
with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy angels and wn the presence 
of the Lamb,’ etc. By faith we see fathers, mothers and children, un- 
broken families, delicate females, feeble age and childhood, receive God’s 
Word and trusting in it, spwrn the worship tendered to them and fall 
beneath the bloody stroke of self-deifying Humanity. ‘Then too, the seduc- 
ing dream now proclaimed from so many pulpits by even earnest and 
honest hearts (viz., that the Church by present means and instrumentalities 
is progressing onward to sure triumphs over the world) will be heard no 
more giving place to the warnings, the threatenings of Antichrist’s brief 
victory over the Church (for he shall overcome the saints and the godly 
shall cease), and to exhortations to faithfulness and steadfastness in the 
coming bloody drama. And, of this too, we feel assured from the complex- 
ion of the predictions implying it, that the sense of a common danger, that 
the knowledge that all believers without exception are now to enter the 
great tribulation, that the fact that all who love Jesus more than Anti- 
christ must suffer, will wate all believers the more firmly together in love 
and fellowship. Before the incoming Antichrist, that mighty enemy who 
shall so freely and unsparingly shed the blood of the faithful, the differ- 
ences of confession, worship, government, etc., will sink into insignificancy 
before the great and vital point now alone insisted upon, viz., Have you 
such faith in, and such love for, Jesus Christ that for His sake you are 
willing to die? All, all, who have such faith and love, who are determined 
by grace sustaining them not to worship the beast or his image, are then 


746 THE THEOCRATIOC KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


indeed and in truth brethren, and in their common trial will mutually 
encourage each other. God help them to triumph. 

Let not persons shrink from the idea that such an Antichrist will be developed. 
Over against Tennyson’s dream of the ‘‘ parliament of man” and the ‘ federation of the 
world” by higher stages of progress, we face this stern reality thus predicted ; over against 
Goldwin Smith’s (‘‘ The Ascent of Man,’’ in Helectic Mag., March, 1877) confident predic- 
tion that vice is natural, and will be eliminated under natural effort and development, 
we have man’s moral nature unchanged and culminating in wickedness under this 
humanitarian sway ; over against the lauded and magnified perfectibility of man and the 
eloquently portrayed glorious future (in which eulogy many sincerely unite, thus ridding 
themselves of the humbling cross of Christ), we have this boasted progress manifesting 
itself in fearful despotism and cruelty ; over against Herbert Spencer’s (Social Statics, p. 79) 
prophecy that through the development of evolution we shall have ‘‘ evanescence of evil” 
(which he makes as ‘‘ logically certain,’’ as ‘‘ that allmen shall die”), we have evil extend- 
ing and widening until it reaches this tyrannical and cruel climax. The rise and the 
career of the Antichrist will effectually remove the notions, now so confidently expressed, 
concerning the conversion of the world by Christianity, or its subjection to Romanism, or 
its being made happy and blessed by ‘‘ the religion of the future,’’ civilization, evolution, 
natural development, republicanism, education, science, etc. (See Prop. 175.) The 
nations seeking freedom from the just claims of God and the cross of Jesus, shall reap 
the liberty that depraved human nature inaugurates in intensified selfishness and oppres-' 
sion, 


Obs. 10. Lastly it may be proper to dwell, briefly, upon a single point 
connected with the worship of Antichrist, viz., that of the worship of the 
image. ‘The image is made to represent the revived first beast (Rev. 13 : 
14, 15), and the second beast or false prophet ‘‘ had power to give life unto 
the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak and cause 
that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.’’ 
This is an image of the revived last head of the beast, or of the personal 

Antichrist ; and it is expressly designed to contribute to the honor and wor- > 
ship of this last head. Without being able to describe, precisely, in what 
this image will consist ; without being able to tell what is meant by giving © 
it life (unless foreshadowed by the attempt of those Spiritualists to make an 
image through which communications might be derived) ; yet from the 
tenor of the prediction we strongly incline to the view that it embraces ¢dol 
worship, and in this position we are sustained by other predictions. The 
original word denotes an image, an idol image (Barnes and other coms.) 
and it being an object of worsbip, representative, in some way, of this last 
personal head, it then becomes an idol, i.e., something that is reverenced, 
etc.’ If this were the only prophecy descriptive of the worship of these 
last days, there might be some hesitancy (seeing that it might be taken 
symbolically) in ascribing literal idol worship to this period. The proc- 
lamation of Rey. 14, to worship God implhes a return to idol worship 
in the phraseology that is used, although it may have exclusive reference to 
the coming worship claimed by Antichrist. It denotes, at least, that men 
shall now be called upon to worship something else than the true God. 
Before deciding how far we are to limit this, 1t is necessary to look over 
the predictions relating to the same time, and in doing this, we find such 
intimations given of existing idol worship, that, whatever, difficulty there 
may be to explain the language in its allusions to the future, we must be 
inclined to the belief that an image erected to a personal Antichrist refers 
to one set up for worship asa kind of test of and authoritative medium to 
Antichrist’s worshippers. It is supposed by some, that Antichrist being 
lawless and godless, will haye no idolatry. Thus, e.g., Chrysostom (Zncy. 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 747 


Lritan., art. Antichrist) observes on 2 Thess. 2, ‘‘ that Antichrist will 
not lead men to idolatry, but will rather abolish the worship of false gods 
as well as that of the true God, commanding the world to worship himself 
alone as the only Deity.’’ This entirely misapprehends the spirit and 
intent of the prophecy, which expressly affirms the retention of a religious 
element and worship, but has it directed as a climax to the worship of 
‘the man of sin,’’ without specifying, as John does, through what 
medium this worship shall be presented. Paul tells us that he will set 
aside all worship excepting that directed to himself; and John informs us 
that this will be done by him but through the agency of a remarkable image 


“worship which is representative of himself. Chrysostom is only correct if 


the ordinary past idol worship is meant by him ; for that idolatry, the use 
of images, is retained in Antichrist’s worship is not denied by Paul; seeing 
that he does not explain the manner in which the worship is tendered, 
whether direct or indirect. Why is it that in so many passages allusions 
to idol worship are made, if it is not designed to teach us that when 
men are once prepared to deify a fellow-man, they are also in a condition to 
do this through the instrumentality and reminding influences of images? 
Look, e.g., at Isa. 66:17, and 65: 11-17 in their connection as they 
stand related to the period immediately preceding the Coming of the Lord 
to consume His enemies in anger, to deliver His people, and to create the 
New Heavens and New Earth, and directly it is asserted, however we may 


explain the details, that, in some way, idol worship is then exhibited, and 


is one of the things which provokes the anger of the Lord. Indeed all 
commentators, however difficult they find the passages, however much they 
vary in their renderings, however much they differ in their application, are 
agreed that it is (Barnes’ loci) ‘‘a general description of idolatry and of 
idolaters as the enemies of God, and that the idea is that God would come 
with vengeance to cut off all His foes.’’ (Comp. Fausset, etc.) More than 
this, obscure as the passages are (it would be desirable, if some one compe- 
tent for the task would aid in deciding their definite meaning) yet su/ffi- 
cient remains, as is seen in expositions, to show that reference is had to 
a singular and hitherto unexplained worship ; for under the notion that 
it is something that has transpired numerous conjectures have been offered 
in explanation, none of which finds its mate in past history. If it be said, 
that these references more particularly relate to the Jewish people, this is 
admitted with the remark : that the Jewish nation, like all others, who are 
not believers in Jesus Christ, will de forced into the worship of this beast 
and image, which is one reason why they, in punishment, suffer under this 
Antichrist, who, for some reason, turns against them in his anger. What- 
ever this may be, the difficulty in explaining the details of this worship, zhe 
general affirmation that it shall prevail, remains true, and is found even in 
such passages as Isa. 45 : 16, 20, which in their fulness of meaning with 
the context are not exhausted until the salvation promised is fully bestowed ; 
or Isa. 44 and 46, and 56, Jer. 10, etc., for whatever inchoate or typical 
fulfilment are assigned in the past they have such a striking relationship 
to some great manifestation of idolatry which shall excite the special ven- 
geance of God, followed by a glorious deliverance of His people, that we 
are at no loss how to estimate their fitness in portraying this very period, at 
least in spirit. The freedom of the Jews from idolatry since the Advent 
of Jesus and the destruction of their city, has been their particular boast, 
especially in these days from Rationalizing pens ; this boast shall also be 


748 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


taken from them, and John 5 : 43, be verified, in that rejecting Jesus who 
‘‘came in the Father’s name,’’ they will, in this Antichrist, ‘‘ receive 
another who shall come in his own name.’’ If the reader still doubts the 
prevalence of idol worship at a period still future, let him turn to Isa. 2, 
and read how in connection with the Coming of the Lord in His terrible 
Majesty to humble the loftiness and haughtiness of man and to exalt Him- 
self, etc., ‘‘ the land is full of idols’ and *‘ they worship the work of their 
own hands’? and “‘the mean man boweth down and the great man humbleth 
himself’? before them, viz. (v. 20) ‘‘ idols of silver and idols of gold’? which 
they made for their worship (comp. Ps. 97: 7; 96:55; Hos. 13 : 8 ; Zech. 
10:2; Rev. 9: 20; Isa. 17, etc.). Andin verse 6, the Jews are especially 
implicated as also being engaged, joining hands with strangers, etc. (comp. 
diff. versions, and notice the Chaldee, ‘* their land ts filled with idols as at 
the beginning’’). Men may now ridicule the idea that enlightened nations 
should again return to idol worship, just as they may that of nations 
accepting of and worshipping a self-deifying man. They may tell us that 
the notion is too disparaging to the human understanding to be credited. 
But ¢¢ stands recorded that man’s depravity shall then lead him into the 
grossest delusions, and into believing and trusting in damnable lies. The 
falling back upon heathen philosophy, the denial of the personality of God, 
the exaltation of Humanity, etc., is’ clearly paving the way for a modified 
form of idolatry.* We have no idea that it will be introduced in the form 
in which it once existed, or, that it can be accepted by the people without 
the special wonderful co-operation of the False Prophet. It will be suited 
to the professed enlightenment of the age—it will be made subservient to 
the exaltation of the Antichrist ; it will, in all probability be claimed to be 
a mere directory and acknowledgment of worship to the beast; that the 
idols themselves are not worshipped but only used as a test and medium of 
worship to him to whom it is then legally awarded. Human nature 
repeats itself ; and when men thus boldly deny God and elevate one of their 
own number to the position of a God, the great representative of a wor- 
shipped Humanity, then the greater may well include the lesser offense, viz. 
—that with the mark received, with the acknowledgment of this usurper 
of God’s rights, and with the worship rendered unto him, each one should 
keep in his house an image to this beast, through which (as Romanists 
now through images operate) such worship is made manifest, so that in the 
persecution of unbelievers, the faith and spirit of a true adherent of Anti- 
christ’s may be exhibited. 'The religious element in man cannot be entirely 
crushed, and the masses must have something to satisfy an inherent cray- 
ing; this is afforded in the substituted worship, artfully constructed to 
increase the greatness and power of its directing head? It may require 
ten thousand additional powerful pens to teach the non-personality of God 
and to deify law, or nature, or man, before the people are fully 
ripened for such a manifestation ; it may yet require a vast amount of 
‘* false philosophy”’ Spiritualism, formative principles of ‘‘ the New Relig- 
ion of Humanity,’’ etc., before such a worship can be instituted; it 
may yet call for repeated attacks upon the Bible, its God and its Messiah, 
scattered by willing hands over the earth to root out a sense of accounta- 
bility, Jefore such a transfer is possible, but it will come, sooner or later. 
How enlightened reason will act in its hatred to the truth can be seen in 
the past ; and we may rest assured that the same spirit which led men, 
proud of their reason, to worship it in the person of a harlot at the ’'rench 


, 


Prop. 162.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 749 


Revolution, has not yet perished, but that it lives, widely extended, and 
only needs the miracle working power of the False Prophet to concentrate 
and direct it 7m the way predicted. Alas! men, unthinkingly and rashly, 
are engaged in the destructive work of paving the way—by their efforts 
against the teachings of God’s Word and to lessen its authority among the 
people—for an incoming worship and persecution, which, if they could see 
it in all its vileness and horror as it will exist, would fillthem with remorse 
at the initiative of their own labors.‘ 


1 Having abundantly shown that this last head has not yet appeared, this at once re- 
moves the notion of many that the image is something in the past. The image is only 
constructed when this last head appears and not before. The favorite view with numer- 
ous writers of the past and present is, that this image is the Papacy, thus representing 
and aiding the power of the Empire ; but this is utterly inconsistent with the prophecy, 
seeing that this image exists and is worshipped after the Papacy is destroyed by this 
beast and the confederated ten horns, This is clear from our entire argument, and needs 
no additional remark. 

» We repeat, owing to its importance : It cannot possibly be anything relating to the 
Papal Power, as many have supposed, simply because that power, instead of being 
worshipped, etc., is destroyed by the beast. It can scarcely be a power, Ecclesiastical, 
or Civil, simply because it is not afterward mentioned as meeting the same doom with 
the beast and false prophet. The narrative seems to imply that it is merely an instru- 
mentality of imposture—something to represent the beast, like the statues erected to the 
Roman emperors, and becoming, in consequence of the likeness or representative char- 
acter, an object of worship and homage. Hence we cannot receive the idea (e.g. Craven, 
Lange’s Com. Rev., p. 273) that the image is the little horn of Dan. 7: 8, 24 (because 
that horn is the culminated Antichrist to and for whom the image is constructed) ; or 
that it is the revived Papal Roman Empire as seen in the Papacy (because the Roman 
Empire existed continuously and supported the Papacy or harlot) ; or that (as Lange, p. 
270) the image of the beast is the reappearance of heathenism or the heathen world power 
in the Christian world (for while this is true, the design of this image is not to represent 
this fact, but to aid to enforcing it as manifested in the last head of this power). 

8 We shall then have in terrible force the ‘‘ abomination of desolation,” and Luther’s 
prediction (Michelet’s Life of Luther, Ap., p. 879) will be verified : ‘By and by we shall 
have visionaries who will undertake to give all the various sorts of idolatries (religious) 
an appearance of faith, and so excuse idolatry itself.’ Then ‘the Goddess of Destiny’’ 
(Delitzsch’s rend. of Isa, 65: 11) will find her cruel worshippers. There is a deep sig- 
nificance in the sudden conclusion of 1 Jno. 5: 21, ‘Little children, keep yourselves 
from idols’’ (i.e. from images or figures calculated to represent an object of worship). 
While applicable to the age in which John wrote and after (as in Mariolatry, etc., 
Lange’s Com. loci), yet it is specially applicable to this period, for in the epistle itself is 
prominently held forth the true and divine Christ and the false Antichrist substituted in 
His place, and the concluding warning is weighty. But what can we expect when men 
prostitute splendid talents in arraying heathen in the stolen virtues of Jesus, the Christ 
(as e.g. Arnold in the Light of Asia), and present them, varnished all over with poetical 
and eloquent laudation, for admiration and reverence. 

4 Alas ! men turn a deaf ear to God’s warnings, pointing to education, intelligence, etc., 
as if they were barriers to human depravity, and insured freedom from persecution. 
History repeats itself, and ten thousand instances like that of Vinegar Hill (Froude, 
English in Ireland, vol. 3, p. 396), indicate how depravity can override all considerations. 
Literary men (De Tocqueville The Old Régime, p. 170), paved the way for the scenes of 
the French Revolution, and many of the most intelligent were leaders in the most brutal 
scenes. The sentiments so actively propagated by them are still prevalent and extend- 
ing. The spirit of a Chammette, of an Anacharsis Clootz (Thiers’s His. French Rev., vol. 
2, p. 366, etc.), is still actively at work, as thousands of volumes and myriads of pages 
evidence. Niebuhr (Lec. on Rome), has repeatedly noticed a simple historical fact, that 
the absolute power to do all things is productive of ‘‘ double vices.’’ The history of the 
past, both in Popery and Protestantism, shows that when men are once in power, and 
then get the notion that others are hindering their advancement or the development of 
man’s higher interests (as associated with themselves), it is easy, under such a plea, to 
excite —even in apparently sincere hearts—the spirit of persecution. Facts—bloody facts 
almost beyond credence—form such a testimony, that God’s foreknowledge in this direc- 


750 _ THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 162. 


tion is in correspondence with what is in man—especially when he casts himself loose 
from God’s restraining Word. It is asad commentary on human nature (so lauded by 
reason), that this dispensation begins and closes with the persecution of the Church, 
thus showing that so many centuries of divine forbearance, mercy, and grace have not 
crushed the inherent spirit of evil. Lecky (His. of Kuropean Morals, vol. 1, p. 157), gives 
this corroborative remark : ‘‘ It is one of the plainest facts that neither the individuals 
nor the ages that have been most distinguished for intellectual achievements have been most 
distinguished for moral excellenee, and that a higher intellectual and material civilization 
has often co-existed with much depravity.” Eccles. His. informs us, how under religious 
prejudice the Greeks massacred the Latins, the Latins butchered the Greeks, and both 
condemned and killed the heretics; and civil history tells us that the most eruel and 
terrible wars and acts perpetrated were based on religious principle. One of the most 
painful exhibitions of human nature in the past is that urging Romanists to kill Protes- 
tants and the latter to retaliate ; while in the name of *‘ Liberty, Equality, and Frater- 
nity’ the rights of conscience were trampled into the gore-stained dust. Prescott 
(Library Notes, p. 240), has well said : *‘ that in every country the most fiendish passions 
of the human heart are those kindled: in the name of religion.’?’ Human nature is so 
readily perverted that even women (like Queen Isabella) rejoiced over the sight of suffer- 
ing, coolly (as the ladies of her court) examined the half-naked bodies of the Huguenots 
with indecent remarks, and brutally trifled (as in the Reign of Terror) with scenes of 
blood and horror as if they were of the most ordinary nature. History repeats itself, 
the only difference being in the intensity exhibited. No matter how great delusion is 
connected with the same, the mind can be completely controlled ; and, as Dr. Carpenter 
(Lect. on Mesmerism, etc.), has stated concerning Epidemic Delusions, ‘‘ that the condi- 
tion which underlies them all is the subjection of the mind to a dominant idea,” we may 
reasonably expect such an exemplification repeated in the Antichristian development, 
Let the time come when the righteous shall be removed by a translation (Prop. 130), and 
then the nations, under the influence of the last head of the beast and his co-workers, 
will ascend the extreme of impiety and wickedness, of which the principles and results 
of the French Revolution are a specimen, indicative of what a polished and intelligent, 
but unrepentant, man can do when frenzied by high-sounding ideas, “ the divinity of 
the human race, the only sovereign,” ‘‘ no other worship than that of reason, equality, 
and eternal truth,” ‘‘ the empire of reason and liberty,’’ ‘‘ the religion of Reason,” etc., 
(Pressense’s Religion and the Reign of Terror, pp. 202, 219, 225, etc.). Itis well to notice 
that men, whom Michelet, and others, laud as ‘‘ the founders of the religion of the 
future, and of religious liberty,’’ established decrees making all worship and religion 
opposed to the introduced worship and religion of Reason penal in “ the sacred name of 
Liberty,’’ and that while for a brief period Atheism ruled the rulers, yet bloody men 
speedily returned to the idea that some kind of religion was indispensable, and hence 
the terrible prostitution of religion under Robespierre and his adherents. Lord 
Carnovan in an address before the London Birbeck Institution (Pop. Science Monthly, 
Feb., 1874), refers to the tendency of making science the predominant study, of causing 
it to encroach more and more on the domain of theology and to repudiate Christianity, 
and then expresses the thought, that ‘‘ he, for one, would regret to see the affairs of 
men regulated by such a standard as they would apply. If such views as they held were 
pushed to an eatreme, he could scarcely imagine a Pharisee more arrogant, a Sadducee 
more self-opinioned, a fanatical monk of the middle ages more intolerant than they who 
practiced them were likely to be.’’ He warns against the extremists, and emphatically 
declares that ‘‘ he entertains a great dread of scientific men as the ultimate rulers of a 
community,” directing attention to the effect that Mill’s teaching has to harden the 
heart, to Compte’s design to transfer all power to a philosophical class, thus forming a 
sort of corporate hierarchy ; to the fact that ‘‘ Italian cruelty” was a proverb when Italy 
counted more men of science than the rest of Europe, etc., so that history indicated that 
science ‘‘ was no safeguard or guarantee of itselffor tenderness and affection.’’ We may 
expect fanaticism (of which Gibbon says, Decl. and Full, vol. 5, p. 134, ‘‘ that fanaticism 
obliterates the feelings of humanity’’), bigotry and intolerance (of which unbelief has so 
much to say) will be invoked to make the new religion obligatory, and a compulsory 
worship will be enforced without pity to sex or age. It was not merely Nero, stained 
with the blood of brother, wife, mother, and many innocents, given up to lust and 
degrading licentiousness, who presented himself amid the burning Christians attired as 
a Charioteer, and the populace greet him with shouts of applause, but even Marcus 
Aurelius, who prided himself on his philosophy, who gave learned dissertations on 
morality, who is lifted up by modern unbelief as a model of perfection, was after all a 
bigoted, determined persecutor of Christians, amid the praise of a multitude. 


Prop. 163. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. Tou 


Proposition 1638. This Kingdom will be preceded by the pre- 
dicted “ battle of that great day of God Almighty.” 


This Proposition is given not to prove that a great conflict will 
ensue between Antichrist with his confederated forces and the 
Lord Jesus Christ and His army (for this has been done in previous 
Propositions, as e.g. Props. 115, 123, etc., and is too plainly pre- 
dicted, ase.g. Rev. 19 : 15-21; Rev. 17: 14, and 16: 14, etc., to re- 
quire additional notice, but to direct attention to some particulars 
connected with it. 


We are reminded of Rev. Dr. J. G. Schmucker’s (Exp. of Apoc., p. 36) remark, when re- 
ferring to the last struggle with Antichrist : ‘““O God! these things are so near at hand, 
and we continue so careless and unconcerned for ourselves and our children; they are 
so certain and important, and we are sa unprepared to meet them, as our heavenly 
calling requires’. It is a remarkable fact (which students will do well to ponder), that 
even the most spiritualizing of commentators fully concede a terrible period to precede the 
Millennium, as e.g. Scott, Com., Rev. 19: 17-21, Barnes, Com. loci, etc. So writers, who 
spiritualize the prophecies, and makea large number of ‘‘mystical comings,’’ are compelled 
to advocate a still future terrible period before the Church. Thus e. g. Smith (Key to 
Rev., p. 169, etc.) contends that the spread of missions should not prevent the Church 
from also anticipating a fearful persecution, likewise predicted. Hesays: ‘‘Ifthe Church 
has scenes of danger before her, and God has given us warning of it, it will not aid the 
cause of Christ to cry peace, and assure her that her warfare is already accomplished. If 
soldiers have a battle to fight, it but ill prepares them for it to assure them they have 
already gained the victory, and the enemy are vanquished. Should such assurance be 
given them, lest they be discouraged, would this prepare them for the battle? The Mil- 
lennium is certain, and will be glorious. But it will be just preceded by the battle of that 
great day of God—the last and most violent attack of Satan. And no victory must be 
shouted previous to this, unless by anticipation. The armor must be put on and kept 
bright, and the warnings of the Word of God sounded.” So also, under ch. 14and 19, he 
speaks of ‘‘ fiery trials yet to pass before the Millennial sun will smile upon the earth. 
The people of God who may then live will have a signal opportunity to glorify our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and to brighten their eternal crown.’’ We are glad that the warning is 
given, evenif surrounded by much that weakens its force or clearness, for it is immensely 
better that that deceptive ery which utterly ignores those future predictions as if they 
did not exist, and declares (as e. g. Dr. Harkey in the Church’s Best State, p. 168—with 
which compare Dr. Sprague, On Revivals): ‘‘We believe that it will be one great and 
universal Revival, that Messiah will finally subdue the world to Himself, and amid the 
bliss and hallelujahs of such a state, He will reign in Millennial glory.” (Comp. Prop. 175.) 
Even such a political prophet as Chateaubriand (Ticknor’s Memoirs), although ridiculed, 
has a more truthful view of the future, when he says what shall be produced (1818): 
«The cloud is too dark for human vision ; too dark, it may almost be said, to be pene- 
trated by prophecy. There perhaps is the misery of our situation ; perhaps we live not 
only in the decrepitude of Europe, but in the decrepitude of the world. 


Obs. 1. The greatness of this Antichrist in his civiland military aspects, 
which are, as we have shown, sustained by the religious, is also pre- 
dicted. The Spirit beholding in prospect the coming of this gigantic 
power says (Rev. 13 : 3, 4), that “ All the world wondered after the beast” 
and <‘ they worshipped the beast, saying: Whos like unto the beast ? Who 


752 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163; 


is able to make war with the beast ?’? The beast is a civil polity ; it is, as 
we have shown Prop. 160, the revived Roman Empire in a modified form ; 
and the last head, the virtually eighth, is, as the controlling head or the 
representative of it, this beast. It is by virtue of his being thus the head 
of civil government that he is enabled to make and carry on the extensive 
military preparations announced by Daniel (latter part of ch. 11, see 
Prop. 160) and the prophets. He will surely overcome all opposition that 
other civil powers may excite, for it is written : ‘* and power was given him 
over all kindreds, and tongues, and nations.’? Weare told that he will not 
reach the climax of power and arrogance without meeting foes whom he 
will overcome with much bloodshed. But in the wars carried on, he shall 
be successful, being prospered beyond all precedent. This is purposely 
allowed both as a punishment to the nations (inflicting the predicted dis- 
tress of nations), and to make the final overthrow of Antichrist the more 
impressive in the eyes of the world. Under the most specious pretexts, 
including that of religion, he will exterminate his foes, and seat himself 
upon the pinnacle of power, preparatory to the final conflict. While he is 
thus meeting with success and elevating himself to the most lofty and com- 
manding position, believers will ponder such passages as Joel 3:16; Ps. 
92; 7-9, Micah 4: 11, 123 Ps. 37 and.73,; Heb.. 1: 12-17: Tsar aes 
etc., anticipating, dy faith, his utter destruction. It seems that God 
intends to show in the most striking manner, both by allowing this ascend- 
ency and by the subsequent overthrow, how utterly vain and false are the 
high-swelling expectations inculcated by rebellious reason in behalf of 
““ Collective Humanity,’’ unified and deified in the person of the last head. 

The Antichrist, owing in part to his greatness, will contemptuously regard the pre- 
dictions of God’s Word. He knows what the prophecies say respecting him, for the 
utterance of the Church (after the removal of the 144,000) concerning him only excites 
his hatred, while his doom, as delineated by the Spirit, and applied to him by believers, 
secures his increased scorn and bitterness. He will depend upon the vastness of his 
confederated forces, to carry out the malignant plans of a godless, and yet god-like, am- 
bition. Thus e.g. although it is plainly predicted (Zech. 12 : 3) that ‘‘ God will make 
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all. people : all that burden themselves with it shall be 
cut in pieces, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it,’’ yet 
relying upon his vast power, he will arrogantly fancy to himself an easy and secure 
victory. Secure it would indeed become, if the King of Israel did not interfere, and 
‘‘make Jerusalem a cup of trembling.” 


Obs. 2. The extraordinary power of this Antichrist could not be obtained 
without the concurrence and co-operation of other civil rulers. Hence, 
the Spirit expressly predicts the formation of a mighty confederation under 
the auspices of this last head, ase.g., in Rev. 17: 12, of which it is 
asserted : ‘* These (i.e., the ten horns) have one mind and shall give their 
power and strength unto the beast.’? Let the reader too notice that as 
these ‘‘ receive power as kings one hour with the beast,’’ i.c., but for a short, 
brief period of time, and as they are associated with this last head in his 
conflict with the Lamb, the formation of this confederacy ts still future, 
and hence, not knowing who they are, it would be rashly premature to 
attempt even to designate any of them. Many passages refer to this last 
aetalianuni: and to the result. Whatever confederations have existed in 
the past, the Spirit, while not excluding these (as, e.g., 2 Ps. quoted by 
the Apostle as having an inchoate fulfilment), yet looks onward to that 
last great array of the kings of the earth against the Messiah. The fulness 


Prop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 753 


of the 2d Ps., as is seen by comparing with the occurrences at the open 
revelation of Jesus (Rev. 19) is to be verified in the future when this con- 
federation is formed and ‘‘ the wrath’’ of the Son is manifested ; when He 
shall break ‘‘ the 'nations’’ that ‘‘ rage”’ (or ‘‘ tumultuously assemble’’) and 
“* the people that imagine a vain thing” ‘‘with a rod of iron and dash them: 
in preces as a potter's vessel’*(comp. Rev. 2 : 27, ete.)' The same is true, 
Hab. 2, of ‘‘ the vision that is yet for an appointed time, but at the end 
it shall speak and not lie; though tt tarry, wait for it; because it will 
surely come, it will not tarry,’’ and which is related to ‘‘ the proud man’’ 
(so proud that he makes himself a god) “who enlargeth his desire as hell, 
and 1s as death” (martyrdom), ‘‘ and cannot be satisfied, but gathereth unto 
him all nations and heapeth unto him all people,’’? and thus becometh (ch. 8) 
“the head over the house of the wicked.’’ Other references are found in 
Tsa. 54 : 15, where it is said: ‘‘Behold, they shall surely gather together but 
not by me,’’ etc. (comp. Rev. 16 : 14); in Ps. 118, where in view of the 
destruction that shall most certainly befall all those (comp., e.g., Zech. 
12:2, 3) who array themselves against the people of God, and because the 
mercy of God is extended and His right hand doeth valiantly, it is said 
significantly of this time of trusting in and worshipping of man and con- 
federating against believers and the Lamb: ‘‘/¢ 7s better to trust in the 
Lord than to put confidence in man. It ts better to trust in the Lord than 
fo put confidence in princes. All nations compassed me about ; but in the 
name of the Lord will [destroy them. They compassed me about ; yea, they 
compassed me about, but in the name of the Lord L will destroy them. They 
compassed me about like bees ; they are quenched as the fire of thorns ; for 
in the name of the Lord I will destroy them,’’ The impressive repetition 
is indicative of the greatness and formidable nature of the confederation, it 
being added ** thow hast thrust sore at me’’ (as, e.g., in the martyr blood- 
shed and the tribulation of the Jews) “‘ that I might fall; but the Lord 
helped me. The Lord is my strength and song, and 1s become my salva- 
tion,’ etc. In many places the confederation is implied, ase.g., Ps. 48 : 43 
Ps. 59, etc., and in others, as many believe, typically represented, as, e.¢., 
Isa.18; Nahumi1,2 and3,ete. InIsa. 17 : 12-14, the connection with the 
‘“‘ evening tide,’ as the time of ‘“‘ trouble,” and with the ‘‘ morning,’’ as 
the time of the utter removal, fixes (Prop. 139) the period when this 
“rushing of the nations, like the rushing of mighty waters’’ shall take place 
and. God ‘‘ shall rebuke them.’’? | 

1 The notion of softening such expressions into converting processes (see Prop. 175) 
is utterly untenable, For while the wielding ‘‘a rod of iron’’ is in itself suggestive of 
irresistible power manifested in the smiting and punishment of enemies, the fact that 
this is associated with God’s anger, vengeance, etc., and explained e.g. by the enemies 
being dashed to pieces as a potter’s vessel, showing that violence is intended. A slight 
comparison of Scripture will clearly show that when this period comes, there will be 
manifested a destruction and subjugation of enemies by a series of judgments resulting 
in a terrible loss of life—life forfeited by its insolent and blasphemous opposition to 
the intended Messianic Theocratic ordering. The time is coming when (Delitzsch’s 
rend. of Isa. 42: 13) ‘‘ Jehovah, like a hero will He go forth, kindle jealousy like a man 
of war; He will break forth into a war cry, a yelling war cry, prove Himself a Hero 
upon His enemies,’’ and the outcome is fully described in Jer. 25 :31-33 ; Zeph. 3:8; 
Joel'3 ; 9=21- Rev. 19 : 11-21, etc. 

2 The apostolic and succeeding Fathers all held to this confederation of kings, so far 
as we have them to describe the Antichrist’s rule. Some interesting fragments are also 
preserved, as e.g. Stuart (Apoc., vol. 1, p. 37) gives Clemens Alexd., quoting from a writ- 
‘ing of the Apostle Paul (not now extant, and supposed to be apocryphal) and asserting 
that Paul recommended the work of Hystaspes (mentioned by Justin), in which ‘ the 


754 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


Son of God is more gloriously and clearly described (than in the Sibylline oracles), and 
also how that many kings will make war against Christ, hating Him and those that bear 
His name, and His faithful followers, and His patience, and His Coming.” ‘The Sib- 
ylline books are full of it. Others also refer to it, as the Fourth Book of Ezra (Dr. Lau- 
rence’s Transl.) declares that when ‘‘ My Son” (the Messiah) ‘‘ shall be revealed, the na- 
tions will assemble to make war and shall be overthrown and destroyed by Him.” The 
simple fact is so clearly announced, in the Scriptures, that we know of no prophetical 
writer who does not fully admit it, from Ireneus (B.V., ch. 25, 26) down to the present. 
If it be asked how, in opposition to many kingdoms with their varied and clashing in- 
terests, itis possible such a head over different nations can be raised up, the answer, 
not dogmatically expressed, may be as follows : the conflicts now going on under Social- 
istic, Communistic, Nihilistic, International, and Unbelieving influences are produc- 
ing in many countries a similarity of feeling, sentiment, and aim. Whatever measure 
of success may attend their views and measures, it will soon be found that the tendencies 
and results are mutually destructive, unless a centralization of power is somewhere estab- 
lished. State and society cannot possibly exist, the direst anarchy must prevuil, unless 
some safeguards in behalf of government are erected and sustained. Hence the idea of 
self-preservation, in the line of humanitarian ideas, will suggest this confederation 
under Antichrist, We are satisfied with the declaration of the Spirit that this is done 
under Divine Providence, for it is so declared, Rev. 17: 17. 


Obs. 3. This confederation arises ‘‘ out of, and forms part of, the revived 
Roman Empire, because the ‘* horns’’ or kings appertain to the beast (comp. 
Prop. 160) who is said to have ‘‘ ten horns.’’ And of these horns, in order 
to avoid the very interpretation usually engrafted, and to mistake them for 
a succession in the past, it is said by way of explanation, and to indicate 
their diversity in this respect from the successive heads, that they exist 
simultaneously or contemporaneously. ‘They arise only when. the beast for 
some time—liow long it 1s not stated—has been headless, i.e., has ceased to 
exist, or is not recognized as an empire. ‘They arise on/y when the last 
head appears, being limited to a brief existence, and as they and the head 
both fight with the Lamb at His Coming, they are still future, coming 
after the Empire has become broken and enfeebled. But in the revival of 
the beast there is a most astonishing change presented, indicated by the 
transference to the horns of the diadems formerly belonging to the heads, 
thus showing that they are strong kingdoms, or that they are to exercise 
supreme rule, in conjunction with the eighth head, over men. ‘This 
remarkable transference does not prove, as some would have it, that the 
heads are ended, for it is expressly asserted that while the seven ‘heads are 
ended, yet an eighth, which, in some way, is still related to the seventh, is 
still in existence, and has g greater power than all the heads before it. 
Therefore, as repeatedly stated (and let not the reader consider this a small 
matter, seeing that, as the Spirit says, it requires and embraces wisdom, 
being one of the points of identification), the virtually eighth head which is 
of the seven sustains such a peculiar relationship and headship over the 
others that his official position and dignity, as assumed and exercised, 
transcends the former Imperial rule. He ismore than amere Emperor ; he 
professes to be and is worshipped as a God. Great as the rule of the horns 
is, that of this head is swperior, and is so acknowledged by the horns who 
give their powerand strength to him. There is here a wonderful transition 
in the form of government under which these confederates act. In what 
this shall consist, it is premature to say, excepting that the supreme polit- 
ical power shall be wielded in conjunction with the religious power, and 
that to sustain and extend especially the latter the False Prophet will arise 
as a chief confederate. Revolutions may be anticipated in order to the 


Prop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. To 


revival of this beast, and the formation of the allied confederates, and the 
relation that this new virtually eighth head sustains to the seventh may be 
in the fact, that aside from his religious (or if we may so call it, for even 
unbelief speaks of its own ‘‘ Church of the Future’’) ecclesiastical rank 
(which makes him differ so materially from all other heads) he retains and 
exercises the same Imperial sway—-more extended—as the seventh head, viz., 
has civil gurisdiction over the whole vast Hmpire. This head and these horns 
arise about the same time and owing to the remarkable features, the modi- 
fications introduced, and the concentration and exercise of absolute, des- 
potic power, the one subordinately to the other, will excite wniversal sur- 
prise. One feature more: the prophecy proclaims that this beast and the 
horns come into existence after a period of non-existence ; this teaches us 
to discard the theories which give the horns to the beast in the past, and 
trace them among the several kingdoms of Europe, because in that case 
the beast would not have had a time of non-existence, seeing that those 
very kingdoms so generally adduced have continuously existed. We see, 
however, now the beast headless and non-existing, and this fact, so much 
overlooked, is a startling sign corroborative of our general position (Prop. 
160). Itis precisely the condition in which we are to see the Roman 
Empire before it is possible for this last head and its confederated chiefs to 
arise, and so cruelly treat the Church and the world. And it is this con- 
dition which makes 7¢ certain to the prophetical student, that important 
political changes must take place in Europe before this organization can be 
effected. What convulsions shall agitate the nations, what revolutions 
must ensue, what conflicts between kingdoms must arise before this beast is 
revived and obtains his head and horns, we cannot tell. Statesmen, the 
most profound, inform us of the unsettled, insurrectionary, revolutionary 

tendencies at work among the masses in all these countries ; this spirit, 
- now so busy, may break forth, and lead the way for the predicted result. 
God only knows the details. 

The simultaneous arising, and contemporary existence, of these ten kingdoms, not 
only sets aside a vast amount of irrelevant interpretation and application to the past and 
present, but it fully corroborates the position taken in previous Propositions. Whatever 
divisions, weakness, mixture of iron and clay, etc., has been witnessed in the past in the 
Roman Empire, these are only preparations to the exact form of ten as they shall be 
revealed at the consummation. In addition, the reader’s special attention is called to 
the fact that it is while the whole number of ten are contemporaneously existing with the 
beast that the Papacy is destroyed, and not after three are fallen, because Rev, 17 is dis- 
tinctive and most precise, thus showing: (1) that our view of the Papacy being the 
apostasy and not the Antichrist is correct ; (2) that all those old theories of the ten 
kingdoms and three fallen before the Papacy are incorrect ; and (3) that after the Papacy 
is overthrown by this confederation and before the war with Christ, three of those king- 


doms, for some cause or other, will be uprooted by the Antichrist. Most probably to 
augment his own power and worship. 


Obs. 4. We feel impelled by a sense of duty to warn the reader against 
allowing himself to be misled into the idea, advocated by very many, that 
it is only at the close of the twelve hundred and sixty days (years they make 
it) that this beast is to form this confederation, etc. Now, whatever inchoate 
fulfilment persons may be pleased to engraft upon these predictions, one 
thing is self-evident, that the twelve hundred and sixty days in their strict 
fulfilment cannot be applied, as given by John, to the past history of the 
beast. The reason is conclusive: John describes the revival of the beast 
under its last head, and it is of the beast in its revived form that he asserts 


756 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 163, 


that it is ‘* fo continue (or make war) forty and two months.’ All inter. 
pretations which igrore or violate this simple fact, viz., that these months 
and days are descriptive of the duration of the revived last head in the exer- 
cise of his extraordinary power, are in so far, at least, untenable. ‘This at 
once sets aside a large number of ingenious and plausible calculations based 
upon the supposed beginning and ending of these days, as well as the 
deductions derived therefrom, and leads us to look to the future for their 
fulfilment. It is at the close of these forty and two months that the con- 
flict takes place between the beasts allied with his confederates and the 
King of kings, the time previous being occupied with his wars and perse- 
cutions, etc. The time is thus purposely shortened, owing to the severity of 
the judgments. 


Obs. 5. The critical student will also notice that the confederation arises 
after (Rev. 17) the harlot has been supported, as in the past, by the beast, 
and yet defore the fall of Babylon (in which fall it participates), and (Rev. 
14) before the universal demand to worship the beast and his image, and 
therefore previous to the persecution of the saints. The beast in revived 
state hates the harlot, which it formerly aided to power, and this indicates 
that there will be @ gradual undermining of the Papal claims over the 
nations, and especially in its attitude of superiority over civil jurisdiction. 
This evidently will be resisted, and lead ¢o a conflict resulting in the utter 
demolition of the Papacy. Whatever aid therefore, may be extended by 
the Papacy in assisting the development of this beast and confederation, or 
whatever resistance it may offer at any period of the same, it is fated to 
fall, owing to the antagonism of its claims, and the loss of power over the 
nations. ‘That it continues to have adherents, and even strong ones, down 
to the fall, is apparent from the lamentations over her, thus indirectly 
indicating to us the great power of this confederation in suddenly produc- 
ing such a result, and that it will not be accomplished without a measure 
of opposition. But it teaches us also, seeing that the beast under its 
revived form is the one that shall slay the witnesses, that the witnesses 
(who may include, Rev. 16 : 6, both saints and prophets) are slain, not 
because they refuse to worship the Papacy (as some suppose), but because 
they reject the worship of the beast and his image. 'This is seen by this 
(slaying not merely persecution) following the fall of Babylon, the closing 
of the forty-two months, and the mention of it in connection with the 
worship of the last head as, e.g., in Rev. 16:2 and 6. The witnesses 
testify against a more arrogant and cruel power than the Papacy—the 
culmination of all wickedness.* This, too, on account of the apparent suc- 
cess in overcoming his enemies and the saints, will prepare the way for the 
first desperate battle. 


1 The witnesses are those who testify to the truth ; they are represented as “‘ two,” i.e. 
being amply sufficient to present the testimony ; they are persons (not e.g. the Old and 
New Testaments, etc., as some hold), as is evidenced by the entire narrative, in the time 
specified, the condition of trial, the power ascribed and exerted, the war made upon 
them, the finishing of their testimony, the death inflicted, the resurrection experienced, 
and their ascension. The linking of these witnesses, slaying and resurrection with the 
still future beast, with the terrible vengeance and results under the last trumpet, etc., 
indicates that the main fulfilment is still future in the text. Nothing in the past is 
commensurate with the prediction as given. We havein this prophecy among other 
points the following presented: (1) a distinction and separation is made between 
believers (as illustrated e.g. under Prop. 130) ; (2) the control of Gentile domination ; (3) — 


PROP, 1639) THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. risy é 


a faithful protest by believers ; (4) the protection and power awarded to these until a 
sufficient testimony is given ; (5) the slaughter of them by this last Antichristian power ; 
(6) the exultation of their enemies ; (7) the resurrection and exaltation of the witnesses ; 
(8) the wrath of God that follows, uniting it with the events under the seventh 
trumpet. Now all this so fully and accurately accords with the condition of the Church 
under this last head of the beast, enduring persecution and death, etc., that we refer it 
to the future and not to the past. We only now suggest to the critical student that an 
encouraging feature and contrast seems to be developed here, viz., in the miraculous 
power attributed to these witnesses. Under this last head, as we have shown, miraculous 
power is exerted to sustain the Antichrist, but as an offset to this, certain believers exert 
far greater power until their testimony is finished. This very exertion of power appears 
to excite the hatred of the beast. But God at this critical period honors His saints as 
He before honored His prophet in the contest with false prophets. We cannot accept of 
the view that these witnesses are Moses and Elijah, or Enoch and Elijah, or any other of 
the saints of the past, because the death, etc., can only be alleged of mortals. They are 
composed of the testifying Church (Rev. 14 : 6-12); represented as two (thus showing 
the completeness of testimony) ; are raised up and witness the dreadful doom of their 
enemies (Rev. 14 : 14-20, and chs. 15 and 16) ; are designated ‘‘ saints and prophets’’ (the 
term prophet being used in the sense of teaching or foretelling the doom etc. of Anti- 
christ), whose blood is shed (Rev. 14 : 9-12, 'etc.), by the last head of the beast ; stand 
related to the future 1260 days, etc. We have here symbolically represented, what is 
more plainly stated in other places, viz.,a persecution of the Church (and, as the “‘ two” 
may suggest, of the Jews). LElijah’s mission in the future to the Jews, if we are to 
receive the prophet’s statement, is a successful one, and does not require the sacrifice of 
his life. 


Obs. 6. The design of this confederation is only stated in general terms ; 
that it shall materially aid in strengthening and extending the power of the 
beast ; that it shall assist him in his overthrow of the Papacy ; that it shall 
co-operate with him in overcoming the saints, and that, finally, it shall 
with him and the False Prophet, as leaders, make war with the Lamb. 
Much is left to be inferred ; much is implied in the filling of details, but 
the great outlines are so plainly drawn by the Spirit that no one can possibly 
mistake them. 'The design actuating these confederated powers is that of 
self-aggrandizement, the exaltation of Humanity, in the person of a recog- 
nized leader, above that of God Himself, the bringing of all nations in sub- 
jection to this denial of the true God and His Christ, and to the acknowl- 
edgment of the deification of Humanity in this last head. In the accom- 
plishment of this purpose they resort to various means, in order to break 
down all protest and opposition to their wicked procedure, so that Hab. 
1:15 will be pre-eminently verified : ‘‘ they catch them in their net and 
gather them in their drag, therefore they rejoice and are glad. Therefore they 
sacrifice unto their net and burn incense unto their drag ; because by them 
their portion ts fat and their meat plenteous. Shall they therefore empty 
their net and not spare continually to slay the nations??? And this includes 
the ‘‘ dealing treacherously,’’ and ‘‘ devouring the righteous.’’ In describ- 
ing ‘‘ the man of the earth,’’ Ps. 10, who shall be crushed by the king that 
he may no longer oppress, he is represented as one who “‘ persecutes the 
poor,’ ‘* boasts of his heart’s desire,’’ proudly (marg. reading) thinks that 
‘“‘ there is no God,’ cannot discern God’s judgments, ‘‘ puffs at his 
enemies,’ exalts himself with the idea that he shall never be moved, pro- 
duces cursing, deceit, fraud, mischief, and iniquity, “‘ murders the inno- 
cent,’’ makes ‘‘ the poor to fall by his strong ones,”’ and ‘‘ contemns God,’’ 
which characteristics belong to all his associates and abettors. In order 
to develop their plans of worship, persecution, and conquest they wili (Ps. 
64) take ‘‘ secret cownsel’’ to ‘* encourage themselves in an evil matter,’’ and 


708 THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


““ they commune of laying snares privily ;’’ ‘* they search out iniquities ; 
they accomplish a diligent search (comp. marg. read.), both the inward 
thought of every one of them, and the heart is deep.’’ The result of this 
counselling, plotting, and searching is found in the rejection of God and 
the institution of man and image worship under the direst penalties, thus 
forming that dark and terrible persecuting confederation more particularly 
described by John. The culmination of all is found in the daring to 
make war with the Lamb Himself. 


In the previous Propositions we have referred to an agency that will be powerfully 
exerted in order to move and control the masses, viz., the performance of miracles. That 
which unbelief has always ridiculed and scorned as the weakness of Christianity, will be 
assumed to support unbelief and will be appealed to as its grand persuasive. Unbelief 
so full of hatred to the miraculous of the Bible, will cause fire to come from heaven 
(Rey. 13 : 13), because in the revival of heatbenism (modernized) there is a return to fire 
which played such an important part in ancient heathen worship, as representative of 
‘‘ the most active thing in nature.” In the worship of nature, fire becomes a special 
emblem of its power, and is accordingly honored. What expectations are excited for the 
future, may, as illustrative, be seen in Froebel’s The Future of Alchemy, where Evolution, 
ete., is predicted as provisionary to a future glorious revival of Alchemy, which shall 
work out its ideals, aiding Nature or the Power underlying Nature in its purpose, ‘‘ the 
creation of ultimate universal perfection.”” Jesus resisted Satan’s offer of power when 
tempted, but Antichrist gladly accepts of Satan’s tender, and his power is wonderfully 
extended, Dan. 8 : 24; 2 Thess. 2:9; Rev. 13 : 2, etc. Those who reject God are the — 
most superstitious, seeking, as Shenkel says, after ghosts. Seiss, Reineke, and many 
others, believe (as Christlieb, Mod. Doubt, p. 290), that the False Prophet will be able to 
perform real miracles in behalf of ‘‘ the new religion.’’ Fausset (Com., 2 Thess. 2 : 9), 
speaks of these “ prodigies of falsehood,” and referring to Matt. 24 : 24, thinks that they 
are ‘‘ real miracles,’’ worked in support of falsehood, adding: ‘‘ The same three Greek 
words occur for miracles of Jesus (Acts 2 : 22 ; Heb. 2 : 4), showing that as the Egyptian 
Magicians imitated Moses (2 Tim. 3: 1-8), so Antichrist tries to imitate Christ’s works as 
a ‘ sign’ or proof of divinity.” So Nast (Com,, Matt. 24 : 23-28) makes the prediction of 
‘* false Christs and false prophets, showing great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if it 
were possible, they would deceive the very elect,”’ to relate ‘‘ to the latter days,” saying 
that we find in no history such a fulfilment before or at the destruction of Jerusalem.” 
Comp. Lange’s Com. on Matt. 24 and 2 Thess. 2. For the reality of such miracles see 
e.g. an art. in Zhe Princeton Review, Ap., 1856, ‘‘ Miracles and their Counterfeits,” which 
appeals to Rev. 16:19; 138 : 11-14; 19 : 20; 2 Thess. 2; Matt. 24, and contrasts these 
miracles with Pharaoh’s Magicians, ascribing them to Satanic agency —“ after the working 
of Satan with all power, and signs, and lying wonders.” (Comp. Props. 161 and 162). 
To the critical student we will say : the manner of the oracular responses by means of 
the Urim and Thummin in the High Priest’s breastplate is a mystery. The reason why 
left unexplained and hence unknown, evidently is, that it may not be imitated by 
impostors to impose on the credulity of others, and that even Antichrist may not employ 
it as an engine of policy. 


Obs. 7. The war with the Lamb being mentioned, separately and distinct- 
ly, is not to be confounded with a previous persecution of the Church. - 
The making war with the saints is specially mentioned, and in this 
war the Antichrist and his confederates are victorious, for it is expressly 
foretold that he shall ‘‘overcome them’’ (as e.g. Rev. 13 : 7%); while 
the making war with the Lamb, separately stated, results in ‘“ the 
Lamb shall overcome them,’’ Rev. 17 : 14 and Rev. 19. The Lamb, there- 
fore, as we have hitherto abundantly proven, is not merely a representa- 
tive of the Church, and one who makes war with those enemies through the — 
Church. The Lamb is personally denoted, as the doctrine of the See. 
Advent unmistakably teaches, coming with His redeemed people to 
destroy the confederation arrayed against Him. The pledge that He will 
thus come, aside from other prophecy, is given in Zech. 9:9. The con- 


PRop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIO KINGDOM. 759 


nection of this verse with the context which declares the complete destruc- 
tion of the enemies confederated against the people of God and the restora- 
tion of the Jews, shows us that the triumphal entry of Jesus at His First 
Advent into Jerusalem “‘ lowly and riding upon an ass and upon a colt, 
the foal of an ass’’ is presented to us as the pledge and earnest of another 
and greater triumphal entry, when He also, ‘‘the Lord shall be seen 
over them and His arrow shall go forth as the lightning,’’ ete. 

So plain are the predictions making Messiah to come as a mighty Man of war, that 
even Impostors allied the same with their pretences, as e.g. Sabbathai, of whom it is 
said (Milman’s His. Jews, vol. 3, p. 370): ‘‘ Your Redeemer is come ; his name is Sab- 
bathai Levi; he shall go forth as a@ Mighty One, inflamed with wrath as a warrior, he 
shall cry, he shall war, he shall prevail against his enemies,” (comp. Isa. 42 :13). This 
Sabbathai “‘ took the title of King of the kings of the earth,”—the 21st Ps. was sung 
before him (showing how the Jews understood the same), and he was largely acknowl. 
edged as the Messiah. In the Encyclop. Metrop. art. Cox’s Biblical Antiquities, allusion 
is made to the opinions of Jewish Rabbis respecting the last battle, and the beasts are 
made to be literal, not noticing that the Jews expressed their views in symbolical 
language. The Jews (Smith’s Bib. Dic., M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop., art. Antichrist), 
held to a dire conflict with Antichrist, and an overthrow by him before the appearing of 
the Messiah Ben-David, who then shall overcome Antichrist. So also the Mohammedans 
(same authorities, and Mohammedan Legends by Dr. Weil) have a future Antichrist and 
conflict, making Jesus to return and overcome him. 'Those who object to this exhibition 
of God coming forth to fight His enemies, must then object to the plainest statements 
(e.g. Rev. 19 : 11, etc.), of Scripture. They might try, as atest of faith, to reconcile e.g. 
Zech, 14:3 with Ex. 14:13, 14, 23, 24, indicative of the manner in which ‘‘ Jehovah 
shall fight for you and ye shall hold your peace.’’ 


Obs. 8. The cause of this war, this final conflict with Jesus Christ, is 
found in the hatred to His truth, in the hostility to His person, because 
the same are in direct opposition to the fundamental principles underlying 
the government and worship of this Antichristian confederacy. Let the 
reader but consider how many things, now but obscurely understood, will 
be clearly proclaimed by the Church before this Antichrist appears and the 
confederation is formed, and he will see abundant reason why Antichrist 
shall be filled with bitterness and enmity toward Christ. ‘Thus e.g. the 
withdrawal of the 144,900, followed by the earnest proclamation of Anti- 
christ’s career, the faithful portraiture of his wickedness, etc., the accurate 
knowledge then entertained respecting the Kingdom of God which is 
speedily to come in accordance with the covenanted Word—these things 
will so enrage (comp. Rev. 11:18 ‘‘ the nations were angry,’’) the Anti- 
christian powers that they will put fo death these confessors, and prepare 
themselves to resist the promised incoming kingdom. Here is the clew to 
the final scene, and to the animosity toward the Jewish nation. Antichrist, 
and the False Prophet, and the allied Chiefs, will not forget this faithful 
preaching, and especially this anticipated kingdom. They will not over- 
look the fact, that this Theocratic ordering is to be initiated at Mt. Sinai 
(Prop. 166), and that to perfect it, a restoration of the Jews is necessary. 
What news may reach them of God’s already “‘ strange work’’ commenced 
at Mt. Sinai we cannot tell, but that they are not ignorant of something 
being inaugurated at Sinai, which looks forward to the re-establishment of 
the covenanted Davidic throne and kingdom, is abundantly clear from the 
tenor of the predictions. Whatever ideas Antichrist may have had respect- 
ing the real power then concealed (in all probability very low and contemp- 
tuous ones), he in self-protection, having a sufliciency of proof that some 
power hostile to himself is then concentrated, proceeds to forestall the 


760 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [CRoP. 168. 


danger by making special arrangements (Rey. 16 : 13, 14) in gathering 
the nations, and marches in the direction of the threatening cloud, and, 
as a first measure, to insure the failure of such a kingdom being realized, 
triumphantly seizes upon Jerusalem and Palestine. They plot against the 
predicted king (which, perhaps, may be attributed to the vain and human 
expectations of some who are secretly striving to have it realized) ; ‘* they 
(Ps. 62:4) consult to cast Him down from His excellency,’’ and in 80 
‘doing, the Spirit informs us, (Ps. 83) that in their hatred ‘‘ they have 
taken crafty counsel against thy people, and consulted against Thy hidden 
ones. They have said, come and let us cut them off from being anation ; that 
the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance. Lor they have con- 
sulted together with one consent (or heart) ; they are confederate against 
Thee’ (then follows, under the familiar names of enemies, those still 
future, and their fearful doom). By this we know, that a leading motive 
in exciting this war springs from the knowledge of Antichrist respecting 
the prophecies and faith of believers that Christ Jesus, as promised, will 
rebuild the fallen tabernacle of David into a world-dominion. Rejecting 
these prophecies and this faith in scorn (as some even now do) as Vision- 
ary, so far as God Himself and His Christ are concerned (for he denies 
the Father and the Son), yet he apprehends trouble so long as the Jews are 
permitted to occupy Jerusalem, and so long as the anticipations excited by 
the faith in the Sinaitic ordering, and the reports reaching the ears of the 
nations from thence, are not crushed. Believing that those ‘‘ hidden ones” 
form the nucleus of a dangerous inroad upon his own prerogatives and 
claims, the Leader prepares to crush it. As Faber and many others have 
justly called it, there arises ‘‘a religious war’’ (Baron Bunsen, Signs of 
the Times, I1., 235, predicts a religious war impending over Hurope)—a 
war against the saints, and then more directly against Christ, verifying 
Ps. 2: ‘‘ The Kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel 
together against the Lord and against His anointed, saying, Let us break 
their bands asunder and cast away their cords from us’? (comp. Micah 
4:11, 13, Luther’s version, Ps. 21:11, etc.) This spirit is fostered and 
excited to the utmost by the wonder-working power of certain agents (Rey. 
16 : 13, 14) sent forth on their mission of miracle performance and decep- 
tion of the kings and nations. It is still premature to fix with any degree 
of certainty, upon the exact nature and mode of operation of these agents,’ 
but when they come they are recognizable by the special charge committed 
unto them, viz., of urging those to whom they are sent to enter upon this 
religious war of extermination. Their ‘‘ miracles,*? however astounding 
and well calculated to entrap the unwary and unbelieving, will not deceive 
the humble believer in the Word of God, simply because these scenes and 
agencies are too plainly foretold.’ 


1 Those who believe in a past and present fulfilment of the vials give a variety of inter- 
pretations to these agents, and designate sundry things as a manifestation of them ; but 
all this is premature and positively forbidden by these last plagues contained in the vials 
being preceded by the exaltation of those who had already suffered under the last head of 
the beast (as seene.g. in Rev., ch. 15:2 and 16 : 2, 6, etc.). The simple, undeniable 
fact is that these agents follow the rise of this last head still future (Props. 160 and 161). 

? Religion (for Lessing’s idea, now seized and exultingly paraded, will be carried out, viz., 
that all religions are but fragments of one religion inherent in humanity, which are to 
progressively educate the race until it arrives at its highest development) is intimately 
connected with politics; both suggest and enforce, from a humanitarian standpoint, 
opposition to ‘the Christ.’’ This explains the widespread influence exerted ; for relig- 


a 


PROP. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 761. 


ious revolutions (as De Tocqueville, the Old Regime, p. 24, and others have shown) are 
not confined to one country or nation, as those merely political and civil often are, be- 
cause the interests involved are general, and cannot be confined. Itis alleged by some 
that it would be absurd for men to fight against ‘« the Christ ;’ but such forget that un- 
belief rejects ‘‘the Christ ” until it is suddenly confronted before His irresistible power; 
that infidelity down to the very catastrophe ridicules the predictions relating to the sub- 
ject ; that special agencies, called ‘‘seducing spirits,’’ lead unbelief on to its confedera- 
tion against the people of God ; that the long-delayed mercy and forbearance of God 
culminates in vengeance (Ps. 115, etc.), which is poured out when unbelief has reached 
its highest point, and ‘‘the pit”’ digged for the wicked has been reached. The believer is 
satisfied with the simple statement (confirmed by numerous others) that (Zech. 14 :3) 
‘‘then shall Jehovah go forth and fight against those nations, as when He fought in the 
day of battle” (with which comp. Ex. 14:13, 14, 23. 24, when Jehovah is sent to fight for 
them, etc.), And such Scriptures, as Ps. 2 (comp. Lange’s Com., etc.) give the divine as- 
surance of a decided and most glorious victory. 


Obs. 9. The objective march of this last great enemy and of his forces 
gathered for the final battle, is, from a comparison of Scripture, easily 
uscertained. ‘he place is expressly designated in such a way that we can- 
not properly misapprehend it. One of the prophets (Daniel 11) declares 
that the Antichrist shall come to his end ‘‘ between the seas in the glorious 
holy mountain ;’’ this Joel 3 : 2, 12, tells us is in “‘ the valley of Jehoshaphat ;”’ 
Hizekiel (chs. 88 and 39) informs us that he ‘* shall come against the land 
of Israel’ and that he ** shall fall upon the mountains of Israel ;’’ Zechariah 
(ch. 14) has him at Jerusalem, which he has taken, or at least not far 
distant, placing the final action 7m Palestine ; Joel also (ch. 2 : 20) has 
him destroyed between two seas ; John (Apoc. 16: 16) has them ‘‘ gath- 
ered together an a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon,’’ and, 
finally, John (Apoc. 14: 20) in the treading of the vintage wine-press 
(which synchronizes with the same overthrow) has the blood to come out 
of the wine-press ** by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs,”’ 
i.e., two hundred miles, which as Faber (Diss., vol. 2, p. 241) and many 
others, and even Jerome, have remarked (and recent surveys have attested) 
-is the length of Palestine between the two seas. Taking all these predic- 
tions together, we need not be surprised the Fathers so universally held to 
the idea that Antichrist would fight the last battle and perish 77 Pales- 
tine. It is when he comes to Jerusalem and takes the city that the Lord 
appears to fight against him, either immediately after, or after a brief 
interval. Probably it is impossible for us to definitely fix, owing to con- 
flicting views, the exact locality of this battle. Jehoshaphat may, as some 
contend, be only a descriptive and not a proper name, signifying 
‘* thevudgment of the Lord.’’? We incline, however, to the view that it 1s a 
proper name, and that Antichrist’s career is closed at or near the city of 
Jerusalem. However this may be, the prophets unite in making the 
decided impression, that he shall certainly fall im Palestine, and such will 
be the vast slaughter that special provision (Ezek. 39 : 11-16) will be made 
to remove the annoyance caused by it. Indeed, the Spirit gives incidental 
reference (in connection with the direct), which also teach that his over- 
throw is witnessed in Palestine, as e.g. Ps. 76: 3, Isa. 10 : 26-34, Ps. 
46:46. It is true that at this period a dreadful slaughter shall also be 
witnessed in Idumea, (Isa. 34, 63, etc.) and has led some (Reineke) to 
suppose that the battle will be fought in that locality. But this 1s easily 
reconciled if we keep in view the exact position of the parties. Antichrist 
arrives at, and takes, Jerusalem, he immediately sends (or probably sent 


762 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. (Prop. 163. 


before the fall of the city) a portion of his vast army under some of the 
kings toward and into Idumea, for the purpose of crushing any opposition 
that may develop itself from Mt. Sinai.? It is at this crisis that Jesus and 
His brethren proceed toward Jerusalem, and on the road meet and fear- 
fully overwhelm a large body of the Antichristian host, and then advanc- 
ing to the Mt. of Olives, confronts His daring adversary, and crushes him 
there as the prophets declare. It would only be a repetition on a grander 
scale of the fighting in the wilderness, and in the land itself under the first 
Theocratic march from Mt. Sinai. 


1 Many (as Reineke, etc.) believe that Isa, 34 has had a mere inchoate fulfilment in 
the past, and will most strikingly be repeated on a grander scale in the future. The 
Spirit passes on from the inchoate to the Advent of the mighty ones, for ‘the year of 
recompenses for the controversies of Zion’’ (or as Delitzsch ‘‘a year of recompense, to con- 
tend for Zion” or Lowth, Clarke, etc., the year of recompense to the defender of the cause of 
Zion”). The description is upon such a scale (followed by Millennial blessedness,) that 
it cannot, without violence, be limited to the past. If it relates to the future, as sug- 
gested, then it indicates that the first onset of Christ and his army is upon a large mass 
of the confederation in Idumea, thus corresponding with other passages. And this does 
not complete the picture, being only one important part of it, for a collation of Scripture 
shows that after this fearful slaughter the remainder of the confederacy is confronted in 
Palestine and there overcome (as e.g. the cleansing of the land indicates,). The Spirit, 
urging us to diligent comparison, presents in one prediction this feature, and in an- 
other a different aspect, and we, if wise, will collate what has been given. The result 
will be, that the restoration of the Theocracy indicates that, just as at the first establish- 
ment, enemies will be overcome on the road from Sinai to Palestine, and enemies will 
be conquered in the Holy Land itself. But the student, to obtain a correct interpreta- 
tion and application, must compare Prop, 166. 


Obs. 10. While compelled by the force of authority to differ from 
Reineke and others in the locality of Antichrist’s fall (all, however, 
being included in the expressive phrase ‘‘ the battle of the great day of 
God “Almighty,”’ viz., the slaughter in Idumea and that in Palestine) yet we 
agree with him that a prevailing mistake has been long current and adopt- 


ed, unthinkingly, by able writers, viz., that this gathering of Antichrist’s _ 


forces is to Armageddon, from whence springs the popular phrase, ‘‘ the 
Battle of Armageddon’’—a phrase not found in the Bible, but still adopted 
as the title of some books, under the plea that it is biblical. Without 
detaining the reader, let us observe that nothing is more certain than this, 
that the adoption of the phrase is derived from a total misapprehension of 
Rev. 16: 16, ‘‘and he gathered them,”’ etc., it being supposed that the 
one gathering refers to the seducing spirits, and those gathered to the 
kings of the earth, mentioned in verse 14. But the singular construction 
rather requires, as many critics contend, a reference to some one person 
who gathers, and hence Hengstenberg and others suggest, that one only 
performs this, referring it to God or Christ. Others feeling the difficulty 
of applying it to the plural spirits, think that Satan, or the sixth angel, or 
the beast must be denoted. Now from Propositions which are given 
(Props. 166 and 130, on Mt. Sinai and Translation) it is found that pre- 
vious to the overthrow of Antichrist, the saints (even anon who have been 
persecuted and killed by him, as is proven by Rey. 15 : 2, comp. with 16 : 

2, etc.) shall be gathered by the Lord Jesus Christ and a brought to Mt. 
Sinai the or iginal founding place of the Theocratic ordering. Notice again, 
that the appearance of Jesus and the gathering of the saints unto Him 
are united in the Scriptures (as e.g. 2 Thess. 2: 1, etc.), and as this 


; 
| 
| 


Prop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIOC KINGDOM. 763 


gathering is preceded by the Advent phraseology, ‘‘ Behold, I come as a 
thief,’’ etc., the gathering that immediately follows has sole reference to 
that which legitimately flows—being in many places united with it—from 
the Advent of Jesus, viz., is a gathering of saints, even of those who have 
suffered under this Antichrist. Jesus is the one who gathers them, and 
He comes in @ thief-like manner, because the time has not yet come for 
His open revelation with the saints, which occurs only when Antichrist 
has reached Jerusalem, etc. Therefore we must regard these verses 15, 16, 
in this light: Having portrayed the gathering of the forces of the Anti- 
christ, the Spirit assures us in these verses that Jesus also gathers His 
army preparative to the conflict. Mentioning the one party preparing 
for the battle, it was natural, suggestive and striking to specify that prep- 
aration—a gathering—was also in progress on the other side. It might 
be almost designated parenthetical, introduced to show that both parties 
were alike engaged in marshalling their hosts for the impending battle. 
The conciseness of the description, in view of other predictions, should 
not mislead us. Again; those that are thus gathered are, as we shall 
show (Prop. 166) taken to Mt. Sinai to be introduced into the initiative 
Theocratic arrangement; now is Armageddon in the Hebrew tongue 
an equivalent or expressive of Mt. Sinai? We think that Reineke (Proph. 
Times, vol. 2, Nos. 3 and 11) has clearly shown this when he says: ‘‘ It 
(i.e., Armageddon) is evidently composed of two parts Ar and Mageddon. 
That the Greek Ar stands for the Hebrew Har, which signifies ‘ a moun- 
tain,’ is so plain that it may be taken for granted. We have then the 
Mountain of Mageddon. But whatis Mageddon? It is evidently a parti- 
cipial form, although it is no regular derivative, and nowhere occurs in 
the Hebrew Bible as such. It may be derived either from the word magad, 
which means ‘to be precious, costly, glorious,’ or else, which is more 
likely, from the verb gadad, which, in the Hithpael, signifies to ‘ assemble.’ 
We may, therefore, translate Armageddon either ‘ the Mount of Assem- 
bling,’ or ‘ the Mount of Glorious Gifts.’ ’’ (See his remarks on the word 
Megiddo, etc., and then comp. the derivations of Faber in his Diss., and of 
commentators generally, the derivation being one of conjecture, so that 
Dr. Clarke, Com. Rev. 16 : 16, remarks: ‘‘ The original of this word has 
been variously formed and variously translated. It is har megiddon, 
‘the Mount of Assembly ;’ or chormah gedehon, ‘the destruction of the 
army,’ or itis har megiddo, ‘mount megiddo.’’’ (Faber makes it the “‘ de- 
struction of Megiddo.’’). For, in a matter so largely dependent upon con- 
jecture (so that, as Reineke informs us, it had been even made the 
‘*synonym for the New Jerusalem, and an old German commentary 
‘* suggests that Armageddon is substituted for Harmeged, ‘ the mountains 
of costly and precious gifts.’ ’’), that conjecture is the best founded, which 
agrees with the general analogy of the Word, Having shown that a 
gathering takes place at the first stage of the Advent ; that these are taken 
to Mt. Sinai; that there will be an assembling of the saints at that moun- 
tair previous to going forth to the destruction of Antichrist; that this 
gathering here is also one allied with the Advent, it is reasonable to con- 
clude, that the gathering here is to the same ‘‘ mountain of assembly,” 
where precious gifts are indeed bestowed. 

The Revision has it ‘‘Har-Magedon,’”’ and Lange’s Com. Rev. p. 295 says this de- 
notes the “Mount of Decision or Sentence ’’ (and refers it to the Mt. of Olives to accord 
with Zech. 14: 4), which would apply to Mt. Sinai. The references to “ mountain of 


764 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


destruction,” ‘* destruction of the army,” ‘‘ valley of Jehoshaphat,” ‘ plain of Esdrae- 
lon,” mountain of cutting to pieces,” ‘‘ city of Megiddo,”’ etc., is referable to a pre-conceiy- 
ed idea that it must relate to the locality of the battle. The wildest conjectures have 
been foisted on the expression, simply to suit a pre-conceived theory, as e.g. Wild, 
who makes the battle to be between England (the Ten Lost Tribes) and the Antichrist, 
putting Victoria (or ruler of England) at the head instead of Jesus, because of an alleged ~ 
(unproven) descent from David. Bonhomme (Proph. Times, N. Ser. Oct. 1877, p. 224) 
remarks that some writers have made Armageddon to denote Sebastopol, and others a 
place in Italy, some making it Rome ; Baldwin (Armageddon) places it in the valley of 
the Mississippi near Paducah in Ky.; Dr. Berg fixes it in England ; Lester (The Pre-Adam- 
ite) makes it significant of locality and speaks of ‘the Battle of Armageddon,’’ etc, 


Obs. 11. This then brings out in forcible contrast the two armies in the 
process of githering. The statement that the kings of the earth are 
gathered for this battle, suggests the party which is to oppose them in it, 
and those two are being gathered for that battle. In ch. 19 both parties, 
gathered as represented, enter into the conflict ; on the one side the beast, 
the false prophet and the kings of the earth with their hosts ; and on the 
other, the Son of Man and His glorified ones. ‘These saints in the army of 
King Jesus, and co-judges with Him, are kings. This may give us a clew 
to that variously explained passage (Rev. 16: 12) just preceding this 
gathering of the kings of the earth, viz., ‘‘ And the sixth angel poured out 
his vial on the great river Euphrates ; and the water thereof was dried up, 
that the way of the Kings of the Last (or from the sunrising) might be pre- 
pared.’’ ‘he interpretations usually given to this verse (as applying to 
the nationalized hierarchies, Turkish Empire, etc.) are founded on a mis- 
apprehension of its chronological position in the Apocalypse, it being 
supposed to be either fulfilled or in the course of fulfilment, when the most 
positive assurance is given that not one of those viais has yet been poured 
out (which is seen by comparing Rev. 15 : 2, etc., with Rev. 16 : 2, show- 
ing that before they are poured out the Antichristian worship, ete., of the 
last head has been manifested.) Now if we are allowed to conjecture 
its meaning, judging merely from facts that shall occur, it would be some- 
thing like the following: thé Euphrates stands related to the modern 
Babylon, just as the ancient river Euphrates did to ancient Babylon; the 
drying up of this river, indicative of the alienation and abandonment of 
her supporters who defend her, is a symbolical representation of the entire 
withdrawal, complete alienation of the faith which the supporters once had 
in Babylon. Let the reader notice, that when Babylon falls we are told 
that many shall lament over her fall, they still have faith in her, etc., but 
this is to be changed ; the waters (i.e. people) that strengthened and 
defended her, shall be absorbed in that (Rev. 14) wniversal worship of the 
beast that immediately succeeds the fall of Babylon. This absorbtion 
takes place preparative to the gathering of the kings of the earth ; indeed 
one of the means employed in performing this work is the sending forth of 
those seducing spirits to these kings. If the question is asked, how does 
this prepare the way for the Kings of the East, or the kings from the sun- 
rising, and who are those kings, the answer would be: the kings are the 
saints who shall reign as such with Christ; they are kings pertaining ¢o 
the rising of the sun (so numerous critics, versions, etc., as e.g. Luther, 
‘“den Koénigen von Aufgang der Sonne’’) ; they are kings appertaining to 
the Sun of Righteousness, who is to arise and shine forth when the terrible 
day of the Lord has come (Mal. 4, ete.) i.e., they come with, belong unto, 
and proceed from this rising sun ; the way is prepared for their coming by 


PRop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 765 


the drying up of the Euphratean waters, i.e., the entire alienation of faith 
and desire in a restored Papacy, State Churches, etc., and the yielding up 
of the world (excepting true believers) after the fall of Babylon, and this 
absorption (Rev. 14) toythe worship of the beast and the killing of the 
righteous. ‘That which appears adverse to the coming of these kings and 
to render it hopeless, viz., ‘* the universality of Antichrist’s worship (now 
swelled by the millions of Papists, etc.) and rule, really prepares the way 
for the speedy fulfilment of the gathering and hostile array of Antichrist 
and his overthrow by the coming of the King (the Sun) with His associated 
kings. Such an interpretation heightens the beauty and force of the con- 
trast presented in these verses: first we have the kings of the sunrising 
presented as already existing, waiting until the culmination of wickedness 
is reached, through the complete absorption of the Euphratean waters and 
the gathering of the earthly kings is effected by the seducing spirits ; 
then, and only then, are they ready for decisive action. Next in contrast 
to these kings, are the kings of the earth forming a vast confederacy to be 
engaged in the battle of the great day. Next, having specified the gather- 
ing of the kings of the earth and the agents through whom performed, the 
Spirit also tells us that the gathering of these kings pertaining to the rising 
of the sun 7s also in progress, and that the Agent by whom it is effected 
is the Saviour Himself, who comes in a concealed manner (previous to His 
open manifestation) to perform this work, and that He gathers them, in 
the meanwhile, to “‘the Mount of Assembly’? or ‘*‘the mountain of 
precious gifts,’’ or ‘‘ the Mountain of Decision.” 


We are confident that the fulfilment relates to the future and hence vastly prefer its 
application, in some way, to the future than to the past and present, as e.g. Lange’s 
(Com. Rev., p. 295), who makes it typical of the re-introduction of heathenism and bar- 
barism modernized. So we reject the idea that these kings refer to the Jews (Elliott, etc.) 
or to the rulers of the East (Barnes, etc.), or to those who alienate power etc., from rulers 
and teachers (Lord, etc.,) and, from the analogy of prediction, prefer the interpretation 
given in the text. 


Obs, 12. The two armies when gathered are fully delineated by the 
Spirit. On the one side, there is the beast, the false prophet, the kings of 
the earth and their armies (Rev. 19 : 19, 20), including the worshippers of 
the beast and his image, those who receive his mark, ‘‘ kings, captains, 
mighty men, men both small and great.’”?” The vastness of this army can 
be readily appreciated by referring to the passages which liken it to a fear- 
ful flood of roaring waters, a tumultuous incoming sea, etc., as e.g., Isa. 
17: 12-14, Hab. 3, etc. The extent of the confederacy, already closely 
exhibited in such passages as Rev. 16 : 14, Rev. 13 : 7, Zeph. 3 : 8, etc., is 
so graphically presented by Joel 3 : 2, 9-16, that a universal uprising for 
this war, this final contest with the Lord Himself, is certain to take place. 
The prophecies unite in describing it to be so great as to be wnexampled in 
the history of the world ; and this is purposely allowed and encouraged (as 
e.g. in permitting the saints to be overcome, the miracle working of the 
agents, etc.), in order that the impotency of man and his punishment as a 
rebel may be the more strikingly displayed. They assemble in their vast- 
ness to utterly destroy the last remnant of the worship and name of God 
from the earth—this is their design in furthering self-exaltation ; God’s 
design is that they shall assemble for Him to execute His judgments upon 
them. They being gathered (Micah 4: 12) ‘‘as the sheaves in the floor” 


~ 


766 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


for the terrible threshing that shall follow. On the other side, there is 
Jesus the Christ, the Mighty One, and His saints, the associated kings 
pertaining to Him. ‘They are represented, e.g. in Rev. 19 : 11-14, as the 
** Faithful and True” (i.e. coming to fulfil His promises and threaten- 
ings), ‘* The Word of God,” (i.e. the One through whom the purposes of 
God are to be accomplished and manifested), and ‘“‘ King of kings and 
Lord of lords’? (i.e., kings and lords are subordinately associated with 
Him), who ‘‘ in righteousness doth judge and make war,’’ and “‘ the armies 
which were in heaven’’ (the reader will consider the symbolical import of 
‘‘ heaven’’ as given by numerous writers that it signifies, so Faber, ch. 2 
Diss., etc., ‘ the body politic’’—to such a body these armies belong, seeing 
that the Theocratic ordering or government has, previously to this coming, 
been initiatively inaugurated (Prop. 166) at Mt, Sinai, embracing the sun, 
the moon, and the stars belonging to a heaven. The symbolical import 
and consistent use of the word ‘‘ heaven’’ and ‘‘ heavenlies’’ and its rela- 
tionship to the Theocratic idea, is yet an interesting field for some students 
to enter) ‘‘ followed him upon white horses’’ (symbolical of their trium- 
phant exaltation and co-heirship with Jesus, coming in the same manner 
as He does) ‘‘ clothed in fine linen, white and clean’’ (comp. v. 8). These 
are “‘ the Lord Coming with ten thousand of His saints to execute gudgment”’ 
of Jude 14, 15 ; *‘ the Coming of the Lord and all the saints with Him,” 
of Zech. 14:5; “* the Coming of the Son of Man in the glory of His Father 
with His messengers,’’ of Matt. 17 : 27, etc. ; ‘“‘ the revelation of the Lord 
Jesus with the messengers of His power to take vengeance,’’ of 2 Thess. 2 : 7, 
8, etc., etc. This strange, stupendous array was long ago described, 
through the Spirit that foreseeth all things, by Enoch, Moses, the 
Prophets, Jesus, and the Apostles.’ The Jews (Prop. 125) are also incor- 
porated with this army after the first assault. ? 


1 One of the most remarkable descriptions of this army is given by the prophet Joel, 
ch. 2, and we are inclined to adopt the opinion of those who believe that it refers to the 
army of saints. It is usually interpreted as descriptive of a literal flight of locusts and is 
called ‘‘the locust army’’ but locusts are not mentioned and it is impossible to reconcile 
some of the statements made with the nature, habits, etc., of the locust. This army is 
peculiar for ‘‘there hath not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it,” 
which can scarcely be attributed to huge flights of locusts because of their being no rare 
occurrence. The description is too exalted and the events designated too great to be 
applied to anything else than the symbolized army of the saints. This takes place in 
«the great and terrible day of the Lord,’’ and this array is called ‘‘ Hisarmy” and ‘‘ camp”’ 
with whom He is associated, uttering ‘‘ His voice before them.’’ The army is irresistible, 
it is composed of those who cannot be injured, it produces fearful consternation, and it 
is expressly called ‘a great people and a strong.” The quaking of the earth, trembling 
of the heavens, darkening of the sun and moon and stars, etc., aid in identifying the 
army denoted. To the critical student, who loves to find surprises in the Word, let me 
add: that in v. 2, it is asserted (comp. Luther’s version) that such a mighty people will 
never again Le formed to all eternity. Now this corresponds with our entire line of argu- 
ment, viz., that these first-fruits, first-born thus associated with King Jesus form a select, 
chosen, elect body forever separate and distinct from the children of the barren woman 
afterward gathered, etc., (conip. Prop. 118, 130). The reader too, may, for himself, 
decide what army is designated in Isa. 5 : 26-80. To fritter away such predictions, sym- 
bolical, by locusts, thunder-storms, etc., is to make the prophet guilty of exaggeration. 
Fausset (Com. loci) is undoubtedly correct when he says, that it contains an ‘‘ ultimate 
reference to be connected with Messiah’s Sec. Coming to judgment. 

> It is well to observe this, for Bonhomme, who generally writes well on prophetical 
subjects, makes the Jews with Jesus to fight successfully before the overthrow of Jerusalem 
bringing in Zech. 12 : 6, etc., thus contradicting Zech. 12 : 1, 2 (Proph. Times, N. Ser. 
Sep. and Oct., 1877, which the editor, Wilson, p. 204, properly notices). Before the war 
waged by Christ and His saints—in which no reverses are experienced—the cup of pun- 


Prop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 767 


ishment is filled for the Jewish nation ; in that, rejecting the testimony given for 1800 
years, it, refusing the true Messiah, now under the hope of worldly advancement is 
induced to accept of the Antichrist as its Messiah—for coming in his name and claiming 
deification, it receives him. Their punishment proceeds from him, and the amazing 
mercy of the true Messiah is seen in that He—rejected and despised—comes to its res- 
cue, and then it will make the confession recorded in Jer. 3 : 22-25. 


Obs. 13. The battle itself and the result are unmistakably presented. 
The Lamb and His army ‘‘ shall overcome (Rey. 17 : 14) them’? (the beast 
and his army), ‘‘for Hews the Lord of lords and King of kings, and they 
that are with Him are called, and chosen, and faithful.’’ The triumph and 
the catastrophe are presented, Rev, 19: 15-21; Rev. 14: 17-20; Dan. 7; 
Hack. 38 and 89; 2 Thess. 2:8, etc. The Bible reader must be familiar 
with the Scriptures, which describe on the one hand the joy and exulta- 
tion of the righteous over the defeat of the wicked ; and on the other, the 
erief and despair of the Antichristian forces when they find themselves 
suddenly conironted by the—to them—terrible revelation of the once despised 
Jesus in the power of His majesty and of the glorified saints, many of 
whom were put to death by them. <A mortal army, with all the advan- 
tages of military resources wielded by a vast multitude, melts away before 
the might of an immortal army, as the snow disappears under the heat of 
the sun. Owing to the conciseness of the predictions and the intermin- 
cling of figure and symbol, it is difficult for us to enter into details, to give 
even the precise order in which the encounters between the two hosts shall 
be conducted (although the hints seem to convey the idea that part of 
the enemy are met on the way to Jerusalem from Mount Sinai, the Antichrist 
and another portion at Jerusalem or near it, and that other portions are 
attacked and defeated by the Jews ; the principal engagement, and that 
which decides the matter, being by Christ and His saints), or to show in 
every case how much is literal and how much figurative. ‘Thus, while some 
latitude must be allowed to application, because of our imperfect under- 
standing of language, yet one thing is certain, that the general description, 
as well as the minor details, whether figurative or not, convey the notion 
of a terrible conflict directly carried on between these two hosts, and which 
results in complete victory to Christ and His army, and in utter destruction 
to Antichrist and his forces. What agencies are exerted, inall cases we 
cannot tell, but that natural and supernatural ones are both employed is so 
evident from the Scriptures that it needs no argumentation, seeing that 
the very Advent of Jesus and His glorified ones is supernatural, and 
stamps the whole drama with a powerful, overwheiming, supernatural cast.’ 
Even whatever agencies of a natural order may be cmployed, these, too, 
are directed and made invincible by the power of King Jesus, so that truth- 
fully, whether His might in some things is exerted directly and in others 
indirectly through animate and inanimate agents, the entire result is attrib- 
uted solely and exclusively to the greatness and almighty power of the de- 
scended Jesus, ‘‘ the Christ.’’ Let any one sit dowr and endeavor to collate 
the Scripture illustration of this tremendous and sublime “battle of that 
— great day of God Almighty,”’ and if he can enter into the spirit of the same 
sufficiently to anticipate it by faith, then his heart must sink and his cheek 
pale when he endeavors to comprehend the awful terrors of that great day 
of wrath and vengeance (he will in a measure feel like the prophet who 
described them, Hab. 3: 16). Is there anything in human language so ex- 
pressive of the terrific as Rev. 19 : 15-20, or Isa. 63: 1-6, or Rey. 14: 18- 


768 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 163. 


20, or Isa. 49 : 24-26, and kindred passages? he Spirit, in the abundance 
of warning, and evidently to impress upon us the correct idea that it will 
be the most fearful of all times that the world has ever witnessed, em- 
ploys the most powerful language in delineating it that can be produced. 
“ Treading the winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God” 
(Rey. 19:15); His garments sprinkled with the blood of His enemies 
(Isa. 63: 3); in brief, ‘‘ slaughter,’’ ‘‘ tempest,’’ “whirlwind,” ** fire,” 
‘* lightnings,”’ ‘‘ hailstones,’’ ‘‘ earthquakes,’’ ‘* pestilence,’ ‘* plagues,” 
‘“madness,’’ “ wailing,’ “the indignation of anger,”’ “‘rod of trou,” * the 
day of vengeance,”’ ‘‘ anger with fury,’’ etc., ete., are some of the impressive 
utterances to awaken within us a lively sense of the greatness and dreadful 
nature of this period to the wicked. Weare assured that when it takes 
place and the world has seen this extraordinary, supernatural manifestation, 
men shall be afraid (Isa. 2:10, 11, 19, 21 ; Micah 7: 16, 17) before the majesty 
exhibited, and fearing and trembling (Jer. 33: 9; Isa. 66:19; Isa. 263 
9, ete.) they shall acknowledge God’s just judgments and praise Him for 
His wonderful doings. For, in the midst of deserving wrath, God stiil, as 
He is wont to be, is merciful, sparing some of Antichrist’s hosts (Isa. 66 : 
19) to be the bearers of the news of the conflict and its result to all nations. 
While this is ‘‘the day of vengeance,’’ it is, blessed be God, the time 
of deliverance, because ‘‘ the year of the Redeemed is come’’ (Isa. 63: 4) ; 
and therefore it is that, after the utter rout of this beast and his army, 
John describes the reign of Christ and His saints and the introduction of 
millennial blessedness. With this all the prophets agree—as e. g. Daniel 7, 
_ Joel 3, Isa. 24 and 25, Zech. 14, Zeph. 3, Ezek. 38 and 39, ete.—describing 
the fall of the Antichrist, the last great enemy, followed by a glorious res- 
toration of God’s Kingdom under the Messiah and the happy condition of 
those who believe in God. In the mean time, we may contemplate those 
war Psalms which contrast the two parties, and tell of the grand issues 
flowing from victory, as Psls. 2, 21, 76, 110, etc., fecling assured that our 
King shall be exalted over all His enemies, that David’s Son is indeed 
‘“most blessed forever’? and “‘ set for blessing’? whom “‘ all nations shall 
call blessed.’? Then will be verified the saying against “‘the multitude of all 
the nations that fight against Mount Zion’? (see Isa. 29) and ** the meek also 
shall increase their joy in the Lord and the poor among men shall rejoice in the 
foly One of Israel. For, the terribleone is brought to nought’’ (as stated 
in verse 5 be made “‘like small dust’’ and “‘as chaff,’ and this ‘‘ sud- 
denly,’’ corresponding with the open revelation of Jesus, which occurs sud- 
denly),“‘and the scorner is consumed, and all that watch for iniquity are 
cut off,’’ etc.® : 

1 Critics say not ‘‘ battle,’’ but polemon, “ war’’ of the great day of God, the Almighty 
(so e.g. also the New Revision, Rev. 16 : 14), and properly so, because it agrees with 
other expressions indicative of the fact that a ‘‘ war’’ is waged which is not simply con- 
fined to a single battle. And these battles of the last great conflict are not waged against 
different powers successively arising (as Swormstedt, and others), but as delineated Rev. 
19, etce., with the one great confederation, which is crushed, one portion on the road 
to Palestine from Sinai, and another in Palestine itself. Simple unity of prediction 
demands such an interpretation, the neglect of which introduces confusion and antag- 
onism., ; 

? We only remind the reader that Gideon’s remarkable slaughter of enemies may be 
typical of this period. Gideon and achosen band, with the shout of Israellike “ the shout 
of a king’’ (Numb. 23:11) make the first onslaught, then follows a second and third 


attack. And Isa. 9:4 evidently refers to this in the prhase ‘‘ the breaking the rod of 
the oppressors, as in the days of Midian;” for the last oppressors say precisely what the 


Prop. 163. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 769 


Midianites said (see Ps. 83 : 12). Stanley, Sinai and Palestine, p. 336, renders : ‘‘ Let us 
take to ourselves the pastures of God in possession.’’ Then, in the momentous devel- 
opments will it be found how universally deceived those are (as e.g. Jowett, Com. 1 
Lhess., pp. 108-111) who declare that Christ’s predictions have failed (respecting the 
Advent, etc.), because inseparably connected with the destruction of Jerusalem. We 
hold that they will be verified because’ thus connected, and seeing eighteen centuries of 
literal fulfilment in the treading down of the city by the Gentiles, we feel impelled to 
await the final catastrophe. So e.g. Fausset (Com. Zech.) heads the last ch. as follows : 
** Last struggle with the hostile world-powers ; Messiah-Jehovah saves Jerusalem and 
destroys the foe, of whom the remnant turns to the Lord at Jerusalem.’’ 

8 This is such a fruitful subject that the reader’s indulgence is asked for the consider- 
ation of some Scripture, not usually applied to this period. Thus e.g. Isa. 9: 4, 5. 
Whatever difficulties there are in the rendering, all commentators are agreed that the 
undoubted reference here is, to a great battle fought in which ‘‘ the rod of the oppressor 
shall be broken,’’ and this is done by David’s Son, the Theocratic King, who shall exer- 
cise His government “ upon the throne of David and upon His Kingdom, to order it and 
to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even forever.’’ Now it 
is in view of this battle and this reign on David's throne that in verse preceding, the 
nation is represented as made strong and mighty, increased with joy, so that ‘‘ they joy 
before thee according to the joy in harvest,’’ etc. Nothing of this was verified at the 
First Advent owing to the sinfulness of the nation, but will be at the Sec. Advent. Take 
Isa, 34 and 35, which we have unhesitatingly used, and behold the same contrast and 
connection. Bh. Lowth, Clarke and many ‘learned expositors’’ (so Lowth) place both 
these chs. in the future, nothing thus far having occurred to justify any other interpreta- 
tion. They justly tell us that they relqgte to the future Advent of Christ, to the restora- 
tion of the Jews, etc. Verse 8 alone is significantly decisive if we allow parallel passages 
due force. The same remarks will apply to Zech. 9. One of the most interesting 
portions of Scripture is the 41st ch. of Isaiah, which describes the Advent of Christ, the 
confederacy sustained by image worship, their overthrow, the restoration of God’s 
people and the Millennial glory that shall follow. Allowing an inchoate fulfilment, as in 
several other chapters, it is certain that nothing in the past history of the Jewish nation 
has ever fulfilled this prediction according to its tenor, seeing that no such glorious 
restoration and blessedness has yet been witnessed. The language is applied to Jesus, 
who also is a man of war; the same acts are applied to Christ ; the same results follow 
the Second Advent; the parallel passages sustain its application to the Sec. Advent and 
the Mill. glory that shall be introduced after the defeat of the nations and the exaltation 
of the Jewish nation. Here in this work, it has been unhesitatingly employed as 
eminently descriptive of the future. The simple truth is, that interpreters too much 
forget that the prophets contemplate the restoration of Davidic rule through the Messiah, 
and that when the time comes for its restoration, there must be of necessity, owing to 
worldly dominion being in the hands of the Gentiles, a terrible conflict before David’s 
throne and kingdom can possibly be re-established. ‘This conflict is therefore constantly 
represented, and also necessarily from a Jewish standpoint. 


Obs. 14. Finally: let no one who isa believer in the Word think that 
this subject, upon which the Spirit so largely dwells and endeavors to im- 
press by the use of figures, etc., conveying terrible realities, is unworthy of 
his serious and earnest attention. While much of folly has been penned 
in reference to ‘‘ the battle of Armageddon”’ (as e. g. in the name, and lo- 
cating the battle in the United States, in the valley of the Mississippi, in 
Italy, as well as formerly at Moscow, Waterloo, in the French Revolution, 
etc.), the mistakes of men do not vitiate that which is clearly predicted. 
Men may transplant the scene of the conflict from the place designated by 
the Spirit ; they may change the actors in it and the results flowing from 
it ; they may antedate its occurrence and spiritualize away its meaning, but 
all this cannot affect the ultimate fulfilment or diminish the fearful and 
actual realization of it as described. Whether able or not to fully under- 
stand how this or that particular is to be accomplished, it becomes us Zo 
receive in faith the unerring description of Holy Writ, and ponder well that 
future which culminates in a conflict the most tremendous, both as to ex- 


770 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


tent and consequences, that is on record anywhere. When the spirit of 
hatred, which leads to this battle, is already so widely prevalent (we append 
but a single illustration, owing to the peculiar language employed, Zhe 
Banner of Light, Dec. 8th, 1861, says : ‘‘ Once mankind clung to the cross, 
and adored the form of Him who was crucified on Calvary asa God. But 
reason has asserted its supremacy, and the world has declared 2¢ would not 
have this man to reign over it any longer’’) and extending itself, when this 
battle with its confederated hosts shows the absurdity of putting trust in 
the development theories of men, when, in brief, all things are tending in 
the direction to bring forth the rejection of Christianity and the self-deifi- 
cation of humanity, thus making the fulfilment in the line of existing 
tendencies, it is folly, yea worse, to ignore ¢he testimony of Jesus and the 
prophets on the subject. Let men sneer at it now ; let professed believers 
turn away from it as an unwelcome subject; yet the time is coming when 
men shall profoundly study it in order to comfort and sustain themselves 
under Antichrist’s fearful persecution. With the hope, therefore, that 
what we now write may be of service in strengthening the hearts of some 
who shall be willing to die for Jesus’ sake, we are willing to endure the in- 
credulity (even worse) of the world and of many (saving a few here and 
there) in the Church. Let us even say, to increase, if possible, the unbe- 
lief of the unbelieving, that, whether dead or living when this time of the 
end shall come, we expect, if faithful to the end, personally to see this very 
battle that we have, in weakness, attempted to describe. (See Props. 
126-130, ete.) 


The reader, if he desires to see all the proof relating to this subject, must consider 
Props. 115, 123, 147, 160, 161, and 162 in connection. Let Prop. 115 enforce our urging 
this subject upon the student’s attention, and tender our apology for the same. 
When God Himself gives so large a space and so many predictions to this period, it is 
wisdom and prudence on our part to honor this fact. Men run directly against the most 
direct predictions of God’s Word. ‘Thus to add illustrations to those given : **‘ The Peace 
Assembly of Friends in America” issued an Appeal to Christians on the subject of war. 
Among just and excellent observations, they (overlooking that wars exist down to the 
end), fall into the error of taking it for granted (for no proof is attached—Scripture being 
quoted at haphazard, without reference to time or dispensation), that war will cease to exist: 
in this dispensation, and Dr. Chalmers is quoted (who is thus made to contradict himself, 
seeing his utterances as given by Taylor, Voice of the Church, and by the author of The 
Time of the End). The ‘‘ Appeal’’ specifically states its belief, that it is only a full and 
proper application of the Gospel in the affairs of nations as well as of individuals that 
the prophecies in regard to war will be fulfilled,” (i.e. that universal peace will be 
secured). This utterly ignores the war that the kings and nations make against Christ, all 
the terrible predictions of conflict and bloodshed down to the end, and antedates the 
prophecies by making their fulfilment (i.e. in relation to peace, the cessation of war), to 
precede the Sec. Advent whereas the analogy of Scripture plainly locates the same after 
the Sec. Coming. It passes by the clearest predictions that men will not learn righteousness 
until the judgments of God are poured out upon the earth ; until Jesus comes with ven- 
geance to overthrow His enemies ; and, for the direct agency by which peace is to be 
secured and wars ended, it substitutes the Gospel (only designed to save ‘‘them that 
believe,’’) in the place of Jesus Christ and His army. It forgets what is said of the 
** desolations” which God makes when “ the heathen raged” and ‘‘ the kingdoms were 
moved” in order to cause “ wars to cease unto the end of the earth” (Ps. 46 : 6-11) ; in 
brief, it overlooks a thousand prophecies, confining itself to isolated fragments torn from 
their connection. That class who are favorable to a Pre-Mill. conversion of the world, 
teach such a doctrine, some advocating the Gospel as the agent, others, civilization, art, 
science, education as the instrumentalities (so unbelieving scientists, etc.) ; others, that 
Commerce will bring about such a result (so Rich. Cobden, ete.) ; others, make ‘‘ Arbitra- 
tion,” or ‘‘ A High Court of Nations,’’ the grand agent (just as if it had power to enforce 
its decisions ; as if it would be always disinterested, non-susceptible to influence and 


= 


Prop. 163.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 771 


bribes ; as if it could not be misled, cause dissatisfaction, and as if it was able to 
remove the ambition, revenge, passion, etc., which urge men on to war). Honest and 
sincere men, earnestly desirous for the good of others, are doomed to a bitter disappoint- 
ment, owing to the depravity of man. Bh. Simpson (Ch. World, Ap. 1871, p. 110 with 
which compare his Centennial prayer), in advocating the Kingdom of God as now existing 
and its embracing a speedy conversion of the world ‘‘ not to be brought about by mirac- 
ulous power but through the agency of man,’’then adds: ‘‘ God has bound Himself not 
to enlarge that Kingdom by means of force, conquest, heavenly appearances, or exhibi- 
tion of Divine power directly displayed.” Alas! what a suppression of Scripture this 
position includes! and what an amount of spiritualizing away the plain grammatical 
sense it requires to sustain it! Before the reader occupies such an attitude, let him just 
blot out Zech. 14, Isa. 63, Rev. 19, and a host of other recorded declarations. So 
Stanley (His. Jewish Church, 1 Ser. Lect. 20, p. 519) reiterates the sentiments of many, 
when he speaks of Christ, saying: ‘‘ He is to be a King, a Conqueror, yet not by the 
common weapons of earthly warfare, but by those only weapons which {the fPro- 
phetlic order recognized — by justice, mercy, truth, and goodness—by suffering, by 
endurance, by identification of Himself with the joys, the sufferings of His 
nation, by opening a wider sympathy to the whole human race than had ever 
been opened before.’’ We rejoice that justice, mercy, etc., characterizes Jesus 
now, and will in the age to come and forever more, but the prophetic order recognizes 
weapons that Stanley utterly overlooks. For as e.g. Dr. Moll (Lange’s Com. Psalms, Ps. 
2, p. 61), we are to distinguish between the means of grace and the blessings now 
tendered, and ‘‘ the powers which infinitely surpass all the powers of this world, and 
which are greatly to be feared when they unfold in their strength, in the exhibition of 
wrath in the Messianic judgment.’’ It is folly to close our eyes to the prophetic exhibit 
of violence, bloodshed, etc., in the day of the wrath of the Lamb, expressly asserted as 
manifested to vindicate and establish His Kingship. The view of the early Church is 
far more Scriptural than that thus presented, and as evidence of the extent in which it 
was held, the Sibylline Oracles, Book of Enoch, and many of the Apocryphal books, refer 
to the future reign of the Christ as preceded by a most terrible war and distress. But 
such predictions suit the development theory, and even infidels confidently proclaim 
them. Thus e.g. in the Evolution of Nov., 1877, Th. Cushing ends an article of extreme 
** Liberal’’ tendency with this prediction: ‘‘ Although the prediction ‘Then shall the 
wolf dwell with the lamb,’ etc., may not find its literal fulfilment in'that age, yet it is no 
stretch of fancy to say that ‘nation will not lift up sword against nation’ for opinion’s 
sake ; that ‘ war for the maintenance of a religious idea will not be known, and that those 
who pray for the universal brotherhood of man will more nearly see the fruition of their 
hopes than ever before’”—i.e. when a religion of the future is established. This is man’s 
fancy : God’s portraiture of the future under man’s control is very different. 

Infidels of every age, with a show of piety and mercy somewhat remarkable, and a 
love for humanity truly astonishing, have denounced the cruelty, enormity of vengeance, 
etc., of Moses’ commands, of some of the Psalms, and of this portrayal of the future, so that 
(as Bolingbroke) they declare the man ‘‘as worse even than an Atheist, who could 
impute it to the Supreme Being.’’ The Apologists, Selden, Patrick, Graves, etc., many 
Christian and Jewish, try to soften (as e.g. Fairbairn, Typology, vol. 2, p. 381), the 
account of Moses by affirming that in case of submission, forsaking idolatry, acknowl- 
edging God, etc., they were spared. But this is forbidden by Deut. 20 : 16, 17; Ex. 23: 
33, and 34 : 12, which indicate no reconciliation but a predetermined destruction. We 
are told that their iniquity was come to the full, and that they were under the ban of 
heaven. Moreover the failure of the Jewish nation to perform God’s will in this matter 
involved them (Judges 2 :1-5)introuble. Others (Michaelis, Ewald, Jahn, etc.), try to 
make out a prior claim—a natural right to the land by the occupation of it before the 
temporary descent in Egypt, and hence justify the resort to the sword and extermina- 
tion. But as Fairbairn conclusively shows (e.g. by reference to Gen. 12 :6 Abraham, 
etc., being a stranger in it), this is ‘‘ a baseless theory.’’ The only right that they had 
was that given by God to whom alllands belong. Now all such objections and apologies 
are conjectured to be in place in order to show, on the one hand, that the God repre- 
sented in the Old Test. is not the God of the New Test., and, on the other hand, to 
reconcile the God of the Old Test. to the supposed softening portraiture of the God of 
the New Test. Both are mistaken, the same God of vengeance exists in the New Test. 
that existed under the Old, and while mercy and forbearance is now shown, we are abun- 
dantly cautioned that the day of vengeance and wrath will again, when iniquity is full, 
come. The time is rapidly approaching when God’s people will again return to Canaan, 


172 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 163. 


and the foes congregated there will again be doomed to vengeance. The sins of the 

Canaanites are typical of the sins of Antichrist and his host, filling the land with abomi- 

nations, idolatry, defilements, and pollutions so that God’s land is defiled (Lev. 18 : 25), 
notwithstanding previous forbearance and mercy, and God, preparatory to establishing 

His theocracy removes these defiled ones from His inheritance. Fairbairn (Typology, 

vol. 2, p. 55-57), fully admits that the destruction of Pharaoh and his host is typical of 

the destruction of the Antichrist ; that this is confirmed by the use of the Song of Moses 

in ‘‘ the immediate prospect (Rev. 15: 3) of the last judgment of God, and by the, 
language of Paul (2 Thess. 2 : 8) “ manifestly borrowed from that Song of Moses ;” but 

then under the bias of the Whitbyan theory of the conversion of the world, he holds that 

this is done by ‘‘ spiritual weapons,” by ‘‘ Divine truth’’ undermining error, by ‘‘ the 

victorious energy of the truth,” and not by “‘ acts of violence,” ‘‘ bloodshed,” and the 

personal presence of Christ, etc., (as there was no God corporeally present then). He 

forgets that Pharaoh and his host were not overthrown by ‘‘ spiritual weapons,” such as 

he enumerates, but by violence through direct supernatural power exerted by a personally 
present God (for see his concessions concerning the pillar of fire and cloud, p. 75, it being 
“the seat in which Jehovah, or the Angel of His presence, appeared, and the form in 

which He manifested His glory” (comp. Kurtz’s remark, His. of Old Covenant) ; and that 

the applicability of the Song of Moses is only realized by supernatural intervention and 
vengeance (and for the ease with which Omnipotence smites, see Alexander’s Com. Isa. 

51:6, 8, and 40:24). ‘he first onset will be of a supernatural nature, which will be 

more or less continued, and of which the case of Jericho (which unbelief ridicules as an. 
appeal to our credulity) is an inchoate fulfilment or representation. Infidelity objects to 

the result of this future war, the supernatural vengeance, just as they have done in refer- 
ence to the past as recorded in God’s Word, on the ground of right, justice, and mercy, 

overlooking the facts incorporated, viz., that this terrible divine wrath is brought about, 
by an Antichristian array which tramples upon right, justice, and mercy ; which is guilty 
of the most outrageous wickedness and idolatry ; which despises the Sovereign of the 

world and most cruelly persecutes and kills His disciples ; which is determined that the 

Theocratic ordering shall not be erected over the nations, and to prevent it resorts even 
to crushing the Church with dire bloodshed. God, in deference to His own rights, His. 
own inheritance, His own Kingdom, His own saints, His own honor and glory, is com- 
pelled in consistency to arise and take vengeance on that humanity which is so impious, - 
merciless, and cruel, (compare Prop. 115). Then the question and the answer of Isa, 
49 : 24-26 (Delitzsch’s rend.) will be verified: “ Can the booty indeed be wrested from a 
giant, or will the captive host of the righteous escape? Yea, thus saith Jehovah, Even the 
captive hosts of a giant are wrested from him, and the booty of a tyrant escapes; and I will 
make war upon him that warreth with thee, and Iwill bring salvation to thy children. And Iwill 
feed them that pain thee with their own flesh ; and they shall be drunken with their own blood, 
as if with new wine ; and all flesh sees that I Jehovah, am thy Saviour, and that thy Redeemer 
is the mighty One of Jacob.” 


Prop. 164. ] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 773 


Proposition 164.— This Kingdom ends the Gentile domination. 


This has been noticed under various Propositions, and is thus 
distinctively presented to impress the fact upon the reader’s mind. 
Such a Theocracy, as God contemplates, to bring back the world 
under f/is special manifested rule to its Paradisaical state, is 
utterly hostile to the notion that worldly empires outside of it shall 
control large portions of the earth under separate and distinct 
governments, whether kingly or republican. King Jesus is the 
covenanted King, not only over His special inheritance, the Jewish 
nation, but also over all the earth; and, as already abundantly 
proven from Scripture, the time is surely coming when all govern- 
ments will be overthrown, making place for the wniversal King- 
dom of the Lord Jesus Christ. | 


Obs. 1. The inheritance of David’s Son (from whence His royalty is to 
be manifested) is left under Gentile power wntil ‘‘ the times of the Gen- 
tiles ’’ are completed (Prop. 66) ; wxé7d the number of the elect is filled up 
(Props. 65, 86, etc.); wetil the time of the resurrection and rewarding of 
the saints (Rev. 11 : 15-18; Props. 126-130) ; wntil the. time of the Sec- 
ond Advent (Props. 74, 121, etc.) ; wate ‘‘the end of the age’’ (Prop. 140) ; 
until a people is raised up to sustain the dignity, etc., of the Kingdom 
(Props. 124, 154); watil the power of Christ is exhibited (Props. 120, 
121) ; wntil the destruction of Antichrist (Props. 123, 161) ; wntel the rev- 
elation of the Judgeship of Christ (Prop. 132) and ‘‘ the judgment-day ”’ 
(Props. 133 and 134) ; until ‘<the day of the Lord Jesus ’’ (Props. 138 and 
139) is to be ushered in ; wntzl the last great battle is fought (Prop. 163), etc. 
It is significant that the fulfilment of the predictions relating to the inheri- 
tance of David’s Son has been continuously witnessed for many centuries, 
and that it is presented before us, still confirmed, this day. This increases, 
with other reasons, our confidence in the fulfilment of the remainder, 
viz., the deliverance and exaltation of the same over all the earth. If, asa 
punishment, and for purposes of mercy, God can so minutely foretell and 
historically overrule the overthrow of the Theocracy and Theocratic people, 
He can as readily predict and bring to pass the restoration of the same and 
the overthrow of the Gentile powers. 


Obs. 2. The predictions relating to this point are so numerous, so plain 
and decisive, that a mere reference to some of them, in view of what has 
already preceded, is all-sufficient. There is to be a shaking and removal 
of earthly kingdoms (Prop. 147) making place for the universal establish- 
ment of the Messianic Kingdom (Prop. 116), in which saints as co-heirs 
with Christ shall gloriously preside (Prop. 154), thus fulfilling Dan. 7: 14, 
27 (comp. Props. 121 and 123). The supremacy of the Jewish nation (Prop. 


774 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 164. 


114) and the place of manifested royalty (Prop. 168), in view of the hom- 
age, worship, and tribute rendered, can only be satisfactorily explained by 
the Theocratic ordering, uniting Church and State over all the earth under 


one central Head. Such a visible Theocracy (Prop. 117) can, in the very 


nature of the case, only allow its own form of government to exist, seeing 
that its design is to restore through it (Prop. 119, etc.) all forfeited bless- 
ings, and to insure to man the much-longed-for perfect government on 
earth (Props. 202, 203, 206 and 207), as well as to exalt the blessed King 
(Props. 203, 204, 205). Hence such a change of domination is included 
in ‘‘the New Heavens and New Earth ”’ (Props. 148-152), in ‘‘ the world to 
come’’ (Prop. 137), in ‘‘the Restitution’’ (Prop. 144), in ‘‘the Regenera- 
tion’’ (Prop. 145), in the removal of the curse from creation (Prop. 
146), etc. The testimony is so abundant and cumulative that not only 
every Millenarian writer has accepted of it, but even many of our oppo- 
nents, who advocate that a time is coming when Church and State shall be 
happily united, etc., affirm that present governments will give place 
to another and higher form, having some central point of unity on earth. 
That unity of the race, dreamed of even by humanitarians, etc., can, how- 
ever, only thus be secured. 


Obs. 3. These present ‘‘ times of the Gentiles’’ are not perpetual ; they 
must come to an end. This is evidenced both by the election of the Jewish 
nation (Prop. 24, etc.) and by the oath-bound covenant of God with David 
(Props. 46, 47, 48, 49), which will yet be realized at the Sec. Advent 
(Props. 66, 69, 72, 75, 121, etc.). This being ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles ”’ 
(i. e. the period in which Gentile nations shall rule over the world and no 
visible Theocratic Kingship shall exist), and as these ‘‘ times ”’ are to end, 
giving place to covenant fulfilment—this serves to remove the objection 
alleged by unbelief, viz., that in the history of the Jewish nation and in 
that of the Church nothing has been witnessed commensurate with the 
grandeur, etc., of prophetic announcements, and that hence the prophecies 
are mere Oriental exaggerations. The reply is an old one, given even by 
an Augustine: discriminate the times, and the Scripture utterances will 
reconcile themselves. For the times of triumph are not in ‘‘ the times of 
the Gentiles ;’’ the latter are ‘‘times’’ of trial and testing, ‘‘ times ’’ in 
which the institutions of the world hold their sway, in which the saints 
are ‘‘pilgrims and strangers,’’ and which are also plainly delineated 
(comp. Props. 174, 175). ‘The Word of God forbids us to look for the ful- 
filment of a covenanted Kingdom and the triumphant Millennial glory dur- 
ing these ‘‘times’’; if we do, we then embrace mere delusion and do vio- 
lence to Holy Writ. We must patiently await the ending of these ‘‘ times,”’ 
and then, and then only, will ‘‘ the sure mercies of David’’ be realized in 
the Theocratic ordering and the rich blessings resulting therefrom. 

These times of the Gentiles have been variously estimated to accord with some 
favorite chronological views, so that the times of Lev. 26 and Dan. 4, have had various 
endings (depending on the commencement) given to them, even extending to a.p, 1918 
(Habershon, Guide, p..34),and to a.p, 1923 (by Guinness in his recent work, Approaching 
End). We are not concerned in the exactitude of such calculations ; only approwimatively 
have they any value. 


Obs. 4. This again reminds us of the folly, so widely prevalent, of exalt- 
ing this present period of time—embracing as it does ‘‘ the times of the 


Prop. 164.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. TID 


Gentiles ’’—above the position assigned to it in Holy Scripture. Eminent 
and good men, overlooking the utterances of the Spirit of truth, and in 
their eagerness to honor the Church, call that ‘‘day’’ which the Spirit 
designates ‘‘ night,’’ and that ‘‘light,’”’ which the Word recognizes as ‘‘ dark- 
ness.’ 'This dispensation includes ‘‘ the times of the Gentiles,”’ for they are 
only closed by their fearful overthrow at the Second Advent (Rey. 19, etc.), 
and while in this dispensation the Church, with all her blessings and priv- 
ileges, is still in ‘‘ the night,’’ surrounded by darkness (herself led by 
“the light shining wm the dark place,’ and by ‘‘ the day-star,” 2 Pet. 
1:19, or by “the light,” 1 Jno. 1: 9, etc.), looking for an absent bride- 
groom, fighting, struggling, and pressed with the curse, it is certainly un- 
wise, both against Scripture and existing fact, to appropriate to her bless- 
ings which only belong to her after these ‘‘ times’’ are ended. 

Obs. 5. This fact, viz., the positive end of Gentile domination to give 
place to the Theocratic reign of Christ and His brethren, will become 
more and more impressed upon, not only believers, but the world. Al- 
ready deep thinkers have received and boldly advocated what is so emi- 
nently Biblical ; devoted men in all denominations proclaim the same ; and 
this will become more intensive as infidelity, etc., advances. This fact in its 
historical connection, and as part of the Divine Plan, will especially be 
unwelcome to the kings of the earth and to nearly all who are in power, 
ecclesiastical or civil. This, too, will evidently be one cause of that deep 
hatred against Christ, and result in the widespread confederation and 
gathering of the nations against Him (Props. 161, 162, and 163.) The 
kings and mighty men of the earth (Rev. 19 : 19, ete.) will be wnwilling to 
yield up (Ps. 2:2, 8) their power and swdmit to the rule that must be 
imposed for the good of man. 

-The early Church, and Millenarians since, have taken this position. Even Disraeli 
(Cur. of Lit., vol. 3, p. 275), quotes Dr. Hartley as follows: ‘‘In 1749 Dr. Hartley 
published his ‘ Observations of Man,’ and predicted the fall of the existing governments 
and hierarchies in two simple Propositions; among others: Prop. 81. It is probable 
that all the civil governments will be overturned. Prop. 82. It is probable that the 
present forms of Church government will be dissolved.’ Many were alarmed at these 
predicted falls of Church and State,’’ etc. The student of the Bible, if reverent and 
receptive, will make this probability to be an absolute certainty. The warning is dis- 
tinctively given ; the necessity for such a change is specifically pointed out, and to close 
our eyes to the truth only indicates lack of faith in God’s own utterances, Indeed, as 
intimated already, this overthrow, thus predicted and based on the incoming Theocratic 
Kingdom, will be sufficiently understood—however scornfully rejected—to be a warning 
to those kingdoms, as evidenced by the events to occur at the closing of this dispensa- 
tion, by the order of fulfilment (as given e.g. in Rev. 14), and by the special entreaty 
given (as e.g. in 2d Ps.) to such kingdoms. 


Obs. 6. But the nations, in their selfishness and opposition to the truth, 
refused to recognize what at the same time is so plainly revealed, viz., that 
while Gentile domination ceases, it simply ceases because the new order or 
dominion introduced is immensely its superior in securing the happiness 
and glory of the Gentile nations. This has been so clearly portrayed in 
various propositions (as e.g. Props. 119, 142, 144, 154, 156, etc.) that it is un- 
necessary to repeat. Paul rightfully presents this point in Rom., ch. 11, 
because when the Redeemer comes and restores the elect people, His do- 
minion will perform that for the nations (Props. 120, 144, etc.) which mere 
human governments, with all the aids that man can possibly apply, can 
never accomplish, viz., remove the curse and introduce the millennial bless- 


776 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [PRrop. 164. 


ings. But the enmity of man, while recoiling upon himself in deserved 
punishment, cannot prevent the abounding grace of God from bringing in a 
dominion designed both for his benefit and his glory. And in this govern- 
ment, the ancient promise (Gen. 9: 27) will still hold good, viz., that God 
will enlarge Japhet, but specially, yea personally, dwell with Shem as He 
did in the past, and again will, Ps. 132 : 13, 14, etc. - 


God does not delight in employing violence, but force, terrible and destructive, must 
be used. The long-continued and cumulative depravity of the nations finally culminat- 
ing in Antichristian blasphemy and cruelty, which despises God’s warnings and kills 
His own, makes it a necessity, in order to introduce a deliverance and the promised 
blessings of redemption. God’s own honor and glory, as well as the happiness of those 
who trust in Him, demand this change. The nations, however great, who undertake to 
crush His truth and people are doomed to vengeance. It has been observed that the 
Bible presents the history of great nations that figure so prominently in secular history, 
only in so far as they stand related to the development of the Theocratic idea in its pre- 
paratory stages and final realization. ‘This omission, of what so largely composes the 
world’s history, has been said by unbelief to be either the result of a narrow, bigoted 
Jewish prejudice (leading the writers to make Jehovah one who did not concern himself 
in the fortunes of the world, but only in those of the Hebrews), or the outcome of Jewish 
vanity (which exalted the Jewish nation by ignoring the affairs of other nations). But 
as Roger’s (Superhuman Origin of the Bible, p. 16, etc.), has well shown, the former is 
refuted by the abundant assertions to the contrary (as in the case of Pharoah, Sen- 
nacherib, Cyrus, etc.), and the positive predictions relating to other nations ; while the 
latter is set aside by the simple fact that such ‘‘ vanity” should speak of other nations as 
“ scourges’”’ of their own and predict their own overthrow and the dominion of the 
Gentiles. The omission must be found in the Theocratic idea, viz., that God regards 
only one form of government, and the people who are to be incorporated with it, as 
deserving of His particular continued and detailed notice. 


Obs. 7. Reference has been made several times to the guarded manner 
in which the primitive Christians, including even Jesus and the apostles, 
spoke of the downfall of Gentile dominion. This was done in order to 
avoid the hostility and persecution of the Roman Emperors. Yet the view 
was more or less distinctly proclaimed by the believers, and was oue 
reason why the millenarian doctrine fell into disrepute, especially after a 
union of State and Church, with those in power. ‘To illustrate how, never- 
theless with reluctance, this truth was proclaimed, Lactantius (De. Jnstit., 
ch. 15) expresses himself: ‘‘ The Roman Power which now governs the 
world (my mind dreads to declare it, yet I must speak it, because it will 
surely come to pass)—the Roman Power will be taken away from the earth, 
and the Empire willreturn to Asia, and the Kast will again have the chief do- 
minion, and the West will bein subjection.’’ ‘he general sentiment with all 
millenarians, based upon Dan., Isa., etc., was that King Jesus with His sub- 
ordinate rulers would sway an undisputed sceptre over all the earth, the 
Gentile dominion being crushed by an overwhelming manifestation of di- 
vine power and vengeance, owing to its final array against the truth, etc. 

The round apple of gold, the token of Universal Lordship over the earth, fallen from 
the hand of the image of the Emperor Justinian, can never be replaced (Sir John 
Maundeville, ch. 1), until it is grasped again by the Antichrist, who shall perish in the 
attempt. Like the apple of Eden, it only proves a curse to its holder, until He comes 
whose right it is. The student will not fail to observe (see next Prop.) that while civil 
government is ordained of God as something that necessarily proceeds from the nature 
of man and society, God has nowhere excepting only the Theocratic—given His 
approval toa special form. ‘This exception indicates the form, which, above all others, 
meets the Divine approval, and we may rest assured from the praises that He bestows 
upon it, that His Divine Purpose relating to it will not fail. Hence we cannot receive 
the predictions of otherwise able writers on the perpetuity and prosperity of “ the times 


Prop. 164.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 777 


of the Gentiles.” Thus e.g. Wines (Com. on Hebrew Laws, Introd. p. 62) growing 
enthusiastic over his delineation of American “ liberty and self-government,’’ confidently 
(speaking of nations as they now exist, and of knowledge progressing, etc.), predicts : 
‘““ The great principle of popular right and popular sovereignty, in some form or other, 
is predestined to a universal triumph. It may achieve this triumph in one century, or 
it may not achieve it in five; but its ultimate success is as certain as its truth. God 
never made a truth, into which He did not put a power, that sooner or later would cause 
it to prevail. Despotism, therefore, will have to bow before the majesty and supremacy 
of the people. Even the frozen gates of Siberia shall yet dissolve and disappear beneath 
the genial warmth of the sun of freedom, Tyranny, with its chains and its blood, will 
everywhere come to an end. Humanity will recover her rights. And an enfranchised 
world shall yet exult in the liberty and happiness, for which it has sighed and struggled 
through many a weary century of injustice and oppression.’’ So again p. 62 he proph- 
esies respecting the American Republic : ‘“‘ Standing upon the soil of freedom, and using 
the lever of Christian civilization, he has a place whereon, and a power wherewith, not 
only to move the world, but to-transform it from a desolate wilderness into the garden 
of the Lord, covering it with the light of truth and the beauty of goodness.’”’ Let the 
reader look at this uninspired prediction and then at the inspired portraiture given by 
Scripture of the future Antichrist, etc. _Wines’s prophecy is based on a false principle, 
viz., that truth must inevitably prevail and triumph, which is proven by history to be 
untrue, as exemplified in the Antediluvian world, in the Theocracy, in the life and death 
of Jesus, in the retrogressions of Christianity, in the overthrow of nations, ete. 


Obs. 8. The reader may regard it as significant that the Theocratic King 
was born at the very time that the Gentile dominion was in its most extend- 
ed and consolidated form. The fairest portions of Europe, Asia, and 
Africa then known formed one vast Empire—the Roman—when Jesus, 
‘‘ the Christ,’’ appeared and tendered the Kingdom to the elect nation 
(Props. 54, 55, etc.) which, if accepted (by a national repentance), would 
have broken the Roman Power with irresistible force. The One through 
whom that Gentile dominion is to cease, comes singly and alone, when at 
its height, and then, owing to the sinfulness of His own inheritance, per- 
mits this dominion to continue on and on until He shall come the Second 
time. And this, too, is done both as a punishment to His own rebellious 
people, and that special grace and mercy should be exterided to the Gen- 
tiles. When He comes again, the time selected is also one in which this 
Gentile dominion shall be manifested in a vast confederation (Prop. 160, 
etc.), and when, humanely speaking, the Church shall so experience its per- 
secuting power that no hope for its continuance appears possible. 


God, for wise and merciful purposes (to correct his nation for their unbelief, to call 
out a people for His name, etc.), and also to indicate by actual experiment how man is a 
ruler over man, has allowed Gentile domination. His own Theocratic Kingdom was 
withdrawn, and the most ample opportunity afforded to Gentiles to show forth their 
ability to rule, and subserve the interests of mankind. Nimrod’s rebellion probably first 
originated the worldly and selfish form of government, and this culminated in the four 
great Empires of Daniel. This domination was tried with the most intelligent and 
cultivated nations under different forms of government, and history records the results 
in the wars, violence, crime, oppressions, etc. ‘The blood, tears, terrors, sufferings, 
despair, and cruelty, that they have entailed in the name of glory, religion, liberty, etc., 
is fearful to contemplate, and the victims of persecution and pride are counted by 
millions and millions. We are gravely told that civilization, education, humanity, 
philosophy, science and art are changing the nations for the better. Are the standing 
armies less? Are the engines of war, and fortifications, and fleets less? Do establish- 
ments that manufacture weapons of destruction languish and die for lack of work? Is 
taxation less? Are the jealousies and desire for revenge less? Is the spirit between 
rulers and subjects more harmonious? Is the conflict between the high and low, the 
rich and poor, the capitalist and laborer diminished? Are the interests of nations and 
classes reconciled? Such questions need no answer, 


778 THE THEOCRATIOC KINGDOM. [Prop. 164. 


Obs. 9. Tt is a significant fact, fully attested by history, past and present, 
that no Christian nation has ever existed among the Gentiles. No matter 
how largely the laws of Moses and the precepts of Christ have been incor- 
porated, and no matter how men of a Christian spirit have endeavored at 
times to legislate and execute laws in a proper spirit, it still remains true 
that the design of this dispensation has never been to convert nations (Prop. 
86. etc.), and that every nation, however professedly Christian, has been 
guilty of oppression, injustice, and wickedness. The spirit of self-interest, 
aggrandizement, earthly glory, etc., has led nations into paths of sin, vio- 
lence and cruelty, and with the principles at work they are utterly unfit- 
ted to co-operate with a pure Theocratic Kingdom, and hence their domina- 
tion must come to an end. 


’ 


Ultraists, in their eulogy of ‘‘ Christian nations,’’ speak loudly of such ‘‘ nations 
tendering allegiance to Christianity’ and of their ‘‘ recognizing the authority of Jesus,’’ 
but conveniently ignore the acts and unbelief of such nations. Those very nations, as we 
abundantly show in other places, develop the Antichrist and array themselves against 
the Christ. The final complete overthrow not only indicates the lack of sanctity, so 
often claimed, but the worthlessness of those ultra views (e.g. see art. ‘‘ Reformed Pres- 
byterian Church, > or Covenanters, in M’Clintock and Strong’s Cyclop.), which make the 
State one of the “ departments of Christ’s visible Kingdom on earth.’’ If any one desires 
to see what evils are engendered by the Church arrogating power over the civil authorities 
or of the civil exercising power over the Church, history is full of it, from the days of 
Constantine down to the present, as witnessed in the history of Rome, France, England, 
Germany, Holland (Motley’s Life of Barneveld), ete. 


Obs. 10. The reader will not fail (which we repeat, in order to im- 
press) to observe, that while civil government is ordained by God as some- 
thing that necessarily proceeds from the nature of man and of society 
(next Prop.), yet as the forms of it are of man’s ordinance, and subject more 
or less to depravity, God has nowhere, excepting only the Theocratic 
form, given His approval to any special one. If we open the Old Testament, 
and read the numerous passages in which God praises and eulogizes this 
form, we find that this exception indicates most forcibly the form of govern- 
ment that, above all others, meets the divine approbation. 


Consequently we deprecate the fulsome and unscriptural eulogies heaped upon 
earthly governments by various writers. Thus e.g. Wines (Com. on Heb. Laws.) ina 
most enthusiastic manner praises the advance in government as illustrated by the 
Republican form in the United States ; predicts in behalf of popular sovereignty ‘‘ 
universal triumph,’’ (see Obs. 7 and note). The wildest of all efforts to glorify the 
United States is presented by Baldwin (Armageddon), who pushes it to an extreme allied 
to the blasphemous, The student has only to contrast this uninspired picture with the 
inspired portraiture of the future, and he finds instead of the former, the Antichrist 
ruling over the nations, the nations confederated against Christ, despotism and tyranny 
the most violent, tribulation, etc. When Wild, in his work The Lost Ten Tribes, exalts 
England and the United States under the plea of being the “‘ Israel,” he only shows 
that he does not comprehend the nature of the Kingdom which is to be set up. When 
he predicts ‘‘ smooth things,’’ including a continued progress in prosperity and great- 
ness, a most triumphant career, he indicates a lack of comparison of prophecy. 

Some students of prophecy, owing to England’s State Church, or the aid given to the 
Reformation, or its missionary and Bible extension, or its contest with the Papacy, or 
its removing Jewish disabilities, think that (as e.g. Thruston in England Safe and Trium- 
phant), the future of England isa decidedly prosperous one, etc. A recent writer, 
Cummings (The Great Tribulation), concludes that England will escape the tribulation of 
the nations. In his Lecture ‘‘ The Destiny of England in the Prophetic Record,’’ he 
takes the favorite position of many that owing to England assisting to carry the Jews to 
Palestine, she shall escape the doom of other nations. On the other hand, a large 
number of prophetic students emphatically declare (as e.g. Thorpe in The Destinies of the 


OE ae 


Prop. 164.] THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. 779 


British Empire), that owing to her national sins (oppression, policy, opium trade, conni- 
vance of idolatry in India, aid extended to Popery, etc.), England is fated to meet the 
divine vengeance. Bickersteth (The Practical Guide), Varley (National Calamities, in The 
Chris. Herald, Aug. 28, 1879), and others give a vivid list of the sins of England, and 
indorse Thorpe’s view. Indeed, whatever England, and others, may do in reference to 
the Jews (through policy, etc.), the universality of prophecy (e.g. Isa, 2: 10-17), the 
positive declarations that no nations are on the Lord’s side when He comes for ven- 
geance and redemption (as Isa. 63 : 3, Delitzsch’s rend. ‘‘ of the nations no one was with 
me,’’ and Lange's Com. loci declares the same, Doc. 2, 3, and Exeg. says: “ The state- 
ment indicates the universal antichristian spirit of the nations,”) the extent of the 
divine vengeance reaching to “ all nations,’’ even “ all the kingdoms of the world, which 
are upon the face of the earth’’ (as Jer. 25), the complete overthrow of world-dominions 
and their incorporation with Christ’s Theocratic rule (Rev. 11 : 15), the ending of Gentile 
times and the manner of closing (e.g. Dan. 2) with no exception of the nations made 
(unless we except those heathen mentioned in Isa. 66 : 19), all this fully indicates that 
the latter view is the most tenable.* 

Some present the United States as the great element for “ the regeneration’’ of the 
nations, expressing themselves in eulogies which appropriate the promises solely belonging 
to Jesus, ‘‘the Son of Man.’’ Wise statesmen (as Webster, etc.), have pointed out the 
great evils connected with our system of government, such as result from office-seeking, 
the licentiousness of the press, the abuse and perversion of suffragé, the dangers of 
emigration, the corruption of officials, the violence of party spirit, the conflicting 
interests of sections, and the misunderstanding of the rights of the general government 
and of individual States. But there is a portent of danger before us far greater than all 
these, which must eventually result disastrously, and that is, the growth of unbelief, 
socialism and its kindred brood with their demands. The government is in the hands 
of the people, and just so soon as the majority becomes leavened with socialistic ideas 
(which will come when the laboring population becomes more dense, wages become low, 
labor itself becomes difficult to obtain, distress brings discontent, etc.); then its doctrines 
respecting capital will be enforced (for the rich being in the minority, will be helpless) 
legally in the Legislative halls, and a series of spoliations ensue. Each blow at capital 
relieving distress but temporarily, will be succeeded by another and another, until the 
means of wealth being exhausted and the motives to its being obtained are destroyed, 
anarchy, engendered by a fearful experience, will evidence the worth of all such predic- 
tions. Unbelief will attack the Church, and in every way cause it to suffer. Both 
capital, because of its former extortion and monopolies, and the Church, because of its 
unfaithfulness and worldliness, will then suffer. This may be thought to be a gloomy 
view of the future, but how can we close our eyes to the fearful increase of infidelity, 
the danger already threatened, the demands already made, the views of disorganization 
already held by a multitude, the communistic parties already organized, the facilities 
already provided for joint action, etc. The aim is finally to control legislation, 
introduce universal co-operation, make the State a universal co-operative corporation, 
and enforce, under coercion, ® universal and equal distribution of property. (For the 
demands, plans, extent, etc., of Socialism, see e.g. the series of articles entitled 
‘* German Socialism in America’’ in The North Amer. Review, 1879, Cook’s Lecture ‘‘ The 
Infidel Attack on Property,” etc.). The membership is numerous, for a Socialistic 
gathering at Chicago (Luth. Obs., July 12, 1878), on Sunday, alone was estimated at 
30,000. It is boldly avowed to be ‘‘ a political party” (as e.g. Morris Cohen before the 
Hewitt Committee in New York, as stated in Cin. Enquirer, Aug. 5, 1878). Emigration 
is rapidly swelling their numbers ; numerous papers and journals, some with a large 
daily circulation, adopt and circulate their principles. The people have worshipped 
Mammon, and their god will bring them misery. ‘* The National Platform and Prin- 
ciples of the Socialistic Labor Party,” adopted by the National Congress at Newark, 
N. J., Dec., 1877, has for its motto: ‘‘The earth is man’s, and the fulness thereof,’’ 
which is but a parody on Ps. 24 : 1, ‘‘ The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof.” 
The abuse poured out upon God, Christ, and Christianity is so virulent and blasphemous 


* During the revisal of the text, the writer observed an interesting article on “ The 
Ships of Tarshish,’’ by Rev. Hytche in The Proph. News, Ap., 1882. It takes Thorpe’s 
position, and gives the following order : (1) England at first resists Antichrist ; (2) then 
allies herself with him ; (3) her navy in the Mediterranean is destroyed by the Lord ;. 
(4) influenced by the spared Gentiles at the fall of Antichrist, she will be the foremost 
in conveying with her ships the Jews to Palestine. 


780 THE THEOCRATIC KINGDOM. [Prop. 164. 


as to be exceedingly shocking. While some to gain adherents quote Jesus as a Socialistic 
Reformer (but refuse his cross), and the Bible as teaching Socialism, Communism, etc., 
others denominate Christianity ‘‘ Poison, and an eighteen hundred years’ sickness,’’ and 
declare (as Volkstaat, No. 25, 1876), ‘‘ that Christianity and Socialism are opposed to each 
other as fire and water.” We transcribe only one sentence as indicative of the fiery 
hate, given by a public speaker : ‘‘ We hold God for an Ass of foolishness ; we view God 
as the greatest evil in the world, and, therefore, declare against God the war.’’ (He will 
meet them in ‘‘ the war,’’ and their blasphemy, pride, and boasting will have a terrible 
fall.) It is this mixture of unbelief, socialism, communism, etc., which will bring this 
country into an endurance of tribulation. By eloquently expressed appeals to humanita- 
rian ideas, and by ravishing pictures of bountiful help from the State, removal of care, 
the certainty of competency, freedom from all restraint, and the surety of help under all 
circumstances, a majority will finally accrue to them, and infidelity will rule. There is 
one feature that may mitigate the severity of God’s judgments on the United States, 
provided that it is retained to the end, viz., the general and State governments have ever 
been friendly to the Jews. So Lawrence (‘‘ The Jews and their Persecutors,” Harper's 
Mag., June, 1874, ref. to Jost’s His. of the Jews) remarks : ‘‘ A fair Republic sprang up in 
the New World, that was the first of all the nations to offer a peaceful and happy home to 
the persecuted people.” Now God’s threatenings are specially levelled against the 
nations who in the past or future oppress that people and burden themselves with it ; 
they particularly shall feel His vengeance. Therefore there is propriety in the observation 
of Wines (Com. on the Laws of the Anc. Hebrews, p. 340), who, after referring to the 
manner in which the Jews were treated in Europe, Africa, and Asia, and how in this 
country they have from the first enjoyed freedom, equality, protection of rights, etc., 
says : ‘‘ May we not hope, that, when Jehovah shall judge the nations, He will in mercy 
remember the land, which has afforded a refuge and a home to the sons of Jacob.”’ 


Obs. 11. Turning back to Props. 131, 154, 159, and others (e. g. Prop. 
201, 202, 206,etc.) of similar import, it will be seen that a Theocracy embrac- 
ing a pure Infallibility, administered through righteous and glorified agents, 
is to possess the rule over the earth. Fallible Imperialism, with its weak- 
ness and vices, will be crushed under its force ; Constitutional Monarchy, 
with its utter inability to meet the clashing interests of classes and Repub- 
licanism which suffers from the suffrage of self-interest and ignorance 
being made the basis of its ordering, all forms of government, unable 
to remove the evils under which their subjects are groaning, must be sub- 
verted and give place to this one, which in itself honors God and blesses 
humanity with a perfect government that fully performs, yea immensely more, 
what others promise. ‘Thisis clearly taught. All that oppose this coming 
Kingdom and its august Ruler shall be destroyed. Kings and nobles, high 
and low, rich and poor, who resist, shall fall beneath its invincible power— 
a power which will settle all difficulties between nation and nation, aristoc- 
racy and commoner, capital and labor, man and man. 


RRA SIE LR ET 


Dh 


Oo 
N 
ai 
Oo 
: =" 
a 


OIE OO 


a Ta haat be 


eee ee 


