School of Theology at Clarem 


i 


WHINE 











ae The Library _ 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 


_ AT CLAREMONT — 


_ WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE _ 
; CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA — 














+ 
= 
¥ 
$. 
¥ 


—— ole 








The Study and Teaching | 
of the English Bible 


Being Four Lectures 


By 
G. CAMPBELL MORGAN, D.D. 
At Westminster Friday Bible School 


Revised for Press by 
E. DUNSCOMBE DE RUSETT, M. A. 





New YORK CHICAGO TORONTO 
Fleming H. Revell Company 


LONDON AND EDINBURGH 


Copyright, 1910, by 
FLEMING H. REVELL COMPANY 


New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 80 Wabash Avenue 
Toronto: 25 Richmond Street, W. 
London; 21 Paternoster Square 
Edinburgh: 100 Princes Street 


INTRODUCTION 


1 this series of lectures I propose to deal 
only with the first and fundamental mat- 
ters, aS my purpose is preéminently that of 
helping those who are beginning the Christian 
life in the study and teaching of the English 
Bible. 

Among English-speaking people there are 
two classes likely to read the Bible; first, 
those who are Christian believers, and sec- 
ondly, those who, as honest enquirers, are desir- 
ous of knowing exactly what is taught in the 
Scriptures. 

There is a distinct difference between these 
classes in the mood of approach, and conse- 
quently in the mode thereof. The first almost 
necessarily comes to the study of the Bible 
with a prejudice in its favor, expecting to find 
therein teaching which will guide in life and 
service ; while’ the second approaches the study 
with a perfectly open mind as to what the 
Scriptures teach, but in many cases with a pre}- 


udice against the attitude of the first, not be- 
7 


Theolog y | | Lea ey 


ISCHIOOL OF THEOL OGY 
~~ LAREMON|\ Tae 
ALC Cabitonnia 873) 


8 INTRODUCTION 


ing prepared to admit upon the basis of the 
conviction of others, that the Bible is the Word 
of God, that it is a Divine Library, or that the 
writings are in any special sense inspired. 
Such a reader does not believe these things be- 
cause he honestly cannot, and is not prepared 
to make his judgment blind. There are many 
senses in which such an attitude is the most 
easy to deal with, for it is the true condition 
for receiving teaching. 

These classes are, however, unified, by their 
common desire to study the Scriptures; and 
they are both asking for help as to the best 
method of doing so. 

It would appear as though there ought to be 
no difficulty in the matter, but it is quite cer- 
tain that there is a very serious difficulty. 
This difficulty is the result of the way in which 
the Bible has been treated, rather than the out- 
come of anything in the Bible itself. There 
are thousands of people who have been brought 
up in somewhat close relationship to the Chris- 
tian Church, who nevertheless think only of the 
Bible as a book of texts from which sermons 


INTRODUCTION 9 


are preached, or which are quoted in proof of 
some theological position. The result is an en- 
tirely false conception of the value of the 
Scriptures, and is largely to blame for the pres- 
ent condition of affairs. As I have travelled 
on both sides of the Atlantic, endeavoring to 
teach the Bible, and striving to help men to a 
methodical study thereof for themselves, I have 
been constantly asked by intelligent young 
people, some of them decided Christians, others 
honest enquirers, Will you tell us how to study 
the Bible ? 

Now I have never been asked to tell any one 
how to study Shakespeare. That may be ac- 
counted for by the fact that no one suspects me 
of any ability in that direction; but I venture 
to say that it is a question that is not asked, even 
of those who are Shakespearean experts; and 
the reason is that Shakespeare has not been 
submitted to the false treatment which the Bible 
has received; and consequently the difficulty 
and perplexity have not been created. 

The present lectures are intended in the sim- 
plest way possible to answer that enquiry. 


Outline 


THE STUDY OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE 


I. Some PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS 
II. THe FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


THE TEACHING OF THE ENGLISH BIBLE 


III. THe NEED 
IV. THe METHOD 


10 


THE STUDY OF THE ENGLISH 
BIBLE 





I 
SOME PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS 





A. AS TO THE BIBLE, B. As To THE STUDY. 











It is :— It requires :— 
I. Religious. I. Honesty. 
II, Dual. II. Reverence. 
III. Triple. III. Diligence, 
IV. Multiple. IV. System. 
V. Unified. V. Response. 





IRST let me speak of some purely elemen- 

tary matters which are necessarily pre- 
liminary to Bible study. There are certain 
matters we must understand before we open 
the Book, and these are set out in brief form in 
the accompanying diagram. It will be seen 
that there are two main divisions, the first 
dealing with preliminary considerations as to 
the Bible ; and the second with the preliminary 


considerations as to the study thereof. 
13 


14 SOME PRELIMINARY 


A. As TO THE BIBLE 

I. Lt ts relagious. 

It will at once be conceded that it is neces- 
sary to recognize that this is essentially a 
Library of religious literature. It may inci- 
dentally contain scientific facts, or philosophic 
principles; but it is neither a scientific text- 
book, nor a philosophic treatise. The nature 
of its declarations are all primarily religious. 
They are declarations concerning God and man, 
and the interrelationships between them. 

For the present I am not concerned as to 
whether the teaching is true, for that is not at 
all the question at this point. We do not start 
with that assumption. For the moment I am 
simply insisting upon the fact that, whether 
true or false, it is a literature of religion ; it 
claims to declare the truth about God, the truth 
about man, and the truth about the relationship 
between God and man. 

That it is religious literature is also clearly 
evident when we consider not merely the nature 
of its declarations, but also the nature of its 
appeal. That appeal is twofold, consisting of a 


CONSIDERATIONS 15 


call to faith in God, and of a demand that such 
faith shall be demonstrated by works. That is 
the double message of the Bible from first to 
last. If at the moment this may appear to be 
a narrow conception of the Biblical message, it 
may be well to say that any decision as to the 
narrowness or breadth thereof must be post- 
poned until the teaching has been examined. 

And yet it must at once be conceded that 
the effect which this Book has produced, and 
still does produce, compels the recognition of 
the fact that it is religious literature. This 
effect is twofold—spiritual and moral. 

It is spiritual in that it produces a belief in 
the life which lies beyond the present. Wher- 
ever ‘men have come to this Bible, have been 
diligent students of it, and have obeyed its first 
and simplest calls, following in the path of 
obedience as its teaching has been more com- 
pletely understood, they have invariably become 
spiritually-minded, that is, conscious of the 
reality and vastness of those facts and forces 
which are not discernible by the natural senses. 

If there may be objection to the fact or 


16 SOME PRELIMINARY 


value of this position, the moral effect produced 
by the Bible is beyond question. It is true that 
there have been those who have declared that 
they discovered immoralities and indecencies 
in the Bible; but the answer to such a state- 
ment is that no man, woman, or child has ever 
come to the honest study of this Book, pure in 
thought and intention, and been made immoral 
thereby. 

Therefore, we must admit that the Bible is 
religious in the best sense of the word, because 
of the effect it produces ; and it is well that we 
at least calmly enquire whether it is conceivable 
that an untrue book can produce the result of 
truth; or a base look produce results so full of 
nobility of conduct and of character. 


Il. Jé¢ ts dual. 

Turning to the more technical matters, it is 
necessary to recognize that the Bible consists of 
two parts which we describe as the Old and the 
New Testaments, or Covenants. The former 
consists of a collection of the sacred writings 
of the Hebrew people, and the latter a collec- 


CONSIDERATIONS 17 


tion of the sacred writings of the Christian 
Church. At the moment we are not concerned 
with the subject of the fixing of the Canon of 
either of these parts. That is a question out- 
side the scope of the present lectures. Iam 
simply dealing with the Book as it stands. 

In the Old Testament we have the complete 
sacred writings of the Hebrew people, as they 
existed in the time of Christ, although not 
arranged in exactly the same order. It is the 
same collection of books as were gathered to- 
gether in the Greek version which we describe 
as the Septuagint, and which was certainly in 
existence two or three centuries before Christ ; 
and which moreover is of great interest and 
value to us because nearly all the New Testa- 
ment quotations were made therefrom. 

In the second part we have the sacred writ- 
ings of the Christian Church, that is, the writ- 
ings which the Church has accounted sacred, 
and has separated from other books because 
they have peculiar value in that they set forth 
the fundamental principles of the Christian 
religion. 


18 SOME PRELIMINARY 


Ill. Zt ts triple. 

Each of these two parts has three principal 
qualities: historic, or statements concerning 
the past; didactic, or teaching for the govern- 
ment of the present; predictive, or foretelling 
of the future. 

In the Old Testament we have the history of 
the Hebrew people ; an account of their origin, 
their destiny, their failure; and all this princi- 
pally on the side of the Divine method of deal- 
ing with them. This Hebrew history is pref- 
aced by a brief statement concerning the first 
things in the history of the human race. 

In the New Testament the history deals with 
-one Person, Jesus of Nazareth, and with about 
sixty or seventy years of the movement result- 
ing from His presence in the world. 

The didactic portions of these two divisions 
consist of teachings which appealed to the times 
in which they were given. In the Old Testa- 
ment we have, side by side with history, a body 
of prophetic messages delivered to the people. 
These teachings, however, have a wider appli- 
cation than that to the age in which they were 


CONSIDERATIONS . 19 


delivered, for they contain fundamental prin- 
ciples which have abiding values. It is neces- 
sary, however, to remember that in the study of 
these writings it is only such principles which 
are of abiding value. We are not to-day to go 
back under the Mosaic or prophetic economy, 
and if we limit our morality by the narrow and 
imperfect outlook even of the finest Hebrew 
thought, we shall sadly fail. 

When we come to the New Testament we 
find teachings which are applicable to the 
whole period which commenced with the ad- 
vent of grace, and will end with the advent of 
glory. Everything which those who have be- 
lieved in the one Lord and Master need for the 
government of individual life, the organization 
of the corporate Church, and the work of the 
proclamation of the evangel to the world, is 
found in these writings. 

The predictive element in the Old Testament 
is very remarkable, consisting of prophecies 
foretelling events, some of which have already 
been fulfilled, and some of which are not yet 
fulfilled. In the New also we have definite 


20 SOME PRELIMINARY 


predictions, some of them from the lips of the 
one central Person, the Lord Jesus Christ, and 
some from the pens of those who were His fol- 
lowers. Many of these predictive writings are 
full of mystery ; some of them have been ful- 
filled, while others await fulfillment. 

These three elements are found, I repeat, in 
each part of the Divine Library, and we must 
recognize them, or we shall find ourselves in 
endless difficulty in our study. If we treat his- 
tory as prophecy, or prophecy as history, confu- 
sion is inevitable. Before reading any book we 
need to recognize whether its character is his- 
toric, didactic, or predictive. 


IV. Jé is multiple. 

Each part of the Divine Library consists of a 
collection of writings. In the Hebrew Scrip- 
tures we have thirty-nine books (there were not 
quite so many in the form in which the He- 
brews had their Bible, because certain which 
are now counted as two appeared therein as 
one), and these were written by about one-and- 
twenty authors. I purposely leave the number 


CONSIDERATIONS 21 


indefinite, because it is not established, for in- 
stance, who wrote the Book of Jonah, or Kings, 
or Chronicles; and in our present study our ap- 
peal can only be made to internal evidence. 

In the New Testament we have twenty-seven 
books, written by ten writers, that is, if we ad- 
mit that Hebrews was not written by Paul. If 
it be admitted that he wrote it, then we have 
only nine authors. 

Thus we have sixty-six books from the pens 
of some thirty different men, and their writing 
extended over a period of at least fifteen cen- 
turies. Between many of these there could 
have been no possible collusion, and it is of 
great importance that in the commencement of 
our study we remember this multiple character 
of the Library. 


V. Lt ts unified. 

Finally, it is necessary from the commence- 
ment to recognize that the whole Library is 
unified in a Person. A man taking up these 
books and reading them might not immediately 
discover this fact; but it would be hardly pos- 


22 SOME PRELIMINARY 


sible for an honest and careful student to fail to 
do so ultimately. At this point, however, I 
think it well that those who are beginning to 
study should accept the practically unanimous 
testimony of those who are well qualified to 
give such testimony as the result of long and 
earnest attention to the Library, that the books 
are unified in the central Person presented. 

In the first division, that of the sacred 
writings of the Hebrew people, there is a 
constant movement towards, and expectation 
of, the coming of One who is to be a De 
liverer. It is true that the vision is not always 
equally clear. Sometimes the thought seems 
to centre upon a nation as fulfilling the idea, 
then upon a remnant out of a nation, and again 
a Person is definitely and distinctly expected. 
Sometimes, perhaps almost unconsciously to 
the men who wrote or sang, the nation idea 
is lost sight of, and that of a remnant passes 
out of sight, and there comes into clear relief 
the figure of one superlative Person. Every- 
thing in the sacred writings of the Hebrew 
people leads towards this One, sighs for Him, 


CONSIDERATIONS 23 


and is conscious of imperfection apart from 
Him. 

In the first five books there is a record of the 
search after a priest; in the historic writings 
we have the quest for a king; while in the 
didactic portions we hear the sigh for a prophet. 
Nevertheless in the whole of these books we 
fail to find perfect priest, or king, or prophet ; 
notwithstanding the fact that the idea of each 
has been borne in upon the mind, and the 
necessity for such is evidently the supreme 
conviction of the unified teaching. In brief, 
the sacred writings of the first division consist 
of a literature revealing a people who in their 
religion, their history, and their ideals are 
making a pilgrimage, in the light of a hope 
which remains unfulfilled. 

When we turn to the New Testament, the 
sacred writings of the Christian Church, we 
find what Carnegie Simpson has so happily 
described as the Fact of Christ. The historic 
section consists of five books, the first four of 
which tell the story of His presence in the 
world; while the fifth describes the first move- 


24 SOME PRELIMINARY 


ments in human history resulting from that 
presence. The didactic portion consists of the 
writings of those who were His followers, and 
explains more fully the mystery of His Person, 
and the resources and responsibilities of His 
people. The predictive element throughout 
has to do with His final triumph. 

Thus, while in the Old we have a progress 
towards a Person, inspired by a hope, in the 
New we have a process from a Person, in- 
spired by a fact. Thus, the whole Library is 
unified in this one Person. 

Now it is conceivable that these Hebrew 
people may have been deceived, and that this 
Christian movement may have resulted from 
imagination. I am not at the moment con- 
cerned with these matters, but rather with the 
attempt to recognize the nature of the litera- 
ture. Whether rightly, or wrongly, at the 
centre of the Bible is a Person, and its first 
division sets forth the history of a people 
searching, seeking, and sighing after Him; 
and the second presents Him, and the things 
resulting from His presence in the world. 


CONSIDERATIONS 25 


Therefore we cannot demolish any part of the 
Library without the whole suffering. That 
whole stands or falls together around the uni- 
fying fact of the central Person. 


B. As To THE STUDY 


I. Lt requires honesty. 

It is preéminently necessary that we come 
to the study of this Bible without prejudice 
either for or against it. I do not desire to 
undervalue the prejudice in its favor in the 
case of many, which results from early train- 
ing. My own first acquaintance with the Bible 
was distinctly, and I am constrained to add, 
graciously, influenced by this prejudice. My 
earliest reading of the Book was a reading in 
a frame of mind prejudiced in its favor because 
of what it was to my own father and mother. 
But while I thank God for these things, yet 
the Book never became truly my own until I 
dared to face it apart from that prejudice, and 
allowed it to deliver its own message to mind 
and heart and will. 

It is a grave mistake to demand this prej- 


26 SOME PRELIMINARY 


udice in favor of the Bible from a class, or 
an individual student, when its very existence 
may prevent the honest and profitable study 
of it. 

At the same time, it is absolutely unfair to 
come to the Bible with a prejudice against it. 
It must be treated honestly by being ap- 
proached with an open mind, and for this 
purpose it is not required that any special view 
of inspiration be held. We ought to come to 
the study, determined to set aside our prej- 
udice in its favor, and our prejudice against 
it, and our prejudice against the prejudice of 
those who believe or do not believe in its 
Divinity. I earnestly plead for this open 
mind, believing that wherever the Book is 
given its opportunity of producing its own 
impression, it will win a singular victory. 


II. Jt requires reverence. 

Since we must admit our limitation of knowl- 
edge concerning the subjects with which the 
Bible professes to deal, we ought most reverently 
to listen to what it has to say. To take the 


CONSIDERATIONS 27 


superlative instance of the existence of God, 
there are necessarily so many things which we 
do not know about God, that we ought to listen 
reverently to anything which claims to be a 
declaration concerning Him. Our very igno- 
rance demands that as we listen to what the 
Bible has to say about Him, we should do so 
with reverence. This is true of all the themes 
with which it deals. They are high and super- 
lative themes, and therefore, whether the state- 
ments be true or false, we ought at least to give 
reverent attention. 

This need for reverence is further emphasized 
by the convictions which the very best men of 
the centuries have held concerning it. Noman 
of a few brief years of life has any right ruth- 
lessly to trample underfoot the convictions 
of centuries, and imagine he can deal flippantly 
with a literature which has produced such con- 
victions. It seems to me that whatever con- 
clusion I might ultimately arrive at concerning 
this Book, I could never consent to deal irrev- 
erently with pages made sacred by the fact 
that my own father pored over them in life, 


28 SOME PRELIMINARY 


and at last pillowed his head in death upon 
their statements, and passed out of sight in 
perfect peace because he believed them to be 
true. 


Il. Jt requires diligence. 

Two words will suffice to convey what is in 
my mind as to the diligence which is demanded 
of those who desire to be students of the Bible: 
intensity, and continuity. Any person desiring 
to study such literature ought to give the best 
he can of time and attention to the work. The 
Bible should be studied when the mind is fresh- 
est and most acute. Continuous study is also 
necessary ; the patient persistence which avoids 
hasty decision, and is content to work and 
watch and wait. I do not hesitate to affirm 
that the Bible demands more diligence than any 
other literature. 


IV. Lt requires system. 

No man is in any sense a Bible student who 
takes up the Bible and reads it by a method 
which can only be described as haphazard. To 


CONSIDERATIONS 29 


open it at a page and read, to take a certain 
portion allotted for each day by others, may be 
perfectly justifiable methods for pleasure, and 
may result in profit ; but they do not constitute 
study, in the true sense of the word. The sys- 
tem should be from general to particular, from 
extensive to intensive. Personally, I should 
advise any one commencing the study of the 
Bible to begin at the centre, and work to the 
circumference, to commence with the Gospel 
narratives rather than with Genesis. All that 
will be considered more particularly in subse- 
quent lectures; but the general principles of a 
true system is that of first gaining a knowledge 
of broad outlines, and then concentrating upon 
details. 


V. Lt requires response. 

Religion is primarily volitional, and I now 
affirm that it is impossible to read this Book 
without being conscious that it makes appeal to 
conscience and to will. Whenever it does that, 
when it captures the conviction, the student 
must respond by obedience, or it inevitably be- 


30 SOME PRELIMINARY 


comes a sealed book. Such a statement may 
seem to contradict much that I have said as to 
the open mind ; but I am compelled to make it, 
because it is demonstrated true by the constant 
and unvarying experience of those who give 
themselves to this study. I personally believe 
that the reason why many people have lost 
their love for the Bible is that they have failed 
to recognize the necessity for obedience to its 
moral claims. The first conviction that pos- 
sesses the soul of the truth of some Bible teach- 
ing, clamors within the conscience for the yield- 
ing of obedience thereto, and if we fail to obey, 
the light will fail. Knowledge unmixed with 
obedient faith is not only profitless, it is harm- 
ful. The student must approach the study of 
this Book in that attitude of mind which says, 
“Tf it speaks to me, I will obey.” 


II 
THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 





A, ACTIVITY, B. RESULT, 

I. Survey. Read. Impression. 
II. Condense, Think. Outline. 
III, Expand. Work. Analysis. 

IV. Dissect. Sweat. Knowledge. 





HEN we turn to consider the funda- 
mental processes of Bible study, it is 
well that we distinctly understand that we are 
dealing with the study of the English Bible, 
and not with the Scriptures in the original 
languages, that being another subject alto- 
gether, although in order to an understanding 
of the books, the same methods might with 
advantage be followed in dealing with the 
Hebrew and Greek documents. 
By fundamental processes Imean those which 
will enable us to come to an accurate knowl- 


edge of what these books contain. I refer to 
31 


82 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


them for the moment as books, because I am 
growingly impressed with the importance of 
beginning with the Bible as a library, rather 
than with its unity as a book; a library having 
two parts, three qualities, and a multiplicity of 
writers, themes, and dates—a true library. 

I may also first of all state three things 
with which I do not propose to deal, because 
they are outside the scope of our present con- 
sideration, these being preliminary to them. 

First, then, the fundamental processes do not 
deal with the veracity of the books. That is 
necessarily considered in the study of intro- 
ductions. The question of authorship and 
authenticity does not occur in the fundamental 
processes. 

Neither have they anything to do with the 
arrangement of Biblical teaching into the form 
of systematic theology. This is final rather 
than fundamental. I hold that every man 
should test his systematic theology by his 
Bible, rather than his Bible by his system of 
theology. In this connection I remember a 
quaint but illuminating story of a negro 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 33 


preacher, to whom Dr. Broadus, the great 
Baptist theologian of the Southern States of 
America, gave a volume of his commentary on 
_ the Scriptures, saying that he hoped it would 
be useful to him in his work. Some time after 
the reception of the gift, Dr. Broadus again 
met the preacher, and enquired whether he had 
found the commentary helpful, and the reply 
was, “Oh, yes, Massa, it is a berry good book ; 
but there is one thing I have noticed about it.” 
“What is that?” enquired Dr. Broadus. 
“Well, Massa, it is that the Scriptures do 
throw a lot of light on it.” That I believe is 
true of many of our theological systems; and 
therefore, from my standpoint, it goes without 
saying that Bible study is preliminary to any. 
attempt to systematize theology. 

In the third place, the fundamental processes 
do not include the application of the Bible to 
all the details of practical life. This again is 
a final matter. 

Of course these fundamental processes must 
affect the final processes, and in the study of 
the Bible we are ever approaching a systematic 


34. THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


view of truth, and always finding application 
of the things we discover to the actualities of 
every-day life. 

It is impossible to study these books in the 
way I am going to suggest, without some im- 
pression being made upon the mind as to their 
veracity ; without coming to definite concep- 
tions concerning God and man, and the inter- 
relationships between them ; without hearing 
an appeal to conscience, and having a con- 
stantly growing conception of what conduct 
ought to be at its highest and its best. 

Nevertheless, we are to consider the first 
things in Bible study; those which we must 
undertake before we decide whether the book 
is true; before we attempt to systematize our 
theology ; before we can make accurate appli- 
cation of its teaching to life and conduct. 

Personally, I am convinced that there isa 
true order in these fundamental methods, 
which I have attempted to indicate in the 
diagram at the commencement of this chapter , 
showing also what the act?vity is in each case; 
and what the result produced will be. 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 35 


In the first process we survey ; in the second 
we condense; in the third we expand; in the 
fourth we dissect. Having followed these proc- 
esses we may adopt any other methods we 
please, and shall do so the more intelligently as 
the result of this preliminary work. 

I believe that it is well to postpone the dis- 
cussion of the veracity of any book until we 
have given time to it along these lines. We 
have no right to say that any book is untrue, 
or even that it is true, until we have taken 
time for these methods of examination. If 
any one is tempted to say that it will be im- 
possible for us to complete the study of the 
Divine Library by these processes in a lifetime, 
let me frankly say that I am in perfect agree- 
ment; but at the same time it is well to re- 
member that, apart from these processes, we 
shall never know any given book in the 
Library. Many great Biblical scholars and 
earnest saints have given their life to the work 
of Bible study, but none has succeeded in 
working through all these processes in the case 
of more than a few books. 


36 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


Once again, let me, even at the cost of weari- 
some repetition, repeat that these processes are 
fundamental ; and that those which follow will 
become clear and forceful in the proportion in 
which we have adopted them. 


A. SURVEY 

This means reading ; and results in an im- 
pression. 

In commencing our study it is well that we 
bear in mind the principles set forth in the pre- 
vious lecture ; and whatever book we take, we 
should first define its place in the Library ; as 
to whether it is a Hebrew or a Christian docu- 
ment; and also its quality ; whether it is his- 
tory, teaching, or prediction. The activity in 
order to survey is that of reading. It is nec- 
essary first, to decide to take practically no 
notice of the chapter and verse divisions which 
we find in our ordinary Bibles. They all have 
their uses for reference, but they may sadly 
mislead us in our attempt to gain a general 
impression of a book. Let the book be read 
straight on, and in reading look, listen, and 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 37 


Vive. Look closely at what you are reading ; 
listen to what the words you see are saying; 
and live for the time in the very atmosphere 
which is being created by the reading of your 
book. Some one may say, who has given more 
time to study other literature than the Bible: 
“But that is exactly what you would do with 
any book!” Certainly ; and if men will begin 
to read the Bible with the same common sense 
as they employ in the reading of other books, 
they will be on the highway to an apprehension 
of its meaning, which hitherto they have lacked ; 
and that statement explains the reason for my 
suggestion that the reader should forget the 
chapter and verse divisions. Who would con- 
sent to any other literature being subjected to 
this mechanical method of division? I re- 
member that eminent Bible scholar, and wonder- 
ful teacher, Dr. Henry Weston, once saying in 
my hearing, “TI hate these chapters and verses ; 
reading a Bible in which I find them always 
reminds me of riding over a corduroy road.” 
He was an old man, and remembered the first 
roadways in the Western parts of the coun- 


38 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


try, and how that the logs of which they 
were formed were so laid that in travelling 
over them one experienced a series of bumps 
which were neither conducive to speed nor 
ease; and that is exactly the mental effect 
produced all too often by reading a chapter 
divided into verses, one experiences a series of 
jerks. There is great value in Dr. Moulton’s 
Modern Readers’ Bible, simply because he has 
arranged it in literary form, omitting the chap- 
ters and verses. 

Having read the book, read it again; and in 
the same way. Then read it once more. 
After that read it again; and yet again, until 
you become conscious that the book has made 
an impression upon your mind ; that you have 
a conception of its general movement. That is 
the first process. In the course of the reading 
make a note of special phrases or words that 
occur repeatedly, or of any particular thought 
which seems to be insistent. 

I may illustrate what I mean by saying that 
such reading of the Book of Numbers produced 
upon my mind the impression of a people on 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 39 


the margin of the land, about to enter it, turned 
back to a long period of wandering, after 
which they came again to the margin of the 
land, with the result that the general outline of 
the book for me is always connected with that 
impression, and is so tabulated. As I have re- 
peatedly said in dealing with this subject in 
public, I think my analysis of books are the 
result of having read them on an average from 
forty to fifty times. Some, of course, yielded 
an impression more quickly, while others took 
many more readings. That will often depend 
upon the individual. There are books which 
may produce a clear impression upon the mind 
of one man far more quickly than upon that of 
another. Therefore, we do not accept any 
man’s analysis as final ; but it is well to observe 
this law of reading a book over and over again un- 
til we know it, not by rote, but by an impression 
of its purpose clearly stamped upon the mind. 


B. CoNDENSE 
This means thinking; and results in an out- 
line. 


40 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


‘The book having thus been read through 
again and yet again, and an impression having 
been made upon the mind in the way I have 
indicated, the attempt should now be made to 
express in the briefest way possible the con- 
tents of the book. This means quiet thinking 
over what has been read, accompanied by ref- 
erence to certain parts in order to clear state- 
ment. 

Now will be found the value of the things 
noted in the course of reading, the recurring 
words and phrases, and insistent thoughts. 
The first result of this process will be the 
statement of the content in the fewest words 
possible. Here I may illustrate by saying that 
if I were asked to put Genesis into three words, 
I should do it thus, Generation, Degeneration, 
Regeneration. 

The next process is the reading of the book 
again, only now in the recognition of the gen- 
eral divisions suggested, and that in order to 
change, adjust, abandon, and perhaps to find a 
new and better brief outline. 

The mind being settled about the general 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 41 


outline, these main divisions should be treated 
in the same way, and subdivided into sections. 

At this point in the process it is well to 
make use of every book which is likely to help, 
until we arrive at what seems to us to be a 
satisfactory outline. It is not until this has 
been done that we are ready for the next stage. 


C. EXPAND 

This means work ; and results in an analysis. 

Of course, I can only illustrate what I mean 
from work which I have done. Therefore let 
me instance the Book of Matthew. In con- 
stant reading of this book I do not think it is 
possible to escape the impression produced by 
the recurrence of the word began on two out- 
standing occasions (see iv. 17 and xvi. 21). Now 
the impression made upon the mind by the 
survey of Matthew is that we have been in the 
presence of a King. 

The outline gained when we condense is, that 
Matthew presents the Person of a King; tells 
the story of the propaganda of the King; and 
finally leads us into the presence of the Passion 


42 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


of the King. So far we have a mere out- 
line. 

Now we may turn to the expansion of that 
outline, and in order to do so we need to sit 
down quietly with each of these sections, and 
carefully work for the production of an an- 
alysis. 

There must first be grammatical analysis, the 
taking of each section, paragraph by paragraph, 
with determination to discover the principal 
sentences, and to note the grouping around 
them of subordinate sentences, and the inter- 
relationships between these. 

This, of course, is specially necessary in study- 
ing the Pauline epistles, in which by reason of 
the Apostle’s constant turning aside, we are in 
danger of missing the principal affirmation of 
passages under consideration. 

I cannot too earnestly urge the importance 
of studying the Bible thus analytically, and of 
refusing to abandon a passage until its real 
sense is understood. 

In the course of this work let us be most 
careful not to mutilate a passage simply be- 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 43 


cause at first we do not comprehend its mean- 
ing; or in an endeavor to escape difficulties. 

I may give an illustration of what I mean 
from those excellent volumes to which I have 
referred, the Modern Readers’ Bible. In the 
volume containing the Book of Jonah, I am 
compelled to say that I think I find one of 
the smartest and most unfair things of this 
kind that I know. The two statements con- 
cerning the fish, one before the psalm of Jonah, 
and one after it, are removed from the main 
text, and are inserted as foot-notes. In his 
notes, Dr. Moulton says: “The reference to 
the great fish prepared to swallow Jonah is in 
literary form a foot-note exegetical of the ex- 
pression in the song, ‘Out of the belly of hell’ ; 
similarly the vomiting out Jonah is a foot-note 
attached to the last line.” Now there is abso- 
lutely no warrant for such a statement, other 
than the conception that the story is not likely 
to be true, and it is easy to account for an 
inaccuracy by suggesting that the original 
writing has been altered, as Dr. Moulton does, 
by saying that “these particular foot-notes have 


44 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


every appearance of being a gloss or later edi- 
tion.” This method of treating any part of a 
paragraph which does not square with our phi- 
losophy is not fair to the book under consid- 
eration. If a passage is difficult, there is all 
the more reason for patience, persistence, and 
determination to read and reread until it is 
understood. 

In this process it is more than ever necessary 
that we should not be in bondage to the 
chapters and verses, as we find them in our 
ordinary Bibles. Again, to take a familiar 
illustration, we entirely miss the beauty of 
some of the final words of our Lord when we 
read the fourteenth chapter of the Gospel of 
John alone. The true beginning of what we 
find in that chapter is in the previous chapter, 
and if the concluding words of chapter thirteen 
be read in immediate connection with chapter 
fourteen, we have a new light upon our Lord’s 
intention. He was speaking to Peter, and in 
close connection immediately associated others 
with him, as He said, first to Peter: “Wilt 
thou lay down thy life for Me? Verily, verily, 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 45 


Isay unto thee, The cock shall not crow, till 
thou hast denied Me thrice ;” and then without 
a break, to Peter and the rest: “Let not your 
heart be troubled: ye believe in God, believe 
also in Me.” 

The whole of the section will show that 
Christ said in effect to this man, “I know the 
worst that is in you, and that presently you will 
deny Me; but I know also that I am able to 
realize the best that is in you, and that if you 
will trust Me, in spite of all the worst, I shall 
at last bring you to the place I go to prepare 
for you.” 

It is by such careful expansion of our outline 
by thinking, and examination, that we come at 
last to the possession of a detailed analysis of a 
book. 


D. DissEcT 
This means—to use the word of the hard 
student in other departments—sweat ; and re- 
sults in knowledge. 
The word “dissect ” suggests the scalpel and 
the microscope ; and the idea of the scalpel is 


46 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


warranted by the expression, “rightly dividing 
the word of truth,” which means, correctly dis- 
jointing, so as to bring each part into perfect 
separation. 

This is the most fascinating part of Bible 
study, that to which I personally have never 
yet been able to give much time or attention, 
save in the case of a few books. Each sentence 
is now to be pondered in itself, and in its rela- 
tionship to all the other sentences. Every word 
is to be carefully examined as to its root mean- 
ing, and as to its use at the time when it was 
written. 

Here, of course, is the place where you need 
all the help and all the scholarship available. 
There is a fine and ever-growing exegetical 
literature for which the true student of the 
Word is profoundly thankful ; and of which he 
will avail himself to the utmost of his ability. 

The work of dissection needs patience and 
persistence, but it yields the most astonishing 
results, full of fascination and delight to those 
who give themselves to it earnestly. 

All these processes must be recognized, and 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 47 


in a measure employed, before any single text 
can be made the basis of a sermon. To think 
out a sermon which seems religious, and then 
to hunt for some Biblical text upon which to 
hang it, is little short of profane. True sermon- 
making is in the last process a dissection of a 
paragraph or text, which has been chosen in 
recognition of the results of all the earlier 
processes. When any single passage of Scrip- 
ture is taken as the basis of a sermon, our 
first business is to enquire from which part of 
the Library is the book selected ; then in which 
part of the book ; next in which paragraph ; and 
finally, what does it really say ? 

And in order to discover this, with the light 
of the surrounding context shining upon it, it 
should be taken word by word, that the value 
of each may be known; and then as to its 
statement, that its true message may be dis- 
covered. That, as I understand it, is true 
preparation for preaching ; and consequently, it 
is evident that the first work of the preacher is 
that of Bible study, and Bible study by these 
fundamental processes. 


48 THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 


Let no man imagine that such preaching is 
cheap or easy. The idea that expository preach- 
ing can be done without work is entirely false. 
On the other hand, that is not Biblical preach- 
ing which finds a text, and then reads all 
available books to see what other men have 
said about it, finally arranging these thoughts 
into a sermon. 

The way to study the Bible is to study the 
Bible; and to give time and attention to the 
business ; to read, to think, to work, to sweat! 
These are the requirements, especially of those 
who profess to teach or preach. If my final 
words may be spoken to those who are looking 
forward to the ministry as to a sacred life-work, 
I would say to them that Bible preaching de- 
mands that they give themselves to the study 
of the Bible with all the powers of their being. 
When they do so, they will find that the illumi- 
nating Spirit of God will lead them into a 
land of romance, of breadth, of depth, of con- 
stant delight. I may be allowed to speak out of 
my own experience and to say that I can truth- 
fully use the words of the palmists and say :— 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PROCESSES 49 


“* Oh, how love I Thy law ! 
It is my meditation all the day.’’ 


Such study of the Bible inevitably makes 
appeal to conscience. This literature has voli- 
tional values beyond the merely intellectual 
and emotional. Therefore, at the end of every 
hour of study, whatever the process may be, 
that of survey, condensation, expansion, or 
dissection, let the life be submitted to the 
truth which has been discovered; and then by 
all means let there be instant obedience to the 
shining of the light; for by this method alone 
can we be prepared for new unveilings ; and 
by this method the Bible will become, as the 
days go on, more and more full of value, and 
full of delight. 





THE TEACHING OF THE ENGLISH 
BIBLE 





Ii 





THE NEED 
A. AS TO THE B, AS TO THE C. THE INTER- 
NATION. CHURCH. RELATION. 

I. Conceptions : I, Revelation : 1. Vindication 
The Suprem- The Doctrines by — Realiza- 
acy of the of the Faith. tion. 
Spiritual. 

II. Conduct: II, Interpreta- | II. Illustration 
The Splen- tion : by Manifesta- 
dor of the The Laws of tion. 

Moral. Life, 

ITI. Character : If]. Inspiration: | III. Initiation 
The Strength The Charter of by Communi- 
of the Unself- Service. cation. 
ish, ' 


N approaching the subject of the teaching 

of the English Bible, I do not propose to 
deal with the science,. history, or importance 
of teaching itself. These must be taken for 
granted. 

It is, nevertheless, important that we should 


recognize that our subject is that of teaching. 
53 


54 * THE NEED 


Of course, I do not undervalue the work of 
preaching ; but for the moment we must draw 
a distinction between the two. Preaching is 
in many senses the greater word, because it 
includes teaching, while it emphasizes proc- 
lamation, interpretation, and application. 
Our present subject is that preliminary teach- 
ing which is the making known of the content 
of the Bible, and which prepares the way for 
its interpretation and application. 

In dealing with the need for teaching, I 
propose to do so from the standpoint of one 
who is a student of the Bible, having accepted 
the preliminary considerations as laid down in 
the first lecture, and followed those fundamental 
processes indicated in the second. 

It is well that I should at once say that the 
result of my acceptation of these considerations, 
and my following of these processes, is that I 
believe the Bible to be the Word of God, and 
it is from the standpoint of that conviction 
that I speak when dealing with the need of 
teaching the English Bible. 

It may therefore be well to deal a little more 


THE NEED 55 


fully with the declaration that I believe the 
Bible to be the Word of God. It is not enough 
to say that in this literature there are embodied 
truths which are found nowhere else save as 
they have reached other writings from the 
Bible; that there are quantities here which 
constitute the message of God, but which we 
are left to discover from the midst of much 
which lacks that supreme quantity. 

I believe that the Bible is the Word of God. 
Yet carefully notice what that statement really 
means. Ido not believe that the Old Testament 
is the Word of God. I do not believe that the 
New Testament is the Word of God. I do be- 
lieve that the whole Library constitutes the 
Word of God to man. As the result of my 
own study of the different parts of the Library, 
and the resulting sense of the unity of the 
whole, I am convinced that presiding over all 
the human thinking and writing was a Divine 
mind, safeguarding the expression of thought, 
so that no words contrary to truth were em- 
ployed. 

The unity of the message is the demonstra- 


56 ‘THE NEED 


tion of its Divinity. Genesis is not the Word 
of God. It isa part of it. Genesis interpreted 
by Revelation—and for such interpretation all 
that lies between is necessary—is the Word of 
God. Exodus is not the Word of God; but 
Exodus and Leviticus interpreted by Hebrews 
is the Word of God. The law of Moses is not 
the Word of God; but the law of Moses ful- 
filled by the grace and truth which came by 
Jesus Christ is the Word of God. 

With such distinction in mind it is impossible 
to go back to Old Testament history and its 
morality for New Testament times. Passing 
through the processes of the Old we find our 
way to the central Figure, and from there study 
the interpretation of the New, and thus we are 
in possession of the Word of God to man. 

The question of the Canon is not now before 
us; but in passing I may say that I believe the 
Spirit of God, who presided over the thought of 
the men who wrote presided also over the 
choice of the Christian Church until in due 
time the completed revelation resulted. 

From these briefly stated views it will at 


THE NEED 57 


once be seen how strong my conviction must be 
as to the necessity for the teaching of this 
Bible. I propose to speak of that necessity in 
three ways: First, from the national stand- 
point; secondly, from the Church standpoint ; 
and finally, from the standpoint of the inter- 
relation between the two. 


A. As To THE NATION 

The matters of supreme importance to the 
life of a nation are three; its conceptions, its 
conduct, its character. That is the true order 
of statement, because it is the order of experi- 
ence. The final matter in the life of a nation is 
its character. This is the result of its conduct, 
and its conduct issues from its underlying con- 
ceptions. 


I. Conceptions: The supremacy of the spir- 
tual. 

The inspirational centres of thought are 
those which are of supreme importance as 
much in the life of a nation as in the life of a 
man. What the nation thinks the nation will 


58 THE NEED 


do, and eventually the nation will be. Ideas 
are the most mighty factors in national life. 

The central, vital conception which the Bible 
supplies to the nation is that of the supremacy 
of the spiritual over the material. The Bible 
assumes the existence of God, and declares His 
government in all the affairs of this life ; it also 
teaches the eternal duration of man’s existence. 
These being the fundamental propositions of 
the Biblical revelation, the Bible messages en- 
force the resulting deductions. 

The Bible assumes the existence of God, and 
insists upon the government of God, who is 
without beginning or end of days, who is from 
everlasting to everlasting, in a mystery of be- 
ing which our minds have never been able to 
compass, and yet in the consciousness of which 
we find the only resting-place for the otherwise 
restless spirit of human enquiry. The opening 
sentence of the Bible is full of suggestive sub- 
limity, “In the beginning God created,” and 
from that first word to the last the burden of 
its teaching is that of insistence upon the exist- 
ence of God. It never explains, nor does it at- 


THE NEED 59 


tempt a philosophy which will finally express 
in the formule of human wisdom the fact of 
that existence; but it affirms it, and insists 
upon the resulting fact of the government of 
God. 

The Bible teaches the eternal duration of 
man’s existence, and necessarily, therefore, gives 
to man those spiritual conceptions which com- 
pel him to put all the things of the present and 
passing moment in relation to the abiding ages. 

Such conceptions call the nation back from 
the vain imagination that the dust of to-day is 
everything, or that the hurried passing hour 
has in it anything of finality. Such concep- 
tions fling the horizon further back, expand the 
outlook, give august spaciousness to ideas con- 
cerning everything near, because it is seen as 
intimately related to that which is infinite 
and distant. 


Il. Conduct: The splendor of the moral. 

Such conceptions issue in conduct conformed 
to a splendid standard of morality, that of con- 
formity to the will of that God who is the Cre- 


60 ‘THE NEED 


ator and supreme Governor of the universe. 
The expression of that conformity to the will of 
God, according to Bible teaching, is that of do- 
ing good to other men. 

While these matters are condensed into brief 
sentences they ought to be treated as of su- 
preme importance. To speak of doing good 
to other men does not mean, according to Bible 
teaching, that men should refrain from doing 
to others what they do not desire others should 
do to them. That is a merely negative and 
selfish morality which is pagan. The ultimate 
expression of responsibility in the Bible is con- 
tained in the words of our Lord, which we now 
describe as the golden rule, “ Whatsoever ye 
would that men should do unto you, even so do 
ye also unto them.” That is positive and self- 
sacrificing. It is often asserted that this golden 
rule had already been given to men by other 
teachers; but any comparison of the sayings 
which are quoted in proof of this assertion will 
show that they are all infinitely removed from 
the ethic of Jesus in the way we have indi- 
cated. Morality, then, according to the Bible, 


THE NEED 61 


is, as to its standard, the will of God, and as to 
its expression, truth and love towards our 
neighbor. Such morality influences conduct in 
business, in pleasure, and in friendships. The 
morality of the Bible is always linked to a 
spiritual conception. There is a great deal of 
morality which leaves the spiritual element out 
of count; but it is weak, anemic, and useless 
for the making of a mighty nation. “ Happy 
is the nation whose God is the Lord,” because 
wherever spiritual conceptions constitute the 
inspiration of conduct the conduct resulting is 
characterized by a splendid morality. 


Ill. Character: The strength of the unself- 
ash. 

The character of a nation whose conduct is 
that of a morality based upon spiritual concep- 
tions is always that of unselfishness. Unself- 
ishness is that submissiveness of tone and tem- 
per, resulting from subjection to the throne of 
God, and His sovereignty, which expresses it- 
self in the service of other men. All the graces 
and virtues which we admire in our own nation 


62 ‘THE NEED 


and in the individuals which compose it, 
whether they be kings, princes, lords, or com- 
moners, the graces and virtues which even, 
what we speak of as, the secular press speaks of 
with admiration, are graces which result from 
the fact that this nation has an open Bible, and 
in its deepest heart believes in God. So surely 
as we lose that open Bible, we shall lose this 
spiritual conception, this conduct of high and 
true morality, and this character which is great 
and strong by reason of its unselfishness. 

All of which explains my conviction of the 
supreme importance in the life of a nation of 
the maintenance of the teaching of the Word 
of God. 


B. As To THE CHURCH 

The Divine Library is supremely the litera- 
ture of the Church, and supplies revelation, the 
doctrines of the faith ; interpretation, the laws 
of life; and inspiration, the charter of service. 
The matters of supreme importance to the life 
of the Church are those of its faith, its life, and 
its service; and this constitutes the true order 


THE NEED 63 


of statement because it is the order of experi- 
ence. 


I. Revelation: The doctrines of the faith. 

These are found in the Bible and are of fun- 
damental importance. I once heard Dr. Ly- 
man Abbott declare to a company of theo- 
logical students that it was important to 
distinguish between theology and religion; 
that religion is the life of God in the soul of a 
man, and that theology is what a man thinks 
about God. He went on to declare that the 
supreme matter is religion, and that what a 
man thinks about God is not of any great im- 
portance. While I am prepared to accept his 
distinctions, and agree as to the importance of 
making them, I do not accept the deduction. 
I believe that religion is the outcome of theol- 
ogy. In this application it is true that asa 
man “reckoneth within himself, so is he.” 

What, then, are the doctrines of the faith 
which the Bible presents? As I am now deal- 
ing with what I hold to be the need of the 
teaching of the English Bible within the 


64 ' THE NEED 


Church, I may summarize the doctrines of the 
New Testament as being those which present 
the Lord Jesus Christ, Son of God and Son of 
man, first as Revealer, secondly as Redeemer, 
and finally as Ruler. These are the central 
doctrines of the Bible; the hopes, aspirations, 
and expectations of the Old Testament; the 
certainties, realizations, and dynamic of the 
New. 

Christ is the Revealer, and it is important 
that we do not treat that as a narrow concep- 
tion. He is directly the Revealer of God and 
of man, and indirectly, but none the less cer- 
tainly, the Revealer of the devil. He reveals 
God, so that the conception of God within the 
Christian Church is the result of what Christ 
was in Himself. He reveals man, so that our 
ideal of the possibility of humanity we owe en- 
tirely to what He was in His humanity. He 
reveals the devil by bringing him into the clear 
light of His own triumph over him, so that 
with the apostle we are able to say “We are 
not ignorant of his devices.” 

Christ is the Redeemer. He not only reveals 


THE NEED 65 


God to man, He makes it possible for man to 
return to Him. He not only reveals to man 
the possibility of his manhood, He makes it 
possible for him to be what he ought to be, 
what it was meant he should be in the 
economy of God. He not only reveals the 
devil to man, He leads man in the conflict 
against the devil, wherein he becomes more 
than conqueror through Him who loved him. 

Christ is the Ruler. Having revealed and 
redeemed, He becomes the one Lord and 
Master of those who accept the grace of His 
redemption, and return to the government of 
God. 

Of course it is at once recognized how con- 
densed a statement this is, no reference being 
made to what the Bible teaches as to the 
nature of the revelation, as to the method of 
the redemption, or as to the programme of the 
Ruler. I have simply attempted to gather into 
three of the briefest words the essential facts 
of the faith—those, namely, that Christ is 
Revealer, Redeemer, and Ruler. If these 
doctrines are not named, they are all implied. 


66 _ THE NEED 


The implication of Christ as Revealer is the 
fact of the Incarnation. The implication of 
Christ as Redeemer is the fact of His Atone- 
ment. The implication of Christ as Ruler is 
the fact of His Resurrection. In every case 
these implications must be taken into account 
when we ponder the revelation of the Bible 
which constitutes the faith of the Church. 


Il. Interpretation: The laws of life. 

Having thus enunciated the doctrines of 
the faith, the Divine Library interprets the 
value of that faith as the inspiration of works. 
We cannot do better in attempting to sum- 
marize these laws of life than make use of the 
inclusive, exhaustive words of Paul in his 
letter to Titus, when he declared that the 
grace of God having brought salvation to all 
men, we should live righteously, soberly, and 
godly (Titus ii. 11,12). In these three words 
every relationship of life is included. “So- 
berly” has to do with the world within, all the 
hidden fact of personality under control, 
balanced, poised, strong ; no longer swept by 


THE NEED 67 


passion, but mastered by principle. “ Right- 
eously ” has to do with the world around, the 
attitude of the Christian towards all other 
human beings; and the context is illuminative 
as it deals with the old men, young men, old 
women, young women, and servants, while 
other writings deal with other relationships 
such as those of husband and wife, parent and 
child, and masters; the whole of which are 
summarized by suggestion in the word “ right- 
eously.” “Godly” has to do with the world 
above and beyond, the facts and forces of the 
spiritual universe. Thus the laws of life are 
those which demand, as to my own life, that I 
live soberly ; as to the world of men with 
whom I come in contact, that I live right- 
eously ; as to the world of spiritual forces, that 
I live godly. 


Ill. Inspiration: The charter of service. 

The final value of the Scriptures to the 
Church is that they provide her charter of 
service. With regard to this I need only 
briefly summarize by saying that the Bible 


68 . THE NEED 


teaches that the purpose of her service is the 
establishment of the Kingdom of God; the 
programme of her service is obedience to the 
commissions of the Son; and the power of her 
service is the indwelling of the Spirit. 

The importance of the Bible to the Christian 
Church if these things be true cannot be over- 
stated. If here we have a literature contain- 
ing the doctrines of the faith, the interpreta- 
tion of that faith in the terms of the laws of 
life, and the charter of service which results 
from acceptation of the faith, and obedience to 
the laws, can there be anything of greater im- 
portance than that we should study this litera- 
ture in order to understand our faith, to know 
the laws of our life, and yield ourselves to 
service ? 


C. Tut INTERRELATION 
The interrelation between the need for the 
Bible as to the nation and as to the Church is 
of supreme importance. The final value of 
Bible teaching within the Church is that it is 
only as the Church knows this Word of God 


THE NEED 69 


and proclaims it to the nation in life and 
service that the influence of the Bible can be 
exerted in the life of the nation. It is not 
merely by teaching the contents of the Bible 
to the nation as such that we can supply its 
conception, inspire its conduct, or create its 
character. It is only as the Bible is supplied 
to the nation through the witness-bearing of 
the Church, incarnating its teaching, that the 
nation profits thereby. The fact of this inter- 
relation therefore creates the responsibility of 
the Church, and that may be indicated by 
three words, namely, Vindication, Illustration, 
Thitiation. 


I. Vindication by realization. 

The conception of the supremacy of spiritual 
things is vindicated in the life of the nation in 
the measure in which the Church realizes the 
doctrines of faith. Of course, I use the word 
“realize” at this point in the sense of making 
real, not in the sense of comprehension merely. 
A Church composed of those who know God, 
are made nigh to Him by redemption, and 


70 _ THE NEED 


under the rule of their Lord and Master live in 
constant obedience to His Kingship, is the 
Church which compels conviction in the life of 
the nation of the reality of spiritual forces. 


Il. Lllustration by manzfestation. 

This word touches the realm of conduct, and 
of course the conduct is that which results from 
the spiritual conception, and is true to those 
standards of morality which the Head of the 
Church enunciated and illustrated in His own 
teaching and life ; the supremacy of the will of 
God, and the necessity for love and truth in all 
human interrelationships. The splendor of 
the moral ideal can only be illustrated in the 
life of the nation by the Church, as she mani- 
fests the life governed by these standards, 


III. Initiation by communication. 

If the word “communication” in this con- 
nection is a somewhat startling one, I neverthe- 
less use it of set purpose and most carefully. 
The unselfish character must be communicated 
to the nation by the Church, as she is obedient 


THE NEED 71 


to her charter of service, making the Kingdom 
of God her perpetual passion, the commissions 
of the Son her sufficient programme, and the 
indwelling of the Holy Spirit her perpetual 
power; she thus initiates in national life the 
movements which tend to the creation of the 
unselfish character; and she communicates a 
virtue which compels national conformity to 
that character of unselfishness which is the 
character of abiding strength. 

On the chart giving the outline of the scheme 
of this lecture I have attempted to indicate the 
connection between the different parts of this 
revelation of the need for the teaching of the 
English Bible. The spiritual conception in the 
nation is related to the faith of the Church by 
the Church’s vindication of the faith by realiza- 
tion. The conduct of the nation is related to 
the laws of life within the Church by the 
Church’s interpretation of those laws by mani- 
festation. The unselfish character of the nation 
is related to the charter of the Church’s service 
by the initiation through communication. The 
Bible must be taught in the Church, in order 


72 . THE NEED 


that it may be taught in the nation ; and the 
interrelation between these two things I have 
tried to illustrate by this simple diagram. 

The Bible is the Word of God, that is, it is the 
truth formen. Take the Bible from the Church 
and what happens? The Church is the pillar 
and ground of the truth, and if it lose the Bible 
it becomes a lamp without a light, a pedestal 
without a figure. By such loss the Church is 
of no use to the nation. 

On the other hand, give the Bible to the 
Church, let the Church know the Bible and love 
the Bible, then it will be a light anda revelation, 
and so will be able to fulfill its true function in 
the national life, and by such fulfillment the 
nation will be constrained towards spiritual 
conceptions, moral conduct, and unselfish char- 
acter. 

I have deliberately chosen not to speak in 
this lecture of the immediate evidences of the 
need. In conclusion, I may touch in a few 
brief words thereupon. There is an immediate 
need for the teaching of the Bible within the 
Church, first because of its long-continued 


THE NEED 73 


neglect, and secondly, because of the present 
urgent enquiry. Of course, there is a sense in 
which it is true that the Bible has not been 
neglected. It is found in all the churches of 
the Christian faith, and in all the homes of 
Christian people ; and it has been read both in the 
church and at home in certain ways ; but if we 
submit any ordinary congregation of professing 
Christian people to a simple examination as to 
the content of the Bible we are almost appalled 
at the ignorance manifested. On the other 
hand, the hour is supremely characterized by a 
spirit of enquiry, and of earnest desire to know 
what the Bible teaches. It is my profound 
conviction that wherever men and women are 
raised up to teach the Bible they will find the 
people of God eager to hear and to learn. 

It is a question whether there was ever 
graver need than now in the national life for 
the teaching of the Word of God. The con- 
ceptions that underlie our policies are on the 
whole far from noble. There is much of 
animalism and of mammon contaminating our 
thinking ; and the moralities in which we are 


74 ’ THE NEED 


very much inclined to make our boast are after 
all lowered moralities; and there is in large 
measure forgetfulness, if not denial, of spiritual 
inspirations which alone create great morality. 
As ‘a nation we are not governed by unselfish- 
ness of character, but by an appalling and 
narrow selfishness. It is my personal con- 
viction that the only cure for the things 
which threaten us as a nation is a new crusade 
of teaching and preaching the Word of God. 
That the Church may return to a study of that 
Word which shall issue in the incarnation of 
its teaching in order to the salvation of the 
nation is the one dominant need of the hour. 


IV 
THE METHOD 









A, AS TO THE TEACHER. B, AS TO THE TEACHING. 


I, The Preparation. I, The Students, 


i, Work. i, Essentials, 
i, Live. Ignorance and Intel- 
ligence. 
ii, Adaptation, 
Grading. 
II. The Purpose. II, The System. 
i, Essential. i. Occasions. 
Spiritual Results, Existing Organiza- 
ii, Processional, tions. 
Knowledge. ii. Apparatus. 
Obedience, Eargate and Eye- 


gate. 


III. The Process. III, The Scheme, 
i. Persistence. 5 i, Extensive, 
ii, Patience. | ii. Intensive. 





F it be accepted that the supreme responsi- 
bility of the Christian Church is that of the 
knowledge and incarnation of the truth of the 
Bible, in order that it may be proclaimed to 


the world, it will at once be recognized that 
75 


76 THE METHOD 


the subject of her equipment for the fulfillment 
of this purpose is of the utmost importance. 
In considering the subject, therefore, of the 
method of the teaching of the English Bible 
we shall confine our attention to the true 
method as within the Church of God. 

I do not mean to suggest that our teaching 
of the Bible will be confined exclusively to 
Christian people; but I am dealing with the 
method of the teaching of the Bible within the 
atmosphere of the Church, on Church premises, 
and in connection with the regular work of the 
Church. 

Mr. D. L. Moody once said, “The Christian 
is the world’s Bible, and very often a revised 
version is needed.” TI believe the whole of that 
statement to be true, but for the moment am 
particularly interested in the first part of it. 
The great truths of the Bible can only be 
communicated to the nation and to the world 
through the Church of God; but it cannot 
be too often repeated, and furthermore it must 
be remembered, that this communication of 
Bible truth to the world by the Church cannot 


THE METHOD 17 


be accomplished merely by proclamation. 
There must be a manifestation through the 
lives of those who constitute the Church, who, 
according to the prayer of the Divine Lord 
and Master, are sanctified through the truth. 
To leave these fundamental considerations out 
of any discussion of method in teaching would 
be to neglect a most important factor therein. 

A glance at the diagram will reveal the 
outline of our subject. We shall deal with 
the subject of method first as to the teacher 
and, secondly, as to the teaching. 


A. As TO THE TEACHER 

I. The preparation. 

It is inevitable that when we deal with the 
subject of method we commence with the 
teacher; and the first matter of importance 
is that there should be adequate preparation 
for the work. In order to preparation two 
things are necessary, which may be briefly 
expressed in the words “ work” and “live.” 

As to the first, let me state in the briefest 
manner possible what I want to impress upon 


78 . THE METHOD 


the mind of those who are contemplating Bible 
teaching, by declaring that the Bible never 
yields itself to indolence. Of all literature 
none demands more diligent application than 
that of the Divine Library. To that statement 
let me hasten to add another. The Bible yields 
its treasures to honest toil more readily than 
does any other serious literature. No one can 
be a teacher of this Book who treats it with 
scant intellectual application and respect; but, 
on the other hand, those who devote to it 
earnest work according to their opportunity 
may become teachers in the best sense of the 
word. 

Limitations which are fixed within the 
government of God are no barrier to prepara- 
tion for teaching; but limitations which are 
created by the indolence of men constitute a 
‘barrier insurmountable. 

I draw special’ attention to this fact because 
I am so often asked, “ What method would 
you advise for a person who has very little 
time for study?” If a person has honestly 
very little time, but uses that time with all 


’ THE METHOD 79 


application, earnestness, and diligence, God 
will make up to such an one in ways which 
will be full of surprise. Only let none expect 
this Divine help unless there be honest and 
full use of whatever time or opportunity may 
be available. 

To ministers and students preparing for the 
ministry I most definitely say that it is im- 
possible to be teachers of the Word apart from 
hard, honest, and continuous sweat of brain in 
the sacred business of studying the Bible. No 
man can truly teach it who picks it up and 
reads it casually, and then, when some isolated 
passage has impressed him, lays it aside while 
he attempts to find on his bookshelves things 
which other men have said concerning the 
passage which has appealed to him. That is 
not study of the Bible, and it cannot issue in 
teaching of the Bible. 

On the other hand, those occupied in busi- 
ness, whose hours are few and precious, but 
who make full use of those hours to the utmost 
of their ability, may expect and assuredly will 
find that God will give them such clear in- 


80 . THE METHOD 


sight into the meaning of His Word, and such 
wonderful unveilings of its hidden glories, that 
they will be growingly amazed ; for this Book 
is not as other books, as there is ever super- 
added to that wonderful and mystic quality of 
its own inspiration, an inspiration within the one 
who is earnestly devoted to the work of dis- 
covering its meaning. The human side of the 
literature may be appreciated and studied by 
the unaided intellect of man; but the Divine 
element, that which constitutes it, inspired lit- 
erature, demands that the student shall be in- 
spired, and this inspiration is given only to 
those who dedicate their best strength to the 
work of studying the writings. 

The work of preparation involves familiarity 
with the familiar things, accompanied by deter- 
mination to become familiar with the familiar 
things. Does that sound like a paradox? 
Think of it. There are some things with which 
we are so familiar that we do not know them. 
We know them by rote; we know them by 
hearsay ; we know them by the habit of con- 
tinuously repeating them; but some of these 


THE METHOD 81 


most familiar things we do not know, never 
having come to a true apprehension of their 
significance. It is important, therefore, that 
we begin on the simplest level with the deter- 
mination to give attention to those fundamental 
matters with which we dealt in our first lec- 
ture, and to make ourselves intelligent possess- 
ors of them for all time. 

Let the Bible teacher make use of all avail- 
able means to help him in his study of the 
Bible. When I earnestly plead for the reading 
of the Bible itself, I am sometimes asked, “ Do 
you suggest that a man should burn all the 
books he has about the Bible?” or, “ Do you 
say that a man should never procure any book 
about the Bible?” Certainly I mean nothing 
of the kind, and earnestly advise whomsoever 
may contemplate the work of teaching to secure 
every available aid. 

To young people I would, however, say, 
even if you have the means, do not buy a li- 
brary of expository works. Build up your own 
library one book at a time, according to that 
particular portion of the Bible which you are 


82 . THE METHOD 


studying. Select and choose, under the advice 
of those in whom you have most confidence, the 
books you require; and buying and studying 
them one at a time, you will presently find that 
you have gathered around you familiar friends 
in your books. Such a collection constitutes a 
true library. It is quite true that you can buy 
at cheap and reduced rates whole series of com- 
mentaries, but the probability is that if you do 
so the majority of them will never help you; 
but the books which you gather one by one will 
certainly be those of greatest value to you 
throughout the whole course of your ministry 
of teaching. 

The second word indicating the true method 
of preparation is the word “live.” Ifit be true 
that the Bible never yields itself to indolence, it 
is equally true that it never yields itself to dis- 
obedience ; and also that it does yield up its se- 
crets growingly to honest obedience. 

There never can be weight and point and 
power in teaching unless the mystic and spirit- 
ual truths which have come to us as the result 
of our study are obeyed. 


THE METHOD 83 


And in this connection let me say that there 
never can be the study of any part of the Di- 
vine Library, but that there will come from 
such study some definite and direct appeal. 

The Divine Library is a revelation, and a 
revelation means light, and light means an un- 
veiling of the things of darkness, accompanied 
by a demand that they should be put away. 

We cannot study the story of the men of the 
past, with its account of earnest purpose and 
constant conflict in the struggle after the high 
and noble in the mere twilight of revelation, 
and with its revelation of the principle of faith 
that made them strong and courageous, with- 
out being conscious of the lure of that life. 
When that consciousness is felt, there must be 
not merely the intellectual apprehension of the 
truth, but the answer of the will thereto. 
Where we fail in this respect, the Bible immedi- 
ately becomes a sealed book. 

It is impossible to read the stories of the past 
without discovering the reason of the failure of 
certain men ; and that quality of the revelation 
is in itself a flaming light of warning falling 


84 THE METHOD 


upon our own lives; but if we persist in the 
things against which we are warned, the Bible 
becomes a sealed book, and we can neither 
know it, nor teach it. 

This is a mystic quality constituting a differ- 
ence between the Bible and all other literature. 
I may study Shakespeare, and the tragedy of 
“Macbeth” breaking in upon my soul, I may 
see the awfulness of sin, and yet may fall a prey 
to the same sin without losing my ability to 
take up another of the writings of Shakespeare, 
and to understand its teaching. But if I read 
the story of wrong in the Bible, and do not 
yield to the teaching conveyed thereby, I can- 
not take up another part of the Bible and un- 
derstand it on its highest spiritual level. 

I am sometimes asked if I do not think that 
what is known as Higher Criticism has hin- 
dered people from reading the Bible. Well, 
that may be so; but I am quite convinced that 
people have far more often been hindered by 
their own disobedience to the Bible, because by 
such disobedience the eye becomes dim and the 
ear dull. 


THE METHOD 85 


All that is supremely true in the case of the 
teacher. We, who in preparation for teaching 
must necessarily deal with the technicalities, 
will become sounding brass, tinkling cymbals, 
the click of the machinery forever discover- 
able in our very method, save as our teaching 
is rendered powerful by conformity of life to 
the claim which the Bible sets up thereupon. 
There is nothing more disastrous than to traffic 
with the letter of Scripture while we disobey 
its spirit. By such action we become such as 
having eyes, see not; having ears, hear not; 
and therefore are unable to communicate to 
others the virtue and glory of the revelation of 
God. 

These are solemn words, but full of impor- 
tance. The Bible teacher must remember that 
the twofold preparation necessary is that of 
hard work and consistent life. 


Il. The purpose. 

The teacher of the Bible must ever have in 
mind the twofold purpose of the work, what I 
may describe as the essential and the processional. 


86 THE METHOD 


As to the essential, I take it for granted that 
we accept the preliminary considerations that 
the Bible is religious, that it is dual, triple, 
multiple, and unified. I take it for granted, 
moreover, that we have not only accepted these 
things, but have come to the conclusion that 
the unified message of the Bible is a full and 
final revelation to men, for the purposes of the 
present life, concerning spiritual things. Con- 
sequently we are face to face in Bible literature 
with the deepest values of human life. 

It is a literature with a purpose, and that pur- 
pose is spiritual. It is a literature intended to 
bring men into the knowledge of God, and into 
direct dealing with God. It is a literature in- 
tended to teach men what God is, what man is, 
and what the interrelationships between God 
and men are. It is a literature intended to set 
sin in its right light, that men may shun it; 
and to reveal to men all the high and the noble 
things of their essential spiritual nature. 

We must remember, therefore, whenever we 
teach, that the ultimate purpose of our teach- 
ing is not the illumination of the intellect ; is 


THE METHOD 87 


not the moving of the emotion; but is the 
bringing of the lives of the people who hear, 
and understand, into right relationship with 
eternal things. 

That is why no man can teach the Bible un- 
less he himself be a spiritual man. That is 
why—let me say it almost with bated breath, 
and yet with strong conviction—I object to the 
teaching of the English Bible in State schools 
by teachers about whose spiritual life I am not 
sure, and into the condition of which I have no 
right to investigate. I believe in the Bible be- 
ing read in the schools of the nation; but I 
hold that it should be read without note or 
comment, because we cannot investigate, and 
we ought not to investigate, as to the spir- 
itual character or religious convictions of the 
teachers in State schools. We are in constant 
peril when we ask men to teach or interpret 
the Bible, save as they are called and prepared 
by God for that sacred and solemn work. 

The processional purpose must also be recog- 
nized. In teaching the Bible our first business 
is to impart knowledge, to make others see, to 


88 THE METHOD 


be perfectly sure that the people we are teach- 
ing understand—whether there be a multitude 
or half a dozen matters nothing. That is teach- 
ing. 

In teaching we must be prepared to sacrifice 
many things held in high esteem, such as dig- 
nity of deportment and beauty of style. I am 
convinced that in order to teach the Bible we 
must be free from slavery to a perfected style, 
and I am absolutely certain we must be eman- 
cipated from the bondage of dignity. The 
business of the teacher is to teach, and that 
means that his supreme anxiety must be that of 
enabling those whom he is teaching to see the 
things he sees. 

I am not undervaluing beauty of style or 
dignity of deportment, but I do desire to make 
it perfectly clear that in the teaching of the 
Bible these are secondary things, the frame 
rather than the picture, and I would rather 
sacrifice the frame to the picture than the pic- 
ture to the frame. 

Then, again, processionally our purpose must 
be that of leading those whom we teach to 


THE METHOD 89 


obedience. Whether they are pleased or 
pained by the truth presented is always a 
secondary matter, or, rather, it ought to have 
no place in our consideration. Moreover, the 
supreme matter is not the theory, but the 
practice which grows out of the theory, and 
our work as Bible teachers is never completed. 
when we have merely instructed the intelli- 
gence or moved the emotion. There must be 
superadded to these, that note of appeal, which 
was always found in the prophetic utterances 
of the old economy, and is persistent in the 
apostolic teaching of the new. 


Ill. The process. 

Finally, the teacher of the Bible must follow 
a twofold process, which may again be de- 
scribed by two words—“ persistence” and 
“patience.” 

By persistence I mean constant repetition. 
It was Dr. Dale, of Birmingham, who once 
told a meeting of ministers that they might 
expect people to understand what they meant 
when they had repeated it ten times. Person- 


90 THE METHOD 


ally, I am not sure that ten times is enough 
for the average man. When I began the work 
of more definitely teaching the Bible the thing 
that troubled me was that in teaching it was 
necessary to repeat, and perhaps there is no 
phantom that fills the soul. of the young 
preacher with more horror than that of repeat- 
ing himself, and that may be a perfectly 
healthy fear; but he need have no fear of re- 
peating the Word of God. In this connection 
the words of Paul have been to me a source of 
great comfort—“ To write the same things to 
you, to me indeed is not irksome; but for you 
it is safe.” That is the doctrine of repetition, 
and that is what I mean when I speak of per- 
sistence. 

But it is absolutely necessary that we under- 
stand that persistence involves patience. Do 
not let any Bible teacher expect too much at 
first from his students. Let him remember the 
slowness of his own apprehension, and by the 
memory be made patient with the slowness of 
those whom he is teaching. I was recently 
asked if I did not consider that it was time 


THE METHOD 91 


. that I should cease work at Westminster, be- 
cause people who had been attending the Bible 
School for six years ought now to be fully in- 
structed as to the general content of Bible 
books. I very much doubt whether those who 
have attended through the whole period can be 
considered as fully instructed, both on account of 
the imperfection of the teaching, and the slow- 
ness with which men apprehend great themes. 

Finally, strengthen your persistence and 
your patience by remembering that the Bible 
teacher cannot and ought not to do everything. 
Leave something for the student to do. Be 
content to leave your theme unfinished ; for the 
true system of education is not that of cram- 
ming, but that of suggesting, so that the mind 
may act for itself and, proceeding along the 
line indicated, grasp the larger meaning and 
the final truth. 


B. As TO THE TEACHING 
I. The students. 
In actual teaching the matter of first impor- 
tance is that of the students, and it is of 


92 THE METHOD 


supreme importance that the teacher should 
remember two things concerning them, which 
we may describe as: essential facts, and the 
need for adaptation. 

As to the essentials, they are those of their 
ignorance and intelligence. The teacher of the 
Bible must remember that nothing must be 
taken for granted as to the knowledge of the 
students, and that their capacity for knowledge 
must be taken for granted in every case. I 
think teachers often make mistakes along each 
of these lines. They imagine. that people 
know simple things which they do not really 
know ; and, secondly, they imagine that people 
are not equal to grasping what they have to 
teach. We need to rid ourselves of these two 
false assumptions. We should face our stu- 
dents, taking nothing for granted, but deter- 
mined to be simple and elementary in order to 
reach the level of the most simple mind ; but at 
the same time believing that that simplest 
mind is capable of grasping the profoundest 
truth we are able to teach. Our business is 
to state the truth in the simplest way possible, 


THE METHOD 93 


but never to shrink from communicating what 
appeals to us as a profound truth, because we 
imagine that those whom we teach are not 
able to comprehend it. 

I was greatly impressed five-and-twenty 
years ago by reading advice which Mr. 
Spurgeon gave to young preachers, when he 
told them that having made a sermon which 
they considered to be above the average, they 
were not to save it because the next occasion 
on which they were to preach was not in their 
opinion a great occasion. He charged them to 
preach the best they had, whenever they stood 
up to face a congregation. That, I believe, is a 
principle of supreme importance. Then let us 
take nothing for granted, except the ignorance 
and intelligence of those whom we teach. 

In dealing with students it is of perpetual 
importance that there should be adaptation. 
To-day this is being emphasized in the work of 
our Sunday-schools by insistence upon the ne- 
cessity for grading the children. It is of equal 
importance, so far as it is possible under the 
more difficult circumstances of mixed congrega- 


94 THH METHOD 


tions, that the teacher should gauge the mental 
capacity of his audience, not as to the truth he 
has to teach, that he finds in his Bible, but as 
to the method by which he imparts the truth, 
as to the language he employs, as to the illus- 
trations he uses. 

It may be that the ability to do that is either 
the final acquirement or the specific gift of the 
true teacher. To be able to confront an audi- 
ence, and immediately to detect the general 
level of its ability to follow, and to be able 
therefore to adapt oneself in the use of lan- 
guage and illustration, so as to convey essential 
truth to that audience, is the supreme quality 
of great teaching. To be able to speak the 
same truth here, with illustrations which would 
not be understood there ; and there, to declare 
. the truth in a way which would not be appre- 
hended here; the truth always the same, but 
the method differing—that gift, I am inclined 
to think, cannot be imparted by any school of 
pedagogy, but it can be imparted by the Spirit 
of God ; and we may pray that in that way we 
may be made apt to teach. I am convinced 


THE METHOD 95 


that persons who seem to lack that ability can 
receive it in wonderful fashion by the prepara- 
tion of the Spirit of God. 


II. The system. 

When in dealing with the teaching of the 
Bible we turn from the students to the system 
we are compelled to become more than ever 
technical, and therefore we may deal with the 
subject in the briefest way possible. There are 
again two things to be borne in mind—occa- 
sions and apparatus. 

As to occasions, I am often asked by my 
brethren in the ministry, “Where shall we 
adopt these methods of Bible teaching?” I 
would reply to all such enquiry, that the first 
thing is to capture existing organizations for 
Bible teaching. Let us see to it first of all that 
our Sunday-schools are Bible schools, and if 
the International Lesson system is calculated 
to help you, use it, and if not, abandon it. 
Especially would I emphasize the importance 
of real Bible study among the elder scholars in 
our schools, those which under the new organi- 


96 THE METHOD 


zation are gathered into the Institute depart- 
ment. Do not let us make the mistake of im- 
agining that the Bible will not interest them. 
Nothing has been more definitely vindicated in 
my own experience than the fact that our 
young people are supremely interested in sys- 
tematic teaching of the Scriptures. To-day 
the most attractive thing in our work among 
young people, judged by their attendance, is 
not the recreation section, is not the intellec- 
tual section, of great importance as we hold 
these both to be, but it is the study of the 
Bible carefully and systematically, under 
trained teachers, in separate classes on Sunday 
afternoons. 

I repeat that in order to teach the Bible in 
the life of our Church we need to capture the 
existing organizations. If I could have my 
way, I would make it a rule that the week- 
night service should be everywhere turned into 
a Bible school, where the Bible is taught pa- 
tiently, persistently, and consecutively. 

As to the apparatus, let me cover the whole 
ground by saying that in Bunyan’s allegory of 


THE METHOD 97 


the capture of Mansoul he has revealed a mat- 
ter of supreme importance by his emphasis 
upon the fact that eyegate is of equal value 
with eargate in gaining access to the central 
citadel of personality. In our teaching let us 
make use of diagrams and charts, and black- 
boards, and anything else which will give those 
whom we desire to teach the opportunity of the 
vision as well as the voice, and thus lead them 
to an apprehension of the truths of the Bible. 

I pass over this question of apparatus quite 
briefly because teachers must make use of 
whatever aids will be of most service to them 
in the doing of their work. 


Ill. The scheme. 

The final matter as to teaching is that of the 
scheme, and the ground may be covered by 
saying that the scheme of Bible teaching should 
be extensive and intensive. 

The extensive is always the first method. If 
I desired to teach a child geography, I should 
first take it to the globe, and let it turn it about 
with its own fingers, while I showed land and 


98 THE METHOD 


water, and indicated facts suggested by the 
pictures, afterwards crystallizing them. into 
definitions. To begin with a book in which 
words such as “peninsula ” and “ isthmus” are 
printed, without allowing them to see Italy or 
Panama, is not to succeed in helping them to 
understand. Then, still with the globe before 
them, I would tell them stories of the countries. 
From that general impression I would pass to 
outline maps of separate countries, and thus 
gradually approach the intensive method of full 
maps and text-books. 

_ All which is a parable illustrative of the true 
method with the Bible. We must begin with 
extensive work, with broad outlines, with 
analyses. An analysis is the separation of a 
compound into its constituent parts. For in- 
stance: Water = Oxygen + Hydrogen. That 
is analysis. Synthesis is the uniting of elements 
into a compound. For instance: Hydrogen + 
Oxygen = Water. That is synthesis. Thus 
we go over the books in analysis, and say the 
Gospel of the King presents His Person, His 
Propaganda, His Passion. That is analysis. 


THE METHOD 99 


And again we say, the Person by His Prop- 
aganda and His Passion is King. That 
is synthesis. Those who have followed this 
method will find the value when they turn 
to intensive work, when they ponder the parts, 
and weigh the words, and are determined not to 
rest until they have found the deepest meaning. 

Let me close this lecture and this brief series 
by declaring that Bible teaching is the supreme 
work of the Christian ministry, and the supreme 
work of the Sunday-school teacher. Let 
Christian ministers and Sunday-school teachers 
devote themselves to this work, and the result 
will be the Bible known and lived by the 
Church of God; and that will mean purity and 
compassion, living and active, in the affairs of 
men. Only so will the nation receive that 
Word of God, without which its conceptions 
will be vulgar, its conduct debased, and its 
character degraded. 

So may we all, in the measure open to us, be 
teachers of the Word—hearers, doers, and 
teachers—helping thus to meet the need of the 
Church and the need of the world at large. 


Gee ag library 


SCHOOL OF TH LOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


) Rae gee 
Scalifornia 











Morgan, G. Campbell (George Campbel1) 
The study and teaching of the English B 


SS 


45. 
S Mor, George Campbell, 1863-1955. 
cs eats and teaching of the pecan carip os ew, 
. bell Morgan ... revis 
“ak onpstatied Se Renee ... New York, Chicago ,etc.; Flemi 
H. Revell company ,°1910, 


1 p. L, 7-08 p. 183. 


1. Bible—Study. 1. De Rusett, E. Dunscombe, ed. 


Library of Congress er 
053i Qs 


ccsC/ef 


ee en ae 
erent eat mers 
Sabena 


A a ee 





SS Sere Capers a saeeniamenee groan 
acne cet gry ce econ anaes mone aa 


