
n-. n. 









'i4rirfT'»p+ni,i ,1, 1 
. 'i-'.ililii 



:t>i.n 



'■"f^'.Mi.Mn 



iiMiii 



CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 




f2 




''^^ 



Cornell University 
Library 



The original of this book is in 
the Cornell University Library. 

There are no known copyright restrictions in 
the United States on the use of the text. 



http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101105090 



THE 

PULPIT COMMENTARY, 

EDITED BY THE 

VERY REV. H. D. M. SPENCE, D.D., 

DEAN OF GLOUCESTER; 

AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY THE 



<n^. AECHDEACON F. W. EAEEAE, D.D., P.E.S.—EIGHT EEV. H. COTTEEILL, D.D., F.E.£ 
— VEEY EEV. PEINCIPAL J. TULLOCH, D.D.— EEV. CANON G. EAWLINSON, MA. 
—EEV. A. PLUMMBB, M.A., D.D. 



FUKK & WAGNaLLS COMPANY 

Nkw York akp Toeonto, 



THE 



PULPIT COMMENTARY, 



EDlTF.n BY THB 



REY. CANON H. D. M. SPENCE, M.A., 

*HAB AND UDKAL DEAN Or BT. PAN0BA9, AND EXA3I1NIN0 CHAPLAIN TO THE lJ»fl» 
BISBOP or GLOCOESTOB AND BBISTOL ; 

AND BY THE 

REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL, M.A. 



ST. MAEK. 

Clxposttfon 
By very REY. E. BICKERSTEia D.U., 

DEAN 07 LIOUrmLD. 

l^omilEttts 
Bt rev. prof. J. R. THOMSON, M.^.. 

^oiniltES bg Fartous ^utftors. 

BKV A. ROWLAND, B.A, LL.B. REV. PROF. J. J. GIVEN, M.A. 

BEV A. F. MUIR, M.A. REV. PROF. E. JOHNSON, ALA 

EEV. E. GREEN. 

VOL. IL 



PUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
New Yoek and Toronto, 



THE 



GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER IX. 



Ver. I. — Till they see the kingdom of Ood 
<:ome with power. In St. Matthew (xri. 28) 
the words ran thus: " Till thej see the Son 
of man coming in his kingdom." In St. 
Luke (ix. 27), " TUl they see the kingdom of 
God." All these evangelists connect their 
record of the Transfiguration with these pre- 
dictive words — a circumstance which must 
not be lost sight of in their interpretation. 
The question, therefore, is whether or how 
far the Transfiguration is to be regarded 
as a fulfilment of these words. One thing 
seems plain, that the Transfiguration, if a 
fulfilment at all, was not an exhaustive ful- 
filment of the words. The solemnity of their 
introduction forbids us to limit them to an 
eveut which would happen within eight 
days of their utterance. But there was an 
event impending, namely, the destruction of 
Jerusalem, involving the overthrow of the 
Jewish polity, which, coming as it did within 
forty or fifty years of the time when our 
Lord uttered these words, might reasonably 
have been expected to take place within the 
lifetime of some of those then standing 
there. And that great catastrophe was fre- 
quently alluded to by our Lord as a type 
and earnest of the great judgment at the 
end of the world. What relation, then, did 
the Transfiguration hold to these two events 
and to the prediction contained in this verse? 
It was surely a prelude and pledge of what 
should be hereafter, specially designed to 
brace and strengthen the apostles for the 
light of the sufferings of their Master, and 
to animate them to endure the toil and the 
trials of the Christian life. So that the 
Transfiguration was an event, so to speak, 
parenthetic to this prediction — a preliminary 
Bianifestation, fbr the special advantage of 

UASX. — n. 



those who witnessed tt ; tbo^h glrea also 
" for our admonition, upon whom the ends of 
the world are come." Such were the viewi 
of St. Hilary, St. Chrysostom, St. Ambrosei, 
and others. "When our Lord was trans- 
figured," says St. Jerome, " he did not lose 
his form and aspect, but he appeared to his 
apostles as he will appear at the day of judg- 
ment." And elsewhere he says, " Go forth 
a little out of your prison, and place before 
your eyes the reward of your present labour, 
which ' the eye hath not seen, nor the ear 
heard, neither hath it entered into the heart 
of man.' " 

Vers. 2, 3. — After six days. St. Luke (ix. 
28) says, "About eight days after these 
sayings." There is no real discrepancy here. 
There were six whole days that intervened 
between our Lord's words and the Trans- 
figuration itself. Jesus taketh with him 
Peter, and James, and John. He chose these 
three, as the leaders amongst the disciples, 
and he showed to them his glory, because he 
intended also to show them afterwards his 
bitter agony in the garden. This magnifi- 
cent splendour — this " excellent glory," as 
St. Peter (2 Bpist. i. 17) describes It— this, 
together with the voice of the Father," This 
is my beloved Son," would assure them that 
Christ was truly God, but that his essential 
Deity was hidden by the veil of the flesh ; 
and that, although he was about to be cruci- 
fied and slain, yet his Godhead could not 
suffer or die. It was an evidence beforehand, 
a prospective evidence, that he underwent 
death, even the death of the cross, not 
constrained by infirmity or necessity, but 
of his own will, for the redemption of man. 
It was plain that, since he could thus invest 
his body with this Divine glory, he could 
have saved himself from death if he had so 
willed. Ee taheth tuith him Peter, and /amee. 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK, [oh. ix. 1—50. 



and John. St. Peter's reference to the trans- 
figuration (just alluded to) shows what a 
deep and abiding impression it made on his 
mind. St. James, too, was there, as one who 
was to be amongst the first to die for his 
sake. St. John also was with them, who, 
having seen the glory of the Son of God, 
which is subject to no limits of time, might 
be buld to send forth his grand testimony, 
"In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was 
God." And bringeth them up into a high 
mountain apart by themselves. " It is 
necessary for all," says Remigius, "who 
desire to contemplate God, that they should 
aot grovel amidst low thoughts and desires, 
but ever be lifted up to heavenly things. 
And thus our Lord was teaching his disciples 
that they must not look for the brightness of 
the Divine glory in the depths of this world, 
but in the kingdom of heavenly blessedness. 
And he leads them apart, because holy men 
are in intention and desire separated from 
evil, as they will be altogether separated 
from it in the world to come. For they who 
look for the glories of the resurrection ought 
now in heart and mind to dwell on high, and 
to seek these glories by continual prayer." 
Into a high mountain. A tradition of the 
time of Jerome identifies this mountain with 
Tabor, in Galilee. But there are two weighty 
objections to this view : (1) that our Lord 
was at this time in the neighbourhood of 
Ctesarea Philippi, a considerable distance 
from Tabor, and (2) that there is strong 
reason for believing that Tabor had at this 
time a fortress on its summit. It must be 
remembered that Csesarea Philippi was at 
the foot of Libanus ; and the spurs of Libanus 
would present several eminences answering 
to the description, "a high mountain (Spoj 
^n^hv)." The Mount of Transfiguration was 
in all probability Hermon, a position of ex- 
treme grandeur and beauty, its snowy peaks 
overlooking the whole extent of Palestine. 
"High up," says Dean Stanley, "on its 
southern slopes there must be many a point 
where the disciples could be taken 'apart 
by themselves.' Even the transient com- 
parison of the celestial splendour with the 
snow, where alone it could be seen in Pales- 
tine, should not, perhaps, be wholly over- 
looked. At any rate, the remote heights 
above the sources of the Jordan witnessed 
the moment when, his work in his own pecu- 
liar sphere being ended, he set his face for 
the last time to go up iio Jerusalem." Al- 
though compelled to dismiss from our minds 
the old tradition of Tabor as the scene of the 
Transfiguration, we still think of that moun- 
tain as near to Nazareth, where our Lord 
was brought up ; and of Hormon, where he 
was transfigured, as we rejoice in the fulfil- 
ment of the old prophecy, " Tabor and Her- 



mon shall rejoice in thy Name." And he was 
transfigured (ficTf/uop^dJeij) before them. The 
fashion of his appearance was changed. It 
was no illusion, no imaginary appearance, 
but a real transformation. It was the Divine 
glory within him manifesting itself through 
his humanity; and yet not that glory of 
Deity which no man hath seen or ca-a see ; 
but such a manifestation that the disciples 
might in some degree behold the glory and 
majesty of Deity through the veil of hia 
flesh. Nor, we may believe, did our Lord in 
his transfiguration change the essence or 
form of his countenance. But he assumed a 
mighty splendour, so that, as St. Matthew 
(xvii. 2) tells us, " his face did shine as the 
sun." This splendour was not in the air, 
nor in the eyes of the disciples, but in the 
person of the Son of God— a splendour 
which communicated itself to his raiment, 
80 that his garments became glistering 
{(TtIkPovto), exceeding white ; so as no fuller 
on earth can whiten them. This figure is 
taken from natural things. The first idea 
of "fuller" from the Latin fullo, is that 
of one who cleanses by " stamping with the 
feet." His business is to restore the soiled 
cloth to its natural whiteness. The evan- 
gelist uses an earthly thing to represent the 
heavenly. The heavenly Fuller gives a 
purity and a brightness infinitely exceeding 
the power of any "fuller on earth." It 
would almost seem as if the figure was one 
specially supplied by St. Peter. 

Yer. 4, — And there appeared unto them 
Elijah with Moses. Moses and Elijah were 
there because Moses was the lawgiver of the 
old covenant, and Elijah was conspicuous 
among the prophets ; so that they were the 
representatives, the one of the Law, and the 
other of the " goodly fellowship of the pro- 
phets." They appear together to bear witness 
to Christ as the true Messiah, the Saviour of 
the world, prefigured in the Law, and fore- 
told by the prophets. They appear to bear 
witness to him, and then to resign their 
offices to the great Lawgiver and Prophet 
whom they foreshadowed. Then, further, 
Moses died, but Elijah was translated. 
Moses, therefore, represents the dead saints 
who shall rise from their graves and come 
forth at his coming, while Elijah represents 
those who shall be found alive at his advent. 
Our Lord brought with him, at his trans- 
figuration, Moses who had died, and Elijah 
who had been translated, that he might 
show his power over both " the quick and 
the dead." St. Luke (ix. 31) says that 
Moses and Elijah "appeared in glory, and 
spake of his decease (tj/k ^IoSov outoC) which 
he should accomplish at Jerusalem." They 
appeared in glory; the Divine E^Iendoul 
irradiated them. They "spake of hig 
decease," literally, hU departure—his dfi- 



OH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 



parture not only out of Jerusalem, but out 
of this life, by his death upon the cross. 
The death of Christ was thus shown to be 
the ultimate end to which the Law and the 
prophets pointed. Even in that hour of his 
glory, on the Mount of Transfiguration, this 
"!»» iheir theme; and thus the disciples 
wars nerved to look with hope and faith to 
that which they had contemplated with 



Ver. 5. — ^Peter answereth, and saith to 
Jesus. We learn from St. Luke (ix. 33) 
that this happened just as Moses and Elijah 
were departing. Peter was excited, and 
there was fear mingled with his excitement. 
He was bewildered. His first idea was to 
seek that they might remain, for he saw that 
they were just preparing to depart. Theo- 
phylact Bays upon this, "Do not say with 
Peter, ' It is good for us to be here ; ' for it 
behoves us ever, whilst in the flesh, to be 
advancing, and not to remain in one stage 
of virtue and contemplation, but to pass 
on to other degrees." It is, perhaps, too 
curious a question to ask how the three 
disciples knew them to be Moses and Elijah. 
The same Divine power which presented 
them with a vision of the other world gave 
them an intuitive knowledge on the subject. 
And we may, perhaps, infer from hence that 
in that world to come there will be not only 
recognition, but knowledge, at once imparted, 
of those whose faces we have not seen " in 
the flesh." St Luke (ix. 32) says that 
Peter and his companions " were heavy with 
sleep (;8f/3api)ju€Voi O'lry^j)." It is probable 
that the Transfiguration took place at night. 
The whole manifestation would be rendered 
more conspicuous and striking amidst the 
darkness and stillness of night. But St. 
Luke is careful to add, "when they were 
fully awake (Staypriyopiiaai'Tes)." This wonl 
might be rendered, "having remained 
awake." But whichever translation be 
adopted, the intention of the evangelist 
is evidently to show that it was not in a 
dream or a vision of the night that they saw 
this. It was a great reality, on which they 
looked with open eyes. 

Ver. 6. — They became sore afraid. There 
is a slight change of reading here. Instead 
of f<rav yhp ekipo^oi, the best authorities 
give eK<po$oLyiip iyhovTo. A sense of great 
awe and terror overpowered the bliss and 
brightness of the scene. All the revelatiuna 
of the other world strike terror, even though 
abated as this manifestation was by the 
presence of their dear Lord and Saviour. 

Ver. 7. — There came a cloud overshadow- 
ing them. The cloud enfolded them all, so 
that they could not be seen, it was so ample 
and dense, and yet lo bright and shining. 
St. Matthew (xvii. 5) says it was "a 
bright cloud." The cloud was a symbol of 



the grandeur and unapproachable glory of 
God. The disciples were admitted within 
this cloud that they might have a foretaste 
of future glory, and that they might be 
witnesses of what took place under the 
cloud, and especially that they might be 
able to give evidence throughout all ages of 
the voice which they heard come out of the 
cloud from "the excellent glory" (the 
expression is equivalent to the Hebrew 
^ Sheohinah," and St. Peter says (2 Epist. 
i. 18), it came from heaven). This is my 
beloved Son : hear ye him. But at the same 
time that this cloud was the symbol, it was 
also the veil of Deity, of the glory of Deity. 
" He maketh the clouds his chariot," says the 
psalmist (Ps. civ. 3). Moreover, the cloud 
abated and subdued the splendour of 
Christ's appearance, which otherwise the 
mortal eyes of the disciples cotUd not have 
borne. It will be observed that St. Mark 
omits the words, found in St. Matthew 
(xvii. 5)," in whom I am well pl.ased." So 
does St. Luke. But it is icmakahle that 
they are found in St. Peter (2 Ji;pi8t. i. 17) ; 
from whence we might ha e expected to 
find them here. In St. Luke (ix. 35) the 
most approved readings give, " This is my 
Son ny chosen (^K\e\67ueyos)." The words, 
I' my beloved Son," are impressed upon us 
in order that epithets so sweet and endearing 
might kindle our love and devotion. " Heaj 
ye him " — not Moses, who has now departed, 
but Christ himself, the new Author of a new 
Law. " Hear ye him " was not said when 
our Lord was baptized, because he was then 
only just proclaimed to the world. But now 
these words signify the abolition of the old 
dispensation, and the establishment of the 
new covenant in Christ. 

Ver. 8. — And suddenly looking round 
about, they saw no one any more, save Jesus 
only with themselves. St. Matthew here 
says (xvii. 6), " When the disciples heard 
it, they fell on their face, and were sore 
afraid. And Jesus came and touclied them, 
and said. Arise, and be not afraid." St. 
Mark omits this; but in his characteristid 
manner states that which implies what 
St. Matthew has recorded. It was the 
" touch " of Jesus that caused them to look 
round about ; and then in a moment they per- 
ceived that they were alone with Jesus, ag 
they were before tliis manifestation began. 
The order of incidents in the Transfiguration 
appears to have been this: Our Lord is 
praying. The disciples, fatigued with the 
ascent of the mountain, are heavy with 
sleep ; and Christ is transfigured. Then 
appear Moses and Elijah; and they are 
talking with Jesus about his exodus — his 
decease to be accomplished at Jerusalem. 
The disciples roused from their sleep by the 
supernatural brightness, and by the conver- 



THE GOSPEL AOCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. n- 1'«-60, 



Mtion, and now. fully awake, behold the 
glory of Jesus, an 1 Moses and Elijah talking 
with him. As Moses and Elijah are pre- 
paring for their departure, Peter, excited, 
enchanted, bewildered, and yet grieved to 
see that they were going, seeks to detain 
them by the proposal to make some tem- 
porary resting-place for them. Then comes 
the bright overshadowing cloud, and a voice 
out of the cloud, " Tliis is my beloved Son : 
hear ye him." At the sound of this voice 
the disciples fall terrified to the earth. But 
they are soon comforted by Christ, and, look- 
ing up, they see him alone with themselves. 

Ver. 9. —He charged them that they should 
tell no man what things they had seen, save 
when the Son of man should have risen again 
from the dead. They were not even to tell 
their fellow-disciples, lest it might cause 
vexation or envy tiiat they had not been thus 
favoured. The time of our Lord's resurrec- 
tion would be a fitting opportunity for 
revealing this mystery; and then the dis- 
ciples would underatend and believe it, 
when, after his passion and death, which 
were an offence to them, they t-hould see him 
rising in glory, of which event the Trans- 
figuration was a type. For, by tlie Eesur- 
n ction they would certainly know that 
Christ underwent the death of the cross, not 
by constraint, but of his own accord, and 
out of his great love for us. 

Vers. 10, 11.— Questioning among them- 
lelves what the rising again from the dead 
should mean; that is, his own rising from 
the dead, of which our Lord had just been 
speaking;. No doubt the general resurrec- 
tion at the end of the world was an article of 
fiiith with which the disciples were familiar. 
But they could not understand, when he 
spake of his own immediate rising from the 
dead. So their perplexities led tliem at 
last to ask him the question ; or rather to 
make the remark to him, The scribes say that 
Elijah must first come ; with a view to ob- 
taining some clearer understanding. They 
had just seen Elijah in the Transfiguration, 
and they had seen him disappear. They 
wondered why he should have departed. 
They thought, it may be, that he ought to 
have remained, that he might be the fore- 
runner of Christ Bud of his kingdom and 
glory, according to the prophecy of Malaohi 
(iv. 6). This the scribes taught ; but 
they erred in the confusion of times, for 
they did not distinguish the first coming of 
Christ in the flesh from his second advent 
to judgment. The thought upon the mind 
of the disciples appears to have been this : 
They Jieard Christ speak of his own resur- 
rection as close at hand, and they had seen 
the type of it in his transfiguration; and 
they thought that immediately after that, 
Chrisi^l kingdoaa would oome, and he would 



reiga gloriously. Why, then, had not Elijah 
remained, that he might be his precursor ! 
St. Matthew (xvii. 13) tells us that oui 
Lord's words which follow ihowed the dis- 
ciples that when he said that Elijah was to 
come first and restore all things, he meant 
them to understand " that he spake unto them 
of John the Baptist." Upon the question 
of a future coming of Elijah, it seems safest 
to confess our ignorance. The prophecy of 
Malachi was no doubt in part fulfilled in the 
coming of John the Baptist ; but it would 
be rash to a£Srm that it may not receive 
another and more literal fulfilment before 
the second advent. A host of ancient 
Christian expositors have held that Elijah 
will appear in person before the second 
advent of Christ. St. Augustine, in his 
'City of God' (XX. 29), says, "Not with- 
out reason do we hope that before the coming 
of our Judge and Saviour Elias will oome, 
because we liave good reason to believe that 
he is now alive ; for, as Holy Scripture dis- 
tinctly informs us, he was taken up from 
this life in a cliariot of fire. When, therefore, 
he is oome he shall give a spiritual explana- 
tion of the Law which the Jews at present 
understand carnally, and will tnrn the 
hearts of the fathers to the children, and the 
children to the fathers ; that is, the Jews 
who are the children will understand tlis 
Law in the same sense as their fathers the 
prophets understood it." Indeed, this is one 
of the principal reasons assigned by the 
Fathers for this appearance of Elijah, that he 
may convert the Jews. 

Ver. 14. — ^And when he came to his dis- 
ciples, he saw a great crowd around them. 
High authorities support the reading adopted 
by the Revisers, when they came to the dis- 
ciples, they saw a great multitude about them. 
" They " would thus mean our Lord and the 
three chosen disciples who had been with 
him on the Mount of Transfiguration. 
" They " came to the other disciples who had 
been left below. St. Luke (ix. 37) add* 
"On the next day, when they were come 
down from the mountain." This would seem 
to confirm the supposition that the trans- 
figuration took place in the night. All the 
synoptists agree in placing the following 
miracle immediately after the transfigura- 
tion. Scribes were questioning with the 
disciples who had been left behind. Ai 
usual, they had assembled in the neigh- 
bourhood where Jesus was, for the purjSse 
of watching him. Their object in question- 
ing with the disciples was doubtless tc 
throw discredit upon Jesus, because they, 
his disciples, had failed to work the miracle. 

Ver. 15. — The multitude were favourably 
disposed towards Jesus, and were glad thai 
he had returned at an opportune moment 
to defend his disciples against the scribea 



m. a. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. 



But why were they greatly amazed t The 
word in the Greek is i^fBaM^ri. It seema 
moet probable that they saw in his counte- 
nance, always heavenly and majestic, some- 
thing even yet more Divine, retaining some 
traces of the glory of his transflguration, 
even as the face of Moses shone when he 
came down from the mount (Bxod. xxxiy. 
29). It hardly seems likely that the amaze- 
ment of the people was simply caused by 
our Lord having arrived at an opportune 
time to relieve his disciples of their diffi- 
culty. The Greek word expresses some- 
thing more than would be satisfied by the 
fact of our Lord having come upon the 
scene just when he was wanted. Even if 
there were no remains of the transfiguration 
glory upon his countenance, the vivid recol- 
lection of the scene, of the conversation 
with Moses and Elijah, and the subject 
of it, and the voice of the Father, must 
have invested his countenance with a pecu- 
liar majesty and dignity. The same word, 
though without its compound (iBafi^oviiTn), 
is used further on in ch. x. 32 to express 
the amazement of the disciples, as he 
pressed eagerly onwards before them on his 
way to Jerusalem and to his cross. There 
was no doubt something then in his counte- 
nance which astonished them. The multi- 
tude innning to him, saluted him. The 
scribes had not been able to shake their 
faith. In their view he was still " that 
Prophet that should come into the world." 

Ver. 16.— And he asked them; that is, 
the multitude. The context shows this. 
The reading here is oiroiis, not roiis ypa/i- 

Ver. 17. — One of the multitude answered 
him. Master I brought — the Greek is ^i/syica 
— unto thee my son. He brought his son, 
expecting to find Jesus ; but failing in this, 
he applied to oiu' Lord's disciples to cast out 
the evil spirit, but they could not. St. 
Matthew (xvii. 14) says that the man 
came kneeling to Christ, " and saying. Lord, 
have mercy on my son : for he is lunatic." 
The word in the Greek there is o-eAijcicJfeToi. 
Etymologically, no doubt, " lunatic " conveys 
the meaning of the word most nearly. But 
the giaphic description here of St. Mark cor- 
responds exactly to epilepsy, and to epilepsy 
acted upon by an unclean spirit, who in this 
instance deprived the sufferer of his speech. 
Lunatics were so called from the prevailing 
impression, not without foundation, that the 
light and the changes of the moon have an 
influence upon the body, and so act through 
the body upon the mind. This influence 
seems to be recognized in Ps. cxxi. 6, 
" The sun shall not smite thee by day, 
nor the moon by night." 

Ver. 18. — ^Wheresoever it taketh him 
(jcaTa\i$ri) ; literally, 4t seizeth hold of him. 



This is the Greek word from which comes 
our " catalepsy," the active form of " epi- 
lepsy." It teareth him Q'fia-trei). Tliis ia 
doubtless the literal meaning. But there is 
much evidence to show that it means here 
" it striketh or throweth him down." This 
is the rendering of the Peshito Syriac, and 
of the Vulgate. The same interpretation 
is also given by Hesychius as one of the 
meanings of the word. St. Luke (iz. 39) 
describes the symptoms thus: "A spirit 
taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out, aui 
it teareth him {ffTrapivaei avriv) that he 
foameth (jie-rh aippov), and it hardly departeth 
from him, bruising him sorely." This it 
will be remembered is the record of one who 
was himself a physician. He ^rindeth his 
teeth, andpineth away (^tipalvercu), as thougli 
the springs of his life were dried up. The 
father of the boy is here minutely describing 
the symptoms when the fit was upon him. 
He seems here to express the stifTness and 
rigidity of the body in the approaches of the 
malady. And I spake to thy disciples that they 
should cast it out ; and they were not able. 
They had tried and failed. This failure is 
attributed by our Lord (see Matt. xvii. 
20) to their want of faith; or rather to 
their "little Mth (iik r^v iXrymurTtar 
u/xfiSy)." 

Yer. 19. — faithless generation. These 
words were no doubt intended primarily as 
a rebuke to the Jews and their scribes; 
though not without a glance at the weakness 
of faith of his own disciples. The words are 
the complaint of one weary of the unbelief 
of the masses and of the weakness of faith in 
even his own. Bring him unto me (i^epcTE) ; 
literally, Bring ye him to me. 

Ver. 20. — And they brought him unto him. 
The father, it would seem, was not able of 
himself to bring him, so fierce and violent 
were the paroxysms of the disorder. And 
when he saw him, straightway the spirit 
tare him (<rvveffirdpa^ev) — it might be ren- 
dered, convulsed him — grievously. Observe 
the Greek construction (««! ISiiv airhr rh 
vpev/jta), masculine participle with neuter 
noun. The sight of Christ stirred the evil 
spirit dwelling ^n the chUd. He was irri- 
tated by the presence of Christ ; for he knew 
bis power, and feared lest he should be cast 
out. Then came the last and most violent 
convulsion. He wallowed foaming. The word 
" to wallow " is probably from the Latin 
volvo. He rolled about in his agony. St. 
Gregory, quoted by Trench ('Miracles,' p. 
397), shows how true all>-this is to nature ; 
and that "the expulsion of a deadly evil 
from our spiritual being is not accomplished 
without a terrible struggle, followed in gome 
cases by extreme prostration." 

Vers. 21, 22. — Our Lord asks the father 
not the sufferer, which in this case woidti 



THE GOSPEL ACCOSDlNG TO ST. MARS. [oh. a. 1—60. 



have been useless — he was but a lad, and 
he was dumb. Our Lord's question, How 
long time is it since this hath come unto 
himl was intended, not of course for his 
own information, but to inspire the father 
with hope and confidence. The father 
briefly answers, From a child ; and then re- 
turns to a description of the perils to which 
his child was continually exposed through 
these paroxysms. And then, half doubting, 
Lalf in despair, he says, If thou canst do 
anything, have compassion on us, and help 
US. It is as though he said, " Thy disciples 
have failed, perhaps thy power may be 
greater." 

Vers. 23, 24. — The most approved reading 
here is, not Elf SmaaaifirmTcvaai, but simply 
El; Sifatrai. So that the English rendering is, 
If thou canst ! AU things are possible to him 
that believeth. Our Lord takes up the 
father's words. It is as though he said, 
" Tliou sayest to me, ' If thou canst do any- 
thing!' Ah, that 'If thou canst I' All 
things are possible to him that believeth." 
In other words, our Lord said to him, 
" Believe in me, and your child shall be 
healed." It was right that Christ should 
demand faith in himself; for it was not 
fitting that he should confer his special 
benefits on those who disbelieved or doubted 
about him — that he should thrust his bless- 
ings on those who were unworthy of them. 
The answer of the father is touching and 
beautiful. Greatly agitated, he cried out and 
«(aid (we might well suppose (jiera SaKpiav), 
" with tears," although the weight of evi- 
dence is against this addition being retained 
in the text), I believe ; help thou mine unbe- 
lief. It is as though he said, " I do believe ; 
but my faith is weak. Do thou, therefore, 
increase and strengthen it ; so that whatever 
there is in me of doubt or remaining unbelief 
may be taken away, and I may be counted 
worthy to obtain from thee this blessing for 
my son." Nor can we doubt that Christ 
heard a prayer so humble and so fervent, 
and took away from him the last remains of 
doubt and unbelief. 

Vers. 25— 29.— The multitude had been 
much excited by the dispute between the 
scribes and our Lord's disciples. And now, 
wlien they noticed that he had taken the 
father apart, as no doubt he had done, to ques- 
tion him, they came running together (the 
word is eiria-wTpexei, an unusual word, mean- 
ing "they ran together to the place") where 
he was, crowding upon him. Then he came 
forward, and with a voice of sublime 
authority he said, Thou dumb and deaf 
spirit, I command thee, come out of him, and 
enter no more into him. The rest of the 
narrative shows how malignant and power- 
ful this evil spirit was, who dared so to 
legist and defy Christ that, in his departure 



out of the afflicted boy, he almost robbed 
him of life. " Most unwillingly," says Arch- 
bishop Trench, " does the evil spirit depart, 
seeking to destroy that which he can no 
longer retain." And he quotes Fuller, who 
says that he is "like an outgoing tenant, 
that cares not what mischief he does to the 
house that he is quitting." Some have sup- 
posed that this was an evil spirit possessed 
of more than ordinary power as well as 
malignity, and that this was the reason why 
our Lord's disciples could not cast him out ; 
so that this expulsion needed the mighty 
arm of One stronger than the strong. The 
words in the Greek are powerful, severe, and 
authoritative : " He rebuked (tVeTf/iTjo-e) the 
unclean spirit, . . . Thou dumb and deaf 
spirit (rb irvevT]a rb &Ka\ov koI Kta<phv), I com- 
mand thee (4y^ aoi iTrtTiairai), come out of 
him, and enter no more into him." This 
explains our Lord's words when the disciples 
remarked afterwards, We could not cast It out. 
. . , This kind can come out by nothing, save 
by prayer; that is, tliis particular kind of 
malicious spirit. For there are different 
degrees of malice and energy in evil spirits 
as in evil men. The words "and fasting" 
are added in many ancient authorities. 

Ver. 30. — This verse informs us tiiat our 
Lord and his disciples now left the neigh- 
bourhood of Caesarea Philippi. Their route 
would be across the Jordan above the Sea ol 
Galilee, and so by the usual track through 
Galilee down to Capemaimi. Our Lord now 
wished for privacy, that he might furthei 
instruct his disciples with regard to his 
Bufferings and death. 

Ver. 31. — ^Por he taught his disciples 
(JSiSoiTKe 7ip To6s jhoStit&j ofrroE) ; literally, 
for lie was teaching (imperfect) hit dUdplea.' 
The Son of man is delivered (wapaStSoTot). 
The whole is present to his mind, as though 
it were now taking place. And they shall 
kill him (airoKrfvoStriv). This is a stronger 
form of KTflva. And when he is killed, 
after three days he shall rise again (avan-T^- 
(r€Toi) ; literally, he shall rise up. Our Lord 
repeats this prediction, in order that, when 
these events actually took place, his dis- 
ciples might not be alarmed or offended, or 
abandon their faith in him, as though he 
could not be the Messiah because he under- 
went so terrible a death. It will be remem- 
bered that, notwithstanding these repeato'l 
warnings from their Lord, when these events 
actually took place, "they all forsook him 
and fled." It was therefore necessary that 
this coming event of his oruoiflxion should 
be repeatedly impressed upon them, that 
they might thus be assured that he was 
willing to undergo this bitter death ; that 
he was not going to his cross by constraint, 
but as a willing Sacrifice, that he might do 
the will of his Father, and so redeem man- 



DH. IX 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



kind. Therefore he repeated all this in 
Galilee, wheu he returned from his trans- 
figuration, and after he had cast out the 
evil spirit from the epileptic child, and bo 
had gained to himself great renown. He 
would thus restrain the excited feelings of 
his disciples, and impress upon them the 
reasons for his journey to Jerusalem, and 
prepare them for the (L:ead realities which 
were awaiting him there. 

Ver. 32. — But they understood not the say- 
ing, and were afraid (4<poPovi/To') to ask him. 
St. Matthew (xvii. 23) says, "They were ex- 
ceeding sorry." They saw that something 
very dreadful was about to happen. Their 
Master's words and looks showed them this. 
But it was a mystery to them. All his words 
staggered them, but especially those which 
spoke of his rising again. They did not 
uaderstand whether it was an entrance into 
a higher state or a restoration to a common 
life. They did not understand why he Wiis 
to die, and how these words of his about 
his death could agree with those in which 
he had told them that his kingdom was nt 
hand. Perhaps, on the whole, they inclined 
to the view most pleasing to them, that 
Christ would not die; for this was what 
they wished and most desired. And so they 
tried to persuade themselves that his words 
respecting his sufferings and death had some 
other hidden jaeaning; and were to be 
understood in a figurative sense and not a 
literal. But anyhow, they dreaded to ask him. 

Vers. 33, 34. — They have now readied 
Capernaum. And when he was in the house 
— the house, that is, which he frequented 
when stuyingin Capernaum — he asked them, 
What were ye reasoning in the way ? The 
words "among yourselves," of the Autho- 
rized Version, are not found in the best 
authorities. St. Matthew (xviii. 1) does nut 
record this question of our Lord, which 
orings to light the fact that they had been 
disputing by the way which of them should 
be the greatest. The Greek is (ris fiei^ay) 
who was greater, that is, than the rest. It 
has been well noticed that this passage, 
given in substance in all the synoptic 
Sospels, is a striking evidence of the truth- 
fulness and impartiality of the disciples. 
This dispute of theirs might easily have 
been suppressed as scarcely creditable to 
them. But in writing the Gospels the evan- 
gelists thought more of what exalted the 
Saviour than what abased themselves. This 
dispute of the disciples shows how thoroughly 
they realized the nearness of his kingdom, 
and at the same time how much they had 
yet to learn as to the qualifioations necessary 
for admission to it. It is not unlikely that 
the preference given by our Lord to Peter, 
James, and John may have given occasion 
for this contention. 



Ver. 35. — And he sat down, and called the 
twelve. He sat down, with the authority of 
the great Teacher, to inculcate solemnly a 
fundamental principle of the Christian life. 
If any man would he first, he shall be last 
of all, and minister of all. These words 
are capable of two interpretations. They 
might be regarded as analogous to our 
Lord's words elsewhere, " He that exalteth 
himself shall be abased;" as though they 
indicated the penalty which attaches to un- 
worthy ambition. But it is surely far more 
natural to regard them as pointing out the 
way to real greatness, namely, by humble 
service for Christ's sake. 

Ver. 36.— And he took a little child 
(iraiSlov'), and set him in the midst of them. 
St. Mark adds, what is not recorded by the 
other synoptists, that he took him in hia 
arms. And taking him in his anus (ivayxa- 
Kiailiivos) ; literally, folding Mm in his 
arma; embracing him. It is probable that 
the house where he was was the house of 
Simon Peter ; and it is possible that this little 
child might have been Simon's. A tradition 
not earlier than the ninth century says that 
this child was Ignatius. 

Ver. 37. — Whosoever shall receive one of 
such little children in my name, receiveth 
me. Whosoever shall "receive;" thut is, 
show him oflSoes of kindness and charity. 
One of such little children ; that is, such in 
simplicity, in innocence and humility, such 
as tills little child is in age and stature, in 
my Name, that is, with special regard to 
my Name. He thus seems to link all that 
is good and beautiful with his Name ; as all 
that is really good and excellent in man is 
a reflection of his goodness. St. Luke (ix. 

48) says, ' Whosoever shall receive this little 
child in my Name receiveth me." Our 
Lord, therefore, speaks first, literally of a 
little child, and secondly, in a mystical 
sense, of those who are like little children ; 
making that little child in his arms the 
figure and type of all those who are like 
little children. The sense, therefore, of his 
words is this: "Humility, wliich is the 
foundation and the measure of spiritual 
perfection, so pleases me that I delight in 
little children. And all who would be my 
dibciples must become as little children, 
and so will they deserve to be received by 
all ; for men will think that they receive 
me in them, because they receive them for 
ray sake." 

Ver. 38. — This verse, according to the 
best authorities, should begin simply, John 
said unto him — although in St. Ltilie (ix. 

49) they stand, "And John answered and 
said" — Master, we saw one casting out 
devils in thy name: and we forbade him, 
because he followed not us. The casting 
out of evil spirits was one of the foiemcst 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINd TO ST. MARK. [oh. ix, 1—50 



ligns of npostleship ; and what BQrprised St. 
John waa that one who followed not Christ 
■hould have been able to work this miracle 
—a miracle in which, it will be remem- 
bered, the disciples had recently failed. It 
thus appears that our Lord's teaching had 
been so influential, that some, not reckoned 
amongst his disciples, had shown this proof 
of a strong and overpowering faith. We 
know that there were those in our Saviour's 
time, of Jewish race, who cast out devils 
(Matt. xii. 27). And Justin Martyr, in hia 
' Dialogue with Trypho the Jew,' states that 
■while exorcism, as practised by the Jew», 
often failed when it was attempted to be 
exercised " by the God of Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob," was eminently successful when 
administered " by the name of the Son of 
God, who was born of a virgin and crucified 
nnder Pontius Pilate " (c. 85). That spirit 
has power over spirit in many mysterious 
ways Is one of those truths which science 
has not yet been able to explain (see Dr. 
Morison on St. Mark, in loc). To return, 
however, to the instance here alluded to by 
St. John, it should be observed that they 
who acted thus had faith in Christ ; and 
that by thus acting with him and for him, 
though not amongst his recognized followers, 
they contributed towards his honour who, by 
means of these imperfect instruments, carried 
out the great purpose of his manifestation, 
namely, " to destroy the works of the devil." 
Then further, the disciples forbade them not 
out of envy or hatred, but out of zeal for 
Christ, as though they were thus serving 
his cause and upholding his honour. But 
thiswas"a zeal,not according to knowledge." 
They had forbidden them, without having 
first taken counsel of their Master. 

Ver. 39. — But Jesus said, Forbid him not. 
It is as though our Lord said, "Do not 
forbid him ; do not hinder him from a good 
work — a work which does honour to me 
and to my cause ; because, although he does 
not actually follow me as jou do, he is 
nevertheless engaged in the same cause; 
he is celebrating my Name by tlie casting 
out of evil spirits. Therefore he is not 
opp;iBing my Name; on the contrary, he is 
publishing and recommending it." Here 
is a warning against that exclusive spirit, 
which is eager for its own ends rather 
than for Christ's glory, and would limit 
the exercise of his gifts and graces to itg 
own system or school, instead of inquiring 
whelhur those whom it condemns are not 
working in Christ's name and for the pro- 
motion of his glory, although it miiy be 
jillowable to think tiiat in some instances 
they might find a more excellent way. 

Ver. 40.— For he that is not against us is 
for us. In St. Matthew (xii. 30) we find 
OUT Lord uging a somewhat similar expres- 



sion, only in an inverted order. He there 
says, " He that is not with me is against 
me." The lesson which both these apo- 
thegms teach is the same, that there is no 
such thing as aeutrality in reference to 
Christ and his cause. We must be either 
with him or against him. Dr. Morison on 
St Mark in this place says, "When in 
applied morals we sit in judgment on our- 
selves, we should in ordinary oircumstancta 
apply the law obversely and stringently, ' ha 
who is not with Christ is against him.' But 
when we are sitting in judgment on others, 
into whose hearts we cannot look directly, 
we should in ordinary circumstances apply 
the law reversely audi generously, ' He that 
is not against Christ is with him.'" 

Yer. 41. — In my name, because ye belong 
to Christ. The reading adopted in the 
Revised Version is, iv bv6fjtaTi Bri xp^^'^oi 
iffTe : literally, in name, that ye are ChrUft ; 
or, because ye are Christ's. The force of this 
observation seems to be this : " If he who 
gives you a cup of water to drink in my 
Name, and out of regard for me, does well, 
and shall be rewarded of God, much more 
shall he be rewarded who casts out devils in 
my Name." The disciples are thus taught 
that it is contrary to the whole spirit of 
Christianity to disparage works of bene- 
ficence, or to suggest unworthy motives 
for them (see ' Speaker's Commentary,' tn 
, Joe). 

Ver. 42. — This verse stands out as the 
severe antithesis to what has gone before. 
As he who receives and encourages Christ's 
little ones and those who are like little 
children and believe in him, receives him, 
and so shall receive from him the glorious 
rewards of Heaven ; so, on the contrary, 
whosoever shall offend one of these little 
ones that believe in Christ is guilty of 
deadly sin ; and it were better for him if a 
great mUlstone (jji6\os oviKid)— literally, a 
millstone so large as to require to be turned 
by an ass — were hanged about his neck, and 
he were cast into the sea. 

Ver. 43. — The hand, or the foot, or the eye 
represents any instrument by which sin may 
be committed ; and it applies to those who 
may be the means of drawing us into sin. 
If your relative or your friend, who is useful 
or dear to you as your hand, your foot, or 
your eye, is drawing you into sin, out him 
off from you, lest he should draw you into 
hell, into the unquenchable Gehenna. Ge- 
henna, or the Valley of Hinnom, lay to the 
south of Jerusalem. Originally a pleasant 
suburb of the city, it became in later, times 
the scene of the worship of Moleoh, « the 
abomination of the children of Ammon." 
On this account the valley was polluted by 
King Josiah. It thus became the receptacle 
of everything that was vile and filthy 



06. a, 1—60.] THE GOSPEL ACOOfiDlNG lO St. tLuBJL 



Fhese noisome accumulations were from time 
to time consumed by fire ; and the things 
rhioh Were not consumed by fire were the 
prey of worms. Hence " Gehenna " became 
the image of the place of eternal punish- 
ment, where " the worm dieth not and the 
Are is not quenched." These terrible 
images are conclusive as to the eternity of 
future punishment, so far as our nature is 
concerned and our knowledge reaches. 
They are the symbols of certain dreadful 
realities ; too dreadful for human language 
to describe or human thought to conceive. 

Ver. 44. — ^Where their worm dieth not, 
and the fire is not quenched. These words 
are a quotation from Isa. Izvi. 24, and they 
are repeated three times in the Authorized 
Version. But the best ancient authorities 
omit them in the two first places, retaining 
them at ver, 48. The metaphor is very 
striking as well as awful. Ordinarily the 
worm feeds upon the disorganized body, 
and then dies. The fire consumes the fuel, 
and then itself expires. But here the worm 
never dies; the fire never goes out. The 
words of Cornelius & Lapide on the original 
passage in Isaiah are well worth recording 
here: "I beseech you, O reader, by the 
mercies of our God, by your own salvation, 
by thai one little life entrusted to you and 
committed to your oare, that you will ever 
keep before your eyes the living memory, 
as of eternity and of eternal torments, so 
also of the eternal joys on the other side 
offered to you by God, and concerning which 
you here cast the die, and that irrevocable. 
Let these two things never depart from your 
mind. In this world, ' Vanity of vanities, 
and all is vanity.' Oh, what a void there 
is in earthly things 1 Oh, how vain is all 
our life without Christ! In the world to 
come, truth of truths, and all is truth; 
stability of stabilities, and all is stability ; 
eternity of eternities, and all is eternity. 
An eternity in heaven most happy, in hell 
most miserable, * Where their worm dies not, 
and the fire is not quenched.' " St, Bernard 
says "the worm that never dies is the 
memory of the past, which never ceases to 
gnaw the conscience of the impenitent." 

Ver, 49. — For every one shall be salted 
with fire ; and every saorifice shall be salted 
vtdth salt, According to the most approved 
authorities, the i second clause of this verse 
should be omitted, although it is evident 
that our Lord had in his mind the words in 
Lev. ii. 13, " Every oblation of thy meat 
offering shalt thou season with salt." Every 
one shall be tatted with fire. " Every one." 
The statement is general in its application. 
There is no limitation. The good and the 
evil alike shall be " salted with fire." There 
is an apparent incongruity here. But it 
must be remembered that both the salt and 



the fire are here osed in a metaphorical 
sense; and there is a fire which is penal, 
and there is a fire which puriflet. In the 
case of the wicked the fire is penal ; and 
the salting with fire in their case can only 
mean the anguish of a tormented conscience, 
which must be commensurate with iti 
existence in the same moral condition. But 
there is a fire which purifies. St. Peter, 
addressing the Christians of the Dispersion 
(1 Epist. iv. 12), bids them not to think it 
strange concerning the " fiery trial " which 
was among them. This was their " salting 
with flre." Those persecutions which they 
Buffered were their discipline of affliction, 
through which God was purifying and pre- 
serving them. This discipline is necessary 
for all Christians. They must arm them- 
selves with the same mind, even though 
they may not live in a time of outward 
persecution. He who parts with the hand, 
or the foot, or the eye ; that is, he who sur- 
renders what is dear to him — he who parts 
with what, if he was only to confer with 
fiesh and blood, he would rather keep, lor 
the sake of Christ, is going through the 
discipline of self-sacrifice, which is often 
painful and severe, but nevertheless purify- 
ing. He is salted with fire ; but he is pre- 
served by the power of God through faith 
unto salvation. 

Ver. 50. — Salt is good ; that is, it is useful 
and beneficial. This is true of the literal 
salt. Its wholesome antiseptic properties an 
universally recognized. But our Lord hai 
before his mind in this whole passage the 
spiritual meaning. He is thinking of the salt 
of Divine grace, of the salt of a spirit informed 
and influenced by the Holy Spirit. He had 
already told his disciples that they werj 
" the salt of the earth." Not, indeed, tha^ 
they could deliver the earth from oorruptioi 
— that was beyond their power. But whei 
Christ had delivered it by his mighty sacri 
flee and the gift of his Spirit, it was thei 
business, as it is the duty of all Christiani 
to keep it in a healthy state ; so that b] 
their wisdom and purity, their holy live 
and holy teaching, they might season th( 
whole world. But if the salt have lost it 
saltness (eav rh Si\as liva\oi> yiv^Tai), where 
with will ye season it 1 This insipid, tasteles 
condition of salt is familiar to travellers ir 
the East, Examples are to be found of largv 
masses of salt which " has lost its savour.' 
Our Lord here applies this in a spiritua 
sense to his disciples. " If ye, my disciples, 
who are the salt of the earth, — if ye lose the 
true properties of salt; if your Christianity 
loses its heart, its quickening, stimulating 
intiupnce ; so that on account of the love of 
the world, or the fear of man, or through 
lust or ambition, yon fall away from the 
heavenly doctrine and life; — who shall » 



IC 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [oh, vl. 1-50. 



etore you to your former spiritual heaUh 
and vigour ? With what can gait itself be 
seasoued when its own chemical energies 
are lost ? " Our Lord plays upon this figure 
of salt, and cautions his disciples, lest by 
any means they should lose the qualities of 
this mystic salt. Have salt in yourselves, 
and be at peace one with another. This 
sentence fitly winds up the whole. Have 
the salt of wisdom and purity, and of a 
Christian life, namely, humility, charity, 
contempt of the world, and especially peace. 
Do not be idly contending about place 
or position, as not long ago you were dis- 



puting (ver. 33). Our Lord foresaw that 

this kind of contention, these rivalries, and 
these ambitious aims, would prove a great 
scandal and a great hindrance to the pro- 
gress of his Church in the future ages of 
the world. But he also knew that if his 
disci[jle3 in every age would endeavour to 
" keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of 
peace," their influence would be irresistible, 
and they would draw all men to them and 
to himself, the great Centre of attraction, 
and " the confidence of all the enda of the 
earth"(Pg.lxv. 5). 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 2 — 13. — Transfiguration. Observe the crisis of our Lord's ministry at which 
this marvellous and memorable incident took place. The period of novelty, of popu- 
larity, of prosperity, was past and gone ; the period of hostility, of persecution, of 
endurance, was commencing. Already Jesus had forewarned his disciples of the speedy 
approach of his death at the hands of his enemies. And it seems as though this 
unique and impressive display of his proper majesty, and of the affection and confidence 
of his Father, came exactly at the needed conjuncture. It was for his own sake, that 
a vivid consciousness of Divine favour might go with him to the scenes of ignominy 
and of suffering which awaited him. It was for the sake of the nearest and dearest 
among his friends, that they might carry with them, especially in those trials of their 
laith and attachment which were coming upon them, a conviction concerning their 
master's nature and mission which might support them and preserve them, if not 
from weak defection, still from shameful apostasy. The close connection between the 
glories of the Transfiguration and the shame and woe of Calvary, is evident both from 
the narrative itself and from the central and critical position it occupies. Regarding 
ihe Mount of Transfiguration as a mount of witness, we observe — 

I. The witness Christ here bears to himself. The sun in heaven is his own 
witness, shines by his own light, tells of his own nature and power. So with the Lord 
Christ. When, amidst the darkness of the night, upon the slopes of Hermon, his 
garments glistened, and his face shone with a dazzling radiance, his proper glory 
shone through the disguise of his human weakness and humiliation. For once he 
appeared to be what he really was — the Sun of the Father, and the Lord of the world. 
It was testimony very powerful and very effective, and produced its impression upon 
those who were privileged to behold that " great sight." 

II. The witness hbeb bobnb to Christ by the lawgiver and thk prophet. 
4fter Abraham, no personages in their history were more honoured and venerated by 
the Jews than Moses and Elijah : Moses the giver of their Law, and Elijah the head and 
leader of their prophets. These two had not only in life fulfilled the will of God, they 
had at the close of their life-service been taken to himself by their Lord in very 
remarkable and singular circumstances. From the seats of the blessed, and in their 
vesture of immortality, these illustrious and glorified saints came to converse with the 
Son of God regarding the decease which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem, 
They had foretold him, they had prefigured him, they now gave place to him ; and 
what more appropriate than that they should thus tender to him their homage and 
their admiration? 1. They manifested interest in bis mission, for this gave the 
meaning to their own— explained in the old economy much which would otherwise 
have been inexplicable. 2. They acknowledged his authority, for they had already 
testified to a Greater than themselves who should come, and their appearance on this 
occasion was an evidence of the reverential honour in which they held the Divine 
Lawgiver, the Divine Prophet. 3, They anticipated his decease; the event which 
he had so recently foretold, and for which he was now so deliberately, so sacredly pre" 
paring — an event of stupendous magnitude in the history of our sinful humanity. 



ill. It i— so.] THE GOSPEL ACCO&DlJia TO ST. MARK. 11 

IIL The witness bobnb to Chbist by his fbiends and apostles. 1. It msj 
be asked — Why was it appoiated that the Transfiguration should be witnessed by so 
small and select a group, and in so secluded a spot ? Why were not multitudes per- 
mitted to behold a spectacle so amazing in itself, and so fitted to bring conviction tc 
the minds of all beholders ? Surely, it might be urged, no unbeliever, no caviller, 
could have withstood the evidence of our Lord's authority which such a scene afforded ' 
It is recorded that the leaders of the Jews, the Pharisees, asked from Jesus a sign 
from heaven. This he refused them. But he allowed three favoured friends to behold 
liis glory, when the customary veil was in some measure withdrawn. What is the 
explanation of this? It may be replied that it was not in harmony with the plans 
of our Lord Jesus to overpower the senses of the people with some irresistible display 
of supernatural power and glory. This would not have been to secure a moral result 
by moral means. Jesus would not have valued the admiration which was withheld 
from his moral character and his benevolent life, but which was accorded to the 
effulgence of celestial glory, striking all eyes with amazement. But there was another 
reason for the limitation of the witnesses of our Lord's transfiguration. The highest 
revelations of God's wisdom and holiness and love are for those only who are prepared 
to receive them. You may walk round the outside of a vast domain, a splendid 
palace ; you may make the circuit of the walls, you may see the tree-tops shaken by 
the wind, you may catch glimpses of the lofty roofs and towers of the lordly edifice. 
But how little do you know of the imposing palace and its enchanting environments 1 
If, however, you are permitted to enter the gates, to tread the stately gardens, to 
explore the mansion, to look through the library, to admire the sculptures and paint- 
ings, and, above all, to spend hours and days in converse with the choice spirits who 
make the abode their home, — then you can form a judgment, and cherish an apprecia- 
tion which, so long as you were on the outside, you would never have been able to do. 
So with the knowledge of every high and pure and noble soul. Such a one is only to 
be known by those who have sympathy with him, and opportunities of fellowship 
with him. It cannot be otherwise than that the ignorant, the vulgar, the selfish, 
should misunderstand him. In like manner, but in the highest degree, it needed some 
sympathy with the Lord Christ in order to judge aright of him. It seems likely that 
when Jesus took with him only his three most intimate and congenial friends to 
behold his glory upon the holy mount, he did so because none others were sufficiently 
advanced in spiritual knowledge and appreciation to be capable of partaking and 
profiting by the privilege. Even the bulk of his own twelve disciples would have been, 
at that time, out of place upon the Mount of Transfiguration. As for the scribes 
and Pharisees, and all the vulgar formalists who desired a sign, they had no spiritual 
eyes with which to see the vision which was then and there vouchsafed to three lowly 
fishermen, whose hearts the Lord had touched, and whose sight the Lord had cleansed 
and quickened. 2. The emotions with which the favoured three were affected, when 
they beheld Christ's glory, deserve attention. There was awe : and this was honour- 
able to them, that they experienced the feeling of trembling reverence in a presence so 
august, and before evidence so majestic and convincing. There was delight : hence the 
exclamation and the proposal of Peter. They felt it " good " to be in such a scene 
and in such society, and they would fain have prolonged the precious opportunity, ami 
dwelt for a season upon the mount. 3. The convictions which they formed may be 
known from the language of Peter in his Second Epistle, from which it is apparent that 
the Transfiguration produced upon the minds of the witnesses a profound and inefface- 
able impression concerning their Master's dignity and authority. 

IV. The witness bokne to Christ by the Father himself. In the voice which 
came from the Father we observe : 1. A declaration to be believed : " This is my 
beloved Son." Jesus was beloved : (1) For the relation he sustained to the Father ; for 
he was " the only begotten," and was by nature what no other human being can be 
affirmed to have been. (2) For his congenial character j for he pleased the Father 
alway ; his character embodied every moral excellence. (3) For his willing obedience ; 
for, as he had undertaken his mission in the spirit of the prophetic language, " Lo, I 
come ... to do thy will, my God," so he acted throughout his ministry in a 
manner conformable to the just and holy will of God the Father. (4) For his perfect 
Bubmission ; for he " learned obedience by the things which he suffered," and shrank 



12 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. ix. 1—50 

not from any sufferings appointed, and refused not the cup which the Father gave. An 
God's beloved Son, he was "obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." 2, An 
appeal to be obeyed : " Hear ye him ! " As in the former clause the address is to the 
intelligent nature, so in this clause it is to the practical nature, of men. It Ib a 
Divine imperative. The appeal is to the sense of human obligation. Hear his teach- 
ings as your Master 1 Hear his promises as your Friend and Saviour ! Hear his com 
mands as your Leader and Lord 1 Hear to rejoice, to respond, to obey I 

Application. 1. Receive this witness concerning Christ. It is the witness of the 
most trustworthy of men, the most competent of observers; it is the witness of the 
Eternal Father, of him who cannot lie. 2. Repeat this witness concerning Christ. It 
is the vocation of the disciple to give testimony to the master. The Church is Christ's 
witness to the world. It is ours to tell who Jesus is and what he has done ; it is ours 
to invite the faith, to require the allegiance of all mankind to him who is the Son of 
God. 

Vers. 14 — 29. — The lunatic boy. In Raphael's picture of the Transfiguration, which 
has often been called the greatest of all paintings, the foregi'ound is occupied by a 
vivid representation of this marvellous miracle wrought by our Lord upon his descent 
from the mountain. The conjunction of the two incidents, which are in such striking 
contrast with each other, seems suggestive. The native glory of the Redeemer shone 
forth in the presence of the three favoured disciples upon the holy mount. But the 
redemptive work of the Son of God is brought out most prominently by his mighty 
work of healing, in which he shows himself able to deliver a human sufferer from the 
agonies of a terrible disease, and from the clutches of a cruel foe. The one incident 
serves to bring out the other into a bolder relief ; and the two must be taken together, 
in order that we may obtain a fair and complete view of the nature, and especially ot 
the ministry, of Jesus. 

I. Observe the distbbssejg case or human misebt hbeb portbatbd. St. Mark 
has depicted this whole incident with a graphic minuteness that cannot faU to impress 
itself upon the reader's mind. 1. The case itself is unique in the wretchedness of its 
symptoms. An epileptic boy, speechless, often convulsed and sometimes flung into 
the fire and the water, a sufferer in this way from childhood, and now wasting away 
from long-continued disease, — can a more affecting picture of human misery be painted 
than this? Add to all the particulars related the possession by an evil spirit ; and the 
hopelessness of the case, the powerlessness of all human endeavours, becomes apparent. 
2. The anguish of the father's heart is beyond description ; his attitude, his language, 
declare his distress and his dejection. 3. The interest of the multitude is evident ; a 
spectacle such as this could not fail to excite the commiseration and compassion of 
every feeling heart. Observe in this case a striking figure of the condition of the 
sinner as a captive of Satan, and of the state of this ungodly and sin-accursed 
humanity 1 

II. Remark the inability of all human means and agencies to believe this 
CASE OF wretchedness. All that a father's watchfulness and care could effect had 
long been tried. Doubtless the best known and most skilful physicians had exhausted 
the resources of their art. But all had been in vain. And now the disciples of our 
Lord had been appealed to with earnest entreaties. In the absence of their Master upon 
the mountain they had put forth their endeavours, had exercised their authority. But 
all was in vain. It was the assertion of the father ; it was the confession of the 
disciples themselves : " They could not cast out " the demon. And there is no power 
on earth that can deal effectually with the sinner's case— that can expel from this 
humanity the spirit of evil that has so long ruled, afflicted, and defiled it. 

IIL Consider the application which was made to Jesus as to the Divine 
Healbb. How spiritually significant and instructive is the approach of the suppliant 
father to the Christ I The importance attached to faith comes out in this narrativo 
perhaps more prominently than in any other part of the Gospel. We recognize • 
1. The demand for faith. The father states his case, describes the sufferings of his' 
son, implores compassion, and entreats help. His qualification, " If thou canst do 
anything," calls forth Christ's marvellous and memorable utterance : " If thou canst 1 
AH things are passible to him that believeth." This Is, indeed, » repetition of th» 



OH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. II 

teaching of Scripture in every page. Faith is 'the posture of the heart which God 
approves, and which renders those who assume it capable of being blessed. Faith ig 
the cry of the heart which God will never disregard or reject. And this condition 
comes out in a very impressive manner in this dialogue. 2. The assertion of faith. 
The poor father was driven to faith by need atid suffering, by sympathy and 
despondency, by his repeated failures to obtain relief. He was drawn to Christ by 
his gracious and majestic presence as he came down from the Mount of Transfiguration. 
The leper had doubted the will of Christ to save ; this father seems to have had con- 
fidence in the disposition and readiness of the Divine Teacher and Healer, and upon the 
suggestion and requirement of the Redeemer he exclaims, with fervour and with 
earnestness, " Lord, I believe." 3. The confession of unbelief. He doubts, or until 
now has doubted, Christ's power to save, as appears from his " If thou canst," and as 
he himself acknowledges in his cry, " Help thou mine unbelief." If he had not believed 
at all, he would not have come to Jesus ; if he had believed firmly, he would have come 
with other words and in another spirit. This combination is very true to nature. 
There are degrees of faith even in the faithful. Where is perfect faith in Jesus? Who 
has not had reason to cry, " Help thou mine unbelief; " " Increase my faith " ? 4. The 
cry for help. The earnest applicant did not wait until his faith was stronger — until 
more assurances and encouragements were given. He pleads as for his life, for he 
pleads for his child. Hating his unbelief, he struggles against it. His appeal is the 
utterance of his heart, which has no hope and no resource save in Immaiiuel, the Son 
of God. An example this to all hearers of the gospel, and especially to the penitent, 
the doubting, the timid, and the tempted. 

IV. Rbmaek the hbalino grace and power of Jesus. 1. His compassion was 
excited. He might pause to call forth the father's faith ; but he would not withhold 
his sympathy from the suffering. 2. His authority was exercised over the evil spirit ; 
for he rebuked and bade the demon to come out, and this with a commanding voice, 
which even so potent an agent of evil could not resist. 3. His healing, gracious aid 
was extended to the boy. When the sufferer seemed as if dead, by reason of the 
exhausting convulsions in which the departing demon displayed his malicious power, 
the Lord of life took him by the hand and raised him up, and he arose. How beautiful 
and encouraging an illustration of our Lord's personal interest in, and spiritual contact 
with, those whom he commiserates, relieves, and saves 1 

Application. I. There is no case of need, sin, and wretchedness beyond the power 
of Christ to aid. 2. There is no faith, however feeble, which will not justify an 
approach to Christ, and elicit his compassion and his willinjiness to help. 3. By 
spiritual discipline Christ's people may train themselves for grappling with every form, 
however extreme, of human misery and helplessness. 

Vers. 30 32. — Death foretold. The evangelists have recorded that on several 

distinct occasions our Lord foretold, in the hearing of his disciples, what would be the 
close of his earthly career. It is evident, accordingly, that these predictions, though 
only partially comprehended at the time, nevertheless made a deep impression on the 
minds of those who Ustened to them. After all that Jesus had foretold had been 
fulfilled, his apostles naturally enough recalled his sayings, and pondered them in the 
light of actual events, and published among their fellow-disciples the communications 
which have been recorded in the Gospels. . , , o 

I. The occasion of these revelations. This second declaration by the Son of man 
of his approaching death and resurrection was made not long after the first. 1. It was 
In the course of the joiirney from Csesarea Philippi through Galilee to the most ordinary 
scenes of his ministry that Jesus thus spoke to his disciples. They were apart from 
the multitude and the busy towns, where the great Healer was contirually beset by 
applicants for relief and healing. There was quiet leisure, of which opportunity was 
taken by the Master to unfold anew to his disciples facts of tremendous import. 2. It 
was soon after the Transfiguration upon the mount— a display of his glory which must 
have enUghtened the minds of his friends with regard to his nature, and must have 
disposed them to receive with deeper reflectiveness declarations concermng himself. 
That a Bein" so glorious and so remarkably in correspondence with celestial intelligences, 
lud so intimately in the fellowship and the favour of the Eternal, should look forward 



14 THE GOSrEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. ix 1—50. 

to a fate so dread — this was indeed likely to provoke them to profound inquiry and 
meditation. 

II. The substance op these revelations. The matter of these very remarkable 
and repeated communications was threefold. 1. He foretold his apprehension by his 
enemies. That there were among the ruling classes at Jerusalem many who were 
violently opposed to his teaching and to his claims, must have been known to his 
disciples as well as to himself. But hitherto Jesus had eluded the efforts of his foes, 
and had always proved himself able both to refute them in argument and to defy their 
efforts to seize and kill him. But the Lord's express words assured them that the time 
was at hand when the foes, whose enmity and malice had hitherto been defeated, should 
prevail against the Holy One and the Just. 2. He foretold the violent death which 
his enemies should inflict upon him. He had saved many from death, and had raised 
home from the dead; strange it must have seemed to them that he himself should 
swbmit to be put to death by the violence of men I Why should he submit to power 
which he was evidently capable of defying ? Why should he endure treatment from 
which he could certainly save himself? Why should he endure a fate which he might 
easily avert? 3. He foretold his resurrection after three days' submission to death. 
Tills must have perplexed tliem still more. To what purpose need he die if he intended 
so soon to revive ? Why not rather avoid death than, first submitting to it, then prova 
himself superior to its power? Yet such a prediction was fitted to enhance their con- 
ceptions of his majesty and authority. 

III. The effect of these hevelations upon the minds of the disciples. Very 
simply are we informed that: 1. They understood not the saying. The words which 
the Lord had used were simple and unmistakable; the events he had foretold were 
such as were familiar to their observation, or such as they were acquainted with from 
the Old Testament narrative. What was it that they failed to understand ? Probably 
the consistency between such a prospect and the view they were forming of Jesus' 
Messianic character and glory, and the expectations they were cherishing of his speedily 
approaching kingdom. Their minds were utterly confused by declarations which 
accorded neither with their primitive nor their more mature apprehensions of their 
Master's nature and ministry. 2. They were afraid to ask him. There seem to have 
been times when the disciples stood in awe of their Master. It could not well be other- 
wise. Sometimes his grace and friendliness drew them to him, and the intimacy was 
as that subsisting among brothers ; at other times the superiority of Jesus seemed to 
cleave a chasm of separation which they had not confidence or courage to bridge over 
by their approaches. They could not then even question him concerning the Import 
of his own language. 

IV. The reason of these revelations. 1. Jesus intended thus to open the eyes 
of his companions to his own character. Such sayings as these must have awakened 
their renewed inquiry, "What manner of man is this?" Thus Jesus would impress 
upon them the tact that his nature and character, his kingdom and mission, were 
altogether unique. 2. Jesus intended, in some measure, to prepare them for the events 
which were about to happen. This was effected but partially; yet it would be a 
mistake to suppose that such teaching was lost upon the twelve. The events of the 
Passion did iniieed amaze and dismay Christ's disciples, yet not to that extent which 
would have been the case had no such communications been vouchsafed. 3. Jesus 
designed to open their minds to the spiritual nature of his kingdom. What he foretold 
could not happen without dispelling, or at least weakening, many preconceived notions 
and expectations ; and even before these things came to pass, some light regarding the 
unworldly and spiritual kingdom must have streamed into their dim minds. 4. Jesus 
purposed that, after he should have arisen from the dead, they should call to memory 
the sayings they had heard from him, and that their faith should thus be confirmed in 
his superior knowledge, and in the divinity of his purposes, so clearly conceived and so 
gloriously accomplished. Thus was provision made for their thinking aright of him 
who laid down his life for the sheep, and in due time and of his own accord took to him 
that life again. 

Vers. 33 — 37. — True greatness. Our Lord's ministry was not only to the people 
generally, but to his own disciples and friends ; and even to these he had occasion 



OH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 16 

sometimes to address language, not only of instruction, but of rebuke and expostulation. 
On the occasion here referred to, a serious fault was displayed among the chosen circle, 
which called for the Lord's interference and reprimand. At the same time the great 
Teacher; pointed out to the erring a more excellent way. Ambition was the fault, 
and its appearance among the twelve occasioned our Lord's lesson in true greatness. 

I. Ambition among the followers of Christ. 1. Notice its occasion. It seems 
as if recent events gave rise to tiie desire for pre-eminence among the friends and 
disciples of Jesus. The special commendation of Peter which the Master had recently 
pronounced, and the selection of the same apostle, with James and John, to witnes.< 
the Transfiguration, probably prompted the aspiration and the discussion here recorded. 
2. The exact form this disposition assumed. The twelve looked forward to the 
Messianic kingdom, of which they had come to regard Jesus as the divinely appointed 
Head, and in which they all expected to occupy posts of dignity and power. But whu 
should be greatest ? Who should be the chief minister under the Messianic King ? 
Such was the matter in dispute, and that it should be so shows us how much the 
apostles had yet to learn. 3. The evil fruits of this ambition. It is quite in accord- 
ance with human nature that such a disposition should lead to disagreement and tu 
contention. The twelve not only reas(ined, they disputed ; rivalry took the place ol 
brotherhood. It is ever so ; when the desire for pre-eminence and supremacy takes 
possession of men's hearts, farewell to contentment, harmony, and peace ! 

II. Christ's rebuke and remedy for ambition. The observant eye of Jesus had 
remarked the wrangling which had gone on among his disciples, and his heart was 
pained. When he inquired into what had happened, they were ashamed and silenced ; 
and he proceeded to unfold a principle which should operate, not in this company only, 
but throughout all periods of his Church. 1. Christ reveals the new and Christian 
law of greatness. Only those who are willing to be last of all, and ministers of all, shall 
be foremost in his kingdom. This was paradoxical, altogether in contradiction to the 
prevalent plan and principle among men in all grades of society, and in all com- 
munities, civil and ecclesiastical. It was exemplified most illustriously in the Lord 
Jesm himself. " Though he was rich, he became poor ;" " He took on him the form 
of a servant ; " " The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister." 
In his own person — in his incarnation, his humiliation, his obedience unto death, even 
ths death of the cross — our Lord furnished the one incomparable exami^le of humility 
and self-denial, and laid the axe to the root of the tree of self-seeking and pride. It 
was a law containing ivithin it its own sanction and power. The humiliation and 
self-sacrifice of the Lord Jesus were more than an example ; they introduced a new 
motive of spiritual persuasiveness and constraint into human society. The cross of 
Christ has been the great moral power which has changed human society, and is now 
the one hope of human regeneration. 2. Christ enforces his new law of greatness by 
a striking symbol. Our Lord often taught by act, thus enforcing the lessons embodied 
in his words. On this occasion he took a little child, and preached an ever-memorable 
sermon from this beautiful and touching text. The infant was in himself a living and 
evident illustration of submissiveness, teachableness, and humility. And not only so ; 
the infant furnished the great Teacher with the lesson he needed: "Whosoever shall 
receive one of such," etc. Instead of seeking to be preferred above their brethren, 
Christians are here taught to seek out, and to minister to, the lowliest and the feeblest ; 
and the inspiriting assurance is added, that those who in the Master's spirit receive 
and aid the least of his disciples— the Iambs of his flock, the babes of his household- 
shall be regarded as having rendered a service to the Christ himself; nay^^as having 
" received " the Creator aud Lord of all, even him who sent and gave his Son for the 
salvation of mankind ! 

Application. 1. Dispositions which we are ashamed to bring into the presence and 
under the notice of Christ, are by that very fact condemned, and must be at once 
repressed and checked. 2. Towards one another it behoves the disciples of Jesus tc 
sherish sentiments of esteem and honour. 3. Towards the feeble and the obscure tbey 
should display the tenderest consideration, remembering that those who serve Christ'i 
lowliest people serve Christ himself. 

Vers, 38—41. The judgment of chaHty. It is clear, from this passage, that the 



16 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIN& TO ST. MARK, [oh. ix. 1— Sa 

influence of our Lord Jesus was wider than was known by his own immediate friends, 
and that his work was, even during his lifetime, advancing in directions of which 
they were not aware. Accidentally, as it were, we gain an insight into the progress of 
the kingdom of Christ outside the immediate circle of his acknowledged and professed 
disciples ; and the incident which affords us this insight, at the same time presents 
to us truths and lessons of vast practical importance. 

I. BiooTBT IB HUMAN, AND CHARITY IB DiviNE. If any One of the twelve might 
have been deemed free from all suspicion of bigotry, surely it would have been John, 
often called " The Apostle of Love." Yet from this incident, and from his wishing upon 
another occasion to call down fire from heaven upon unbelievers, it is plain that, at all 
events during the Lord's ministry, he was wont to give way to an ardent, impetuous, 
violent spirit. In the view of a bigot, one who does not work in his own way ia 
censured and condemned as unfit to work for God at all. The Lord Jesus proved his 
superiority to human infirmity by permitting and encouraging service which his 
followers would have forbidden. 

II. Odtwaed unity and conformity are no sufpicibnt test of Christian 
DISCIPLE8HIP. Men are naturally prone to lay great stress upon this. The complaint, 
" He foUoweth not with us," has not been confined to the first followers of Jesus. The 
" following," in such cases, means outward association and agreement in language, 
usages, forms of policy and of worship. But two considerations should check that 
tjai rowness which would limit discipleship to those who conform to established custom : 
1. Some conform, who prove themselves to be lacking in the mind and spirit of Jesus 
Christ. 2. Some refuse, or neglect to conform, who display such spirit, and whose 
actions show them to be Christ's. 

III. One test of discipleship is the spirit in which men work fob Christ. 
The stranger, to whom reference is made, is said to have done what he did in ChrisCs 
Name, and the Lord declares that the presumption is markedly in the favour of one whose 
practice may be so denoted. What are we to understand by the expression, " in 
Christ's Name " ? It is an idiom which involves more than lies upon the surface. The 
Name of Christ implies his nature, his character, his claims, his mission. What is done 
truly in his Name, is done from reverence towards him, from faith in him, from love to 
him, in reliance upon his grace, and with a view to his honour and his approval. 
Now, our Lord teaches us that they whose life is animated and governed, controlled 
and guided, by a constant reference to himself, are to be honoured and encouraged. 
Such may have an imperfect acquaintance with the Lord Jesus, an insufficient appre- 
hension of his nature or his work, an indisposition to consort with his professed 
followers. In all this it is possible they may be inferior to ourselves, thoufjh it is 
nut certain. But this must not rouse us to bigotry, to conceit, and opinionated self- 
complacency. Let us recognize and admire the spirit which such " outsiders " may 
display, and wish them God-speed, and rejoice in their witness and in their work I 

IV. Anothbb test of discipleship is the work which men do for Christ. 
This passage reminds us that: 1. It may be a mighty work or a power. This is not 
necessarily miraculous ; it may be moral. The mark of God's finger may be upon the 
work. In our own state of society this " note " of true Christianity may sometimes be 
recognized among those who are unassociated with our Churches, and even among the 
" unorthodox." 2. It may be the casting out of demons. In the GUispel narrative thii 
was literally the case. And in modern life there are many demons of ignorance, 
impurity, sloth, and selfishness, which need expulsion. And those who devote their 
time and energies to combating these ills, are doing the work of our Master, and will 
not be able quickly to speak evil of him. Let us rejoice, not only in their work, but 
in themselves. 3. It may be the giving of a cup of cold water to Christ's people in 
Christ's Name. Not the magnitude, but the moral tendency, the inner motive of the 
act, is of importance in the sight of our Lord. If the act itself be kind and beneficent, 
that is sufficient to recommend it to us, and to make it acceptable to the Lord. There 
is an obvious harmony between a good work and the good spirit in which the work 
is performed. 

V. A CANON OF judgment. It may be determined that the rule of ver. 40, " Ho 
that is not against us is for us," refers to our judgment of others and of their action*. 
It i« » wise as well as a charitable principle. It is a preservative against bigotry, umI 



■H. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. n 

it is fitted to ensure equitable and considerate treatment of our neighbours. The rule 
elsewhere recorded, " He that is not for us is against us," applies to ourselves, and warne 
us against lukewarmness in our piety and negligence in our service. Let us be 
ptricter with ourselves, and more charitable with others, and we shall the better 
please our righteous and gracious Lord, 

Vers. 42 — 50. — Wamingt. With these solemn words our Lord closed his arduous 
and faithful ministry in Galilee. Christ's language was usually language of grace and 
encouragement ; but there were occasions, like the present, when he spoke words of 
faithful warning in tones almost of severity. Yet it should be noted that these 
admonitions wete addressed to his own disciples, and were intended to quicken their 
spiritual sensibi lity, and to induce them to use with diligence the privileges with which 
they were favoured, especially through their association with himself. 

L Powers and means op usefulness mat become occasions of spiritual offence. 
This is a very serious consideration. Increased privilege brings increased responsibility, 
and none can possess powers of body or of mind without being exposed by such 
possession to liability to unfaithfulness and to consequent deprivation. 1. Social 
intercourse and influence come under this general principle. Our Lord speaks of his 
disciples, and especially of the inexperienced and immature, as " his litiie ones who 
believe on him." We cannot be associated with such without affecting them for good 
or for evil. To cause them to stumble, to betray them iuto errors or into sin, is an 
offence against our Lord, and it would be better for a man to be iiung with a millstone 
about his neck into the deep water, than so to offend against the Lord of the little 
ones. 2. Our active powers may become occasions of offence. The hand and the foot 
may be taken as emblematical of these powers, the proper and intended purpose of 
which is undoubtedly their employment in works of justice and of charity and helpful- 
ness. Yet these good faculties may cause their possessors to offend. The hands may 
work deeds of violence, the feet may lead into the way of sinners ; and in such a case 
the purpose of the Creator is frustrated, and condemnation is incurred. 3. Sense and 
intelligence may he productive of harm as well as of good. The eye may fairly be 
taken as representing sense generally, and the apprehensive faculty. When the eyes 
wander where they should not, are closed when they should be open, or are open when 
they should be closed, they are an offence. When the intellect is directed to the 
wrong topics, or to the right topics in the wrong temper, its glory is dimmed, for its 
intention is thwarted, and it becomes a curse instead of a blessing. 

II. The abuse of powers and means of usefulness will involve punitive 
SUFFEBINO AND EUIN. Under the rule of a righteous God, it cannot be that faithfulness 
and unfaithfulness, watchfulness and remissness, obedience and rebellion, will be treated 
alike. From the lips of the Lamb of God, the " meek and lowly in heart," language 
such as that which our Lord here employs is doubly impressive. Nevertheless, it if 
in mercy that the fruits of sin are shown to be apples of Sodom, that the wages of sm 
are expressly declared to be death. The figurative representations of the doom of the 
sinful are indeed terrific. This doom is worse than the vengeful overwhelmmg in the 
Lake of Galilee; it is compared to the casting out of corpses into Gehenna, below 
the walls of Jerusalem, where the fire consumed or the worms gnawed the unburied 
bodies of the dead. Such teaching leaves us in no doubt as to the view which the 
omniscient and most gracious Saviour takes of the future and eternal pros^cts of 
those who desecrate their powers and misuse their opportunities in the service of sm. 

Ill On the other hand, watchfulness and severity with self will ensure the 

BLESSING OF THE ETERNAL LIFE, AND THE HONOURS OF THE HEAVENLY KINGDOM. Even 

supnosing that self is denied and crucified, that pleasures are foregone, that privations 
are incurred,— is all this worth thinking of with regret when the reoompense of the 
faithful is borne in mind ? What is this recompense ? The Giver of life himself pro- 
mises "entrance into life;" the Sovereign of the spiritual kingdom promises " entrance 
into the kingdom of God." If in some sense the saved are, in the process, exposed to a 
thousand ills and sorrows, still, though they enter lame and maimed and half-sightlesa 
into the kingdom of life, of God, they do enter, and entering are for ever glorious and 
for ever blessed. It is promised that through much tribulation Christ's followers shall 
enter into the kingdom of heaven. 
MARK — n. 



L3 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. rx. 1— 5a 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

>'er8. 2—8. — T^ie Transfiguration. I. The oiroumstanobs. At an Interval of sii 
..>r eight (Luke) days from Peter's confession and the teaching of the nross. " Into a 
high mountain," i.e. into some glen or secluded spot in the mountain. As there is 
Qo mention of any movement southward, and distinct assurance that they did not at 
this time go into Galilee (ch. ix. 30), the notion of Tabor being the mountain is 
unfounded. The slightness of its elevation, and the circumstance that its summit has 
been a fortified spot from the earliest times, render it almost certain that it was not the 
scene of the Transfiguration. All the evidence is in favour of Hermon, the snow-clad, 
sentinel-Uke peak in which the Anti-Llbanus range culminates. Its name means " the 
mountain," and it is spoken of in the Old Testament as " holy." Its cool slopes and 
upland solitudes would afford congenial retirement to the weary Christ. It was 
mental trouble he had to overcome, and this he sought to do in prayer and Divine com- 
munion. For this reason, and the signs afforded by the rest of the chapter of the day 
having well begun as they descended, it has been supposed it was a night scene. He 
was wont to pray during the night, and the disciples were " heavy with sleep." It gives 
a peculiar character to the occurrence to suppose this to have been the case. But that 
they were fully awake when the vision appeared, Luke again assures us. The duration 
of the vision is not suggested ; probably, as in dreams, time was an inappreciable element. 

n. The incidents. 1. Transformation, " He was transfigured before them," etc. 
The change described by the Greek word is literally one of form, but this must not be 
pressed. " It was a change in the externality of the' person," says Morison ; " a kind 
of temporary glorification, effected no doubt from within outward, rather than from 
without inward. It would reveal the essential glory of the spirit that ' tabernacled 
within, its glory at once in that lower sphere that was human, and in that higher 
sphere that was Divine " (' Practical Commentary,' in loc). The general brightness oi 
his appearance is noted by the three evangelists, Matthew comparing his face to the 
sun, and his garments to the light. Mark speaks of the fuller's white in his description 
of it. The face is referred to by Matthew and Luke, and all three refer to the garments. 
Luke tells us it occurred " as he was praying." 2. Association with Moses and Elias. 
They were seen by the apostles, but did not purposely present themselves. They were 
talking with him, and Luke tells us the subject of their converse : " his decease which 
he was about to accomplisli at Jerusalem." They were representatives of the righteous 
spirits in Hades, the world of the unseen, of disembodied spirits ; representatives, too, of 
the Law and the prophets. They had laid the foundations of the kingdom of righteous- 
ness which he perfected. They spoke of his death as the grand means of the fulfilment 
of the hopes of immortality, they themselves having in the manner of their own 
"exodus" afforded the shadow and prophetic type of which his was the substance. 
He is in essential, sjMritual oneness with them. 3. Peter's suggestion. Outcome of 
zeal, but not according to knowledge. It is seemingly enough for him to see his 
Master on terms of equality with those great spirits of the past. There is an undis- 
criminating comprehension in his proposal ; a desire also to extend the duration of the 
ecstasy in which he and his companions were. It breaks the grand harmony of the 
evolution of the scene, and yet is full of instruction. 4. Divine attestation. The three 
accounts agree in the words, " This is my Son : hear ye him." Matthew and Mark 
have also "beloved," for which Luke substitutes "my chosen;" and Matthew alone 
adds, " in whom I am well pleased." The words are but human renderings of the 
unspeakable " voice." They prove that the great Centre of attention and attraction foi 
the Church is Jesus, not Moses or Elias. 5. Restoration of Christ to his usual appear- 
ance. The distinguished associates of his glory vanish. The vision was no " baseless 
fabric," but it was over, and now the spectators must return to common life and 
mundane duties. Jesus " was found alone ; " " Jesus only." 

III. The lessons. These are innumerable, and we must content ourselves with a 
few of the more prominent. There was revelation for both Christ and his disciples 
A new light was thrown upon past and future, and the fear of death was broken. 
But the whole scene is best understood as a revelation and glorification of Christ. 1, 
Th* Divine Father has glorified his Sun, and thereby attested him to himself ami to thi 



OH. a. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. IS 

wnfidenee of lelieven. This was the "sign from heaven" vainly asked by the 
unbelieving Pharisees, and now granted to the three leaders of the apostles. And a 
corresponding revelation will take place in the experience of every true child of God, 
whereby his faith shall be confirmed, and he shall be " sealed unto the day of redemp- 
tion." The yearning, praying, aspiring spirit of the Son at last, in foretaste, attains ; 
and he a >d his followers are strengthened. The personal glory, the sublime association 
with the precursors of the kingdom in the past, and the transcendant commendation, 
loave no room for doubt in the heart of the true believer. The evidence is intuitive, 
bat it is spiritually complete. 6. The loftiest tendencies and aspirations of the Law 
and the prophets are fulfilled in the " obedience unto death " of the Divine Son. " They 
spake with him of his decease;" it was evidently central to their thoughts. The 
religious hopes of the past were to he satisfied in that way alone ; by that alone was the 
righteousness of God to be satisfied. Self-sacrifice is the spirit of both Law ap.i 
prophecy. To them the profound mystery of the hereafter was solved in the spirit 
of his death and in his resurrection ; " life and immortality were brought to light " in 
him. It is as associated with them and representative of them that he looked forward 
to his dying. The manifestation of the Divine Son is therefore of universal significance, 
and relates itself to all that was highest and most spiritual in ancient religious move- 
ments. 3. What Ood did for his Son on this occasion he will do for all who vitally 
belong to his "Body." Even as the bodily frame of Christ was transfigured, and partook 
of the inward glory of his spirit, so shall all in whose nature his grace is found appear 
with him in the glory of the resurrection. The spiritual law is manifest and certain, 
and it is evidently the same in the believer as in his Lord. Glury of spirit must 
sooner or later appear in glory of external appearance, and the body shall partake in 
the blessedness of the spirit. — M. 

Ver. 8. — "Jesus only." The transition from the glory and the spiritual vision to the 
sober light of common day — from the Christ uplifted in the radiance of heaven, and 
waited upot by the greatest spirits of ancient Hebrew religion, to the humiliated form 
of the man Jesus — was a perilous one for ordinary mortals to pass through. But it was 
necessary. It is for faith to penetrate the spiritual significance of ordinary forms and 
appearances, and grasp the Divine. It is to faith, and faith alone, that God is manifest 
in the flesh. 

I. Jesus outlives his eecommbndations. He is ever more, far more, than he 
appears to be. Some things and persons have nothing remaining when you strip the 
pretence and tinsel away. The radiance subsides into damp mist, and the glorioua 
brightness proves but bottle-glass. It is this overmastering intrinsic worth and power 
of Jesus which explains his enduring influence. Eloquent advocacy has been engaged 
in his cause, great ideas have been associated with him, his claims have been attested 
by miraculous powers and signs, and ever and again the background of the Divine 
mystery from which he emerged has revealed itself, and a multitude of external proofs 
etc. are forthcoming wheu required ; but he himself is greater than them all, and 
contains their latent possibilities within himself. When excitement, etc., are over, 
there still remains the power to elicit faith and constrain personal attachment. He 
himself is the ultimate verification of the faith of his disciples. 

II. Not the sign ob marvel, but Christ it is that saves. The former only 
provisional, the latter permanent. The familiar, continuing, sympathizing Christ. 
The crucified One ; the risen again ; and in spiritual presence the Dweller in the heart 
of faith. It is this Christ whose power is felt within, a vital energy and a moral 
impulse ; an Interpreter of the mysteries of life and death. 

III. He alone is suFFicrBNT FOR OUB NEED. There is an unhealthy longing for 
dainties in things spiritual as in bodily satisfactions. His teaching, his example, his 
sympathy, his perfect sacrifice, are ours if we but believe. God has testified his 
approval and acceptance, and commends him to us. Our own experience will seal and 
confirm the prophecies and attestations of others : " Now we believe, not because of 
thy sayin": for we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, 
the Savioor of the world " (John iv. 42).— M. 

Vers, 9—13. The toying that wa* kept. The disciples did not understand theit 



a© THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. II.1-5Q 

Master— « comiaon experience. Why was this saying so difficult? It seems plain 
enough to us. But then we look at it after its accomplishment ; they hefore that. 
And their rahbinio training taught them to look for something very diGFerent from 
what Christ seemed to be referring to. He spoke as if he alone was to rise again. Thej 
had been taught to think of the resurrection as universal, and altogether; not an 
experience of one here and another there. Moreover, their teachers had told them that 
Elias must first come. In fact, their habits of thought were all going in one direction, 
and this saying of Christ's in another. Yet, like fair and candid men, they did not 
dismiss the words as impossible of accomplishment or interpretation; but they "kept 
the saying." 

I. How ARE WB TO EXPLAIN THE HOLD WHICH THE HARD BAYHrOS OF ChKIBT HATH 

UPON THE DEVOtTT MIND? Their "keeping" the saying was doubtless for the most 
part a voluntary thing, yet there was also a sense in which it was involuntary. The 
subject it concerned awed and interested them, and they could not, if they had 
wisiied to do it, throw off its fascination. And so it is with the other hard sayings ; 
that which is to be said of this may be said of them. 1. Because of relation with 
similar experiences. Many a time had the actions of Christ, or their own spiritual 
history, presented enigmas that refused to be summ.irily explained. They were con- 
tinually stumbling upon some new, strange thing. They had just come out of a scene 
of which the wisest and soberest of them might well wonder whether it was fairyland 
or fact. And they were conscious of deep yearnings and aspirations to which the 
Saviour's words seemed to answer as the key to the look. These had evidently some- 
thing in common. The doctrines of Christianity may be difficult for the carnal mind 
to construe, but they appeal to a deep, universal, albeit depraved, human consciousness, 
which forbids their being at once dismissed from the thought. 2. And the sense of 
mystery is itself an element of fascination. The mind goes forth freely after the 
infinite and eternal in speculation and fancy, if not in serious moral interest, If there 
be but a substratum of apparent fact upon which thought can build, the sense of a 
mystery lying beyond is congenial to man ; and he will continually return to it in 
efforts to penetrate it. This is why — at least, one reason why — the world around us 
never palls upon our senses. Its commonest things are steeped in wonder of the 
unknowable, if we but take one or two steps onward in the study of them. 3. In 
addition to this, the disciples knew that no mystery was uttered by their Master viithoui 
tome gracious meaning in it, which luould sooner or later le made knotim. The hardest 
doctrine was, they felt, closely connected with their welfare, and would be seen to be 
so by-and-by. And Christians have experienced the same ever since. Our daily life 
is, if we be thoughtful, the best expositor of the deep things of grace, and keeps hover- 
ing within oiir horizon many an angel of revelation ready to deliver his message in 
due time. 

II. How should these be DEALT WITH ? The disciples " kept," i.e. held fast, the 
saying; thus affording an example to all true Christians. 1, We should continually 
endeavour to understand or learn their meaning. Sometimes simple communion with 
one's own heart will be enough ; or, again, it may be necessary to discuss them with 
others of a kindred spirit. Many of the happiest hours of life are so spent. Not that 
we shall always succeed ; very often there will remain an element of the infinite or the 
unknown that will trouble us. 2. But when human wisdom fails. Divine wisdom 
may he invoiced. " They asked him," and he cleared away the difficulty to the extent 
to which they made it known. To the praying soul the light will come in ever- 
increasing fiilness. More light will break forth from the book of earthly experience 
and from the |written Word of comfort and revelation. And when the mystery still 
remains insoluble, the Spirit of Jesuu will give us faith and patience until " the day 
dawn, and the day-star arise in our hearts," and we know even as we are known. M. 

Vers. 14 — 29. — The cure of the demoniac child. This stands out in striking contrant 
with the halcyon hour on the nountain with which the three had been favoured. 
Their brethren were experiencing i greater difficulty than they had ever yet known. 
But the discussion of the saying Ihey had kept, formed for the three an intermediate 
step down into actual life, and daily events and troubles. Christ, on the other hand 
appears to have received a greater fuluesa of Messianic consnicusnesft and powei 



ex. a. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MALK. 21 

through his transfiguration, aa was his wont after similar retirements into spiritual 
Hclusion. This incident affords a view of Christ's manner of dealing taith exceptional 
dijUoalties in spiritiud service, 

I. Accredited servants of Christ were being despised and DiscotTRAOED. (Vers. 
14 — 18.) 1. Their spirit was being daunted. The people ceased to respect them, and th§ 
scribes began to turn the failure to account as an argument against their Lord. What 
could they say or do ? Their Master was absent, and they were at their wits' end. A 
situation with its parallels in every age of the Church. Moral phases of individual, 
social, and national life which seem to defy remedy or even amelioration. DifBcultiee 
and failures in mission work, etc. 2. Their usefulness was at a standstill. The 
enemies of their cause had now the upper hand, and they were pressing them with 
objections and sneers. Perhaps they were even asking why their Master had gone 
away so mysteriously, and left them to cope with difficulties for which they were 
unequal. It was high time Jesus should come to their rescue. And lo 1 as the thought 
arose within them almost despairingly, he appeared I " The multitude, when they saw 
him, were greatly amazed," He had come just at the right moment, as if he divined 
the need for his presence. 

II. Thbib Master made the DiTFicniiTT an ocoasiok fob spiritual bebitkk 
AND instruction. 1. To the people, or generally. He laments their want of faith, 
and slowness to receive the things of God. They had the highest reasons for faith— 
his works and himself — in their midst, and yet would not believe. He gives vent to 
the feeling of weariness and moral disgust which overcame him, and in the face of 
which he still laboured and forbore. The want of faith, only immediately manifested 
towards the disciples, was in reality towards himself. That was the root and spring 
of their readiness to cavil, and their questionings and arguments. 2. To the father. 
His conversation with Christ is made by the latter a perfect spiritual discipline. 
Already the dealings of God had been experienced in his home and heart, and that 
which has been begun is carried to a successful issue. It is amongst the compensa- 
tions of great sorrows that, if they do not themselves induce a high spirituality of 
mind, they, at all events, help us to feel our need of the Saviour. There was a pre- 
paratory work already done, and Christ wastes no advantage thus gained. Having 
signified his willingness to undertake the cure, he begins to question the father, partly 
as an expression of sympathy, partly to show the true character of the case. In this 
he succeeds in eliciting an expression of the sceptical spirit of the man: "If thou 
canst do anything, have compassion on us, and help us." Here there is room for a 
commencement, and the Saviour repeats in grieved astonishment, "If thou canst I" 
It was a qualification that had no business in such a request, and it showed how poor 
was the spiritual life or power of the man. He then declares the grand condition of 
all his cures, "All things are possible to him that believeth;" which in this connection 
meant that all the blessings Christ conferred were given only in response to faith, but 
where that was there was no limit with regard to their bestowal. He did not mean 
that any request, of whatever kind it might be, would be granted if it were only 
accompanied by faith, but that all requests that were the outcome of a Divine faith, and 
consequently subject to its conditions — as, for instance, their being agreeable to God's 
^ill — would be granted, however hard they might appear to man. This remark awoke 
the slumbering spiritual nature of the father, whose love for his son was also at work 
to qiiioken his susceptibilities, and he cried out, " I believe ; help thou mine unbelief." 
There is great difference of opinion as to the true meaning of these words, and no 
certainty would seem to be attainable. Yet that they reveal a low, self-contradictory 
epiritual state is evident. Still, progress is perceptible. He at least knows his short- 
coming, and has asked for its removaL That was probably effected by the cure of his 
son, which took place, not because of satisfaction with the father's confession — a very 
faulty one at best — but through desire to prevent tumult, etc. ; for when " he saw that 
a multitude came running together," he quickly completed the miracle. But even in 
his expedition there is no hurry. The whole scene is solemn and expressive, and must 
have had a strong influence on all who looked on. 3. To the disciples. A call to • 
more intense and elevated communion with God. Prayer (and fasting) was a means 
to that. Faith is thus seen to be a condition both of getting good and doing good. It 
la because Chiistians live habitually on such a worldly plane that they lack power, 



22 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK.. Lea- ix. 1—50. 

Oneness in heart and life with God would remove " mountains.'' This power should 
he sought by all. 

III. He made it also an occasion fob mobb signal display op his glory. The 
delay, failure of disciples, gradual extraction of all the circumstances of the case from 
the father, etc., all tended to increase the moral effect of the final exercise of power. 
His authority as the moral Governor of the universe, and Destroyer of the works of the 
devil, is also vindicated in addressing the demon. Not less, but far more, awful are 
the effects of sin upon the soul. Its expulsion is a work of Divine power and grace, 
and exhaustive of the nature in which it has dwelt. It is for Christ to raise up anu 
revivify the poor wreck, the spiritual impotency that survives. So are the failures oi 
weak disciples retrieved, and where disgrace is, humanly speaking, inevitable, the glory ol 
God is revealed. The servants of Christ may despair of themselves, but never of him. — ^M. 

Ver. 23. — The omnipotence of faith. This is a case in which the revisers have 
introduced a dramatic play of expression into what has seemed a merely conditional 
statement ; and apparently with the authority of the best manuscripts. The words of 
Christ are seen to be those of surprise and expostulation. He sends back the qualifica> 
tion which the man had uttered, and asserts the virtual omnipotence of faith, and, at 
the same time, the dauntlessness of its spirit. 

L The spirit which characterizes the believer. 1. Confidence and fearlessness. 
The true believer will never say, " If thou canst." The greatest difBculties will not 
seem insuperable, and the testimony of sight and ordinary experience will be distrusted. 
Inward weakness and uncertainty will be conquered. The one thing of consequence 
will be, " Is this promised ? " " Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him " (Job 
xiii. 15 ; cf. Hab. iii. 17). 2. It is to be distinguished from self-confidence. There is ni 
immediate reference to self in such a conviction ; it bases itself upon the unseen and 
eternal, the laws and promises of God. Hence we may speak of the humility of faith. 
3. It is exceptional and divinely produced. Most men are guided by their ordinary 
experience. When that experience is deliberately set aside or ignored, it must be 
because of some fact or truth not visible to the natural mind. But such a discovery 
would be equivalent to a Divine communication. The faith which proceeds upon this 
must, therefore, be supernaturally inspired. It cannot exist save in one conscious of 
God, and of a peculiar relation to him. 

II. The possibilities op faith. If not wholly dependent upon the actual ex- 
perience of the power of faith, the confidence of the believer is nevertheless greatly 
sustained and strengthened by it. Besting in the first instance upon the consciousness 
of One mighty to save, whose help is promised and assured, and concerning whom it 
may be said, " If God be for us, who can be against us ? " the man of faith will also 
prize every indication that God has been with man. For he is assured from withia 
and from without that the possibilities of faith are : 1. Unlimited — because it identifies 
itself with the power of Ood. Faith is the union of the spirit of the believer with 
him in whom he trusts. It ensures nothing less than his interest and help. The 
weakest child of God can secure his aid. " If God be for us, who can be against us ? " 
2. Unlimited — save that it subjects itself to the will of Ood, Just as God is omnipotent 
and yet incapable of unrighteousness, so the faith of the believer will only avail for 
things pleasing to his heavenly Father. But, then, it never desires any other. The 
promises of God, however, declare the direction in which Divine help may be certainly 
expected ; and there are countless instances in which the believer can plainly discern 
the lawfulness and propriety of the objects for which he pleads. (1) The work of faith 
is ever blessed. (2) The prayer of faith is never denied; for if the answer do not 
assume the form expected, it will nevertheless prove to be substantially, and under the 
best form, the blessing that is required. And fervent, earnest, repeated prayer is 
unmistakably encouraged by the teaching of Christ. It is for Christians not to" pray 
less, but more and more importunately, only leaving the particular mode in which the 
answer is to come to the wisdom and love of God. 3. Unlimited — as illustrated in 
Scripture and the biographies of godly men. The eleventh chapter of Hebrews is a 
magnificent confirmation of the promises of the Lord ; and there can be no better 
exercise than the study of the answers to prayer recorded in the Word of God and tht 
liTes of saints. — M. 



te, IX. i--60.] "iRk GOSPEL AUOOBDINa TO ST. MARK. H 

Yet. 29. — " And he said wnto them. This kind can come out hy nothing, save iy prayer. * 
The work of the Christian Church essentially the same from age to age, although the 
external phase of it may change and pass away. " Casting out devils " sounds strangely 
on modern ears ; its associations, whilst they are weird and picturesque, are too far away 
to seriously engage our attention. We are in the habit of dismissing it in an offhand 
fashion, as a form of religious activity necessarily conflned to a transitional period of 
the development of Christianity, and having no relation to our own or any other age. 
But that is only a superficial view of the work of the gospel which will lead to such a 
judgment. " Casting out devils " is a task which belongs as much to the servant of 
Christ to-day as in the apostolic.age. The particular form assumed by the " possession " 
may not be the same, but the fact of " possession " still continues ; and the mission 
of the Son of God to " destroy the works of the devil " must be fulfilled, until human 
souls are freed from the thraldom to which Satan subjects them. In every sinful wish 
or thought Satan gains a foothold ; in every sinful habit formed he may be said to 
" possess " the nature in which it exists. Until we regard sinful habits as not mere 
habits, but as involving the presence and power of the evil one, we need not expect to 
grasp or deal with the problem of evil in our world. In the work of converting human 
souls, we are contending not merely with those who are the immediate objects of our 
solicitude, but with a supernatural antagonist, holding them in subjection, and deeply 
skilled in the arts requisite for the maintenance of his influence. " For our wrestling is 
not against flesh and blood, but against principalities, against the powers, against the 
world-rulers of tiiia iarkness, against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly 
places" (Eph. "vi. 12). It is due to this permanent characteristic of evil in human 
nature that such difficulties are met with as the text explains. 

I. Exceptional riFFicuLTiBS in spieitual work. 1. Occasioned by (1) a peculiar 
intensity of indwelling evil. We cannot explain it, but it is full of stubbornness, 
subtlety, and power of resistance. There is a mysterious sympathy, it may be, between 
the sinner and the special sin that besets him, or prevents his yielding himself to Divine 
grace. And this may go the length of (2) total enslavement of the nature. Like the 
epileptic of the story, not only the body but the spirit may be enthralled. The will is 
so weak that it is practically powerless. The external ministries of the Church are 
insufficient to deliver, unaccompanied as they are by any strong desire for salvation on 
the part of the sinner. It sometimes happens, too, in more general work, that a spirit 
of opposition displays itself, or circumstances are persistently unfavourable. The 
Christian toils on, but his efforts are like the dashing of himself against a rock, or the 
nloughing of the sand. There are none of God's people who are strangers to such 
experiences, which are : 2. From their very nature unexpected. The spiritual worker 
goes on with comparative or even brilliant success for a time, and then encounters sudden 
breakdown. The reason of this in most instances is, that a great proportion of Christian 
work is all but mechanicaL It consists in a routine of duties ; its results represent a 
sum total of indirect and sometimes unconscious agencies ; religious institutions are 
originatod perhaps in an impulse once imparted but not repeated, and are carried on 
thus far by " their own momentum." There occurs all at once a check, and a sense of 
helplessness and humiliation ensues, involving the baffled worker in spiritual perplexity. 
Such difticulties are : 3. Not an unmitigated calamity. They have their uses in the Divine 
economy. When searching of heart is induced, and hidden sins are revealed, or absence 
of direct communion with God is made manifest, or pride and self-sufficiency are brought 
low, they have accomplished a good and necessary work, 

II. How ARE THEY TO BE OVERCOME ? 1, The means. " Prayer," or, in the Authorized 
Version, " prayer and fasting." There is a singularity about such a specific. A particular 
case of failure occurs, in apparently exceptional circumstances, and the remedy is not new 
ar peculiar, but general. Could devils, then, come out by anything else than prayer, 
when man was the exerciser? It would almost seem as if the disciples had done their 
work hitherto by virtue of an external commission, using the name of Christ as a sort 
of talisman. This was sufficient for ordinary cases, but whenever one out of the usuaj 
occurred they were at a loss. 2. The reason for its necessity. The immediate occasion 
for the Master's admonition probably was the increasing laxity of the disciples in 
personal prayer, their outwaiiness, and their failure to grasp the essential principles of 
bis kingdom. But there was a more profound reason for the advice. The servant o< 



U tHE GOSPEL ACCOEt)lNa TO ST. MARK. [0=- 1»- 1— 5^- 



God should be in complete sympathy and oLtness with his Master, and that can only 
be cultivated by frequent acts of devotion and the exercise of a constant faith. It is 
not in his own strength that difficulties are to be met, but in Christ's. But that can 
only be imparted through fellowship with his spirit, which depends for its efficiency and 
depth upon repeated aois of the spiritual nature. The disciple by this rule is called into 
conscious personal fellowship with God, whose power will only then be granted. One^ 
ness with God is the secret of spiritual power. 3. The same principle applies to the 
whole life of th^e Christian. True success depends upon vital spiritual effort, upon con. 
scions co-operation with God, and consequent fasting from sell. If we would not be 
taken at unawares we must be watchful, in constant actual exercise of faith, and unin- 
terrupted personal communion with God. We are in danger of making too much of 
the external and accidental element in religion ; we can never make too much of him 
who " worketh in " and through " us to will and to do of his good pleasure " 
(PhiL ii. 13).— M. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — The gospel a source of sorrow and perplexity. Something very grand 
and pathetic in those rehearsals of the drama of redemption. The great heart of Christ 
yearning for sympathy, aud yet shrinking from the kind that was evoked ; wondering, 
meanwhile, at the " hardness of heart " of his disciples, who " understood not the 
saying." How inexplicable this failure to affect their moral nature ! So far as words 
are concerned, it was the same gospel as that which woke the nations at Pentecost; yet 
it was as if still-born ; an abstraction ; a mystery past finding out. It is a sad mono- 
logue ; a recitative upon a minor key. Beasons for this failure and ineffectiveness — 

I. It was not understood. From human standpoint all but incomprehensible; 
as it certainly could not have been originally conceived by man. A mood and sentiment 
too elevated for ordinary moral natures. An important consideration in determining 
the question as to who founded Christianity — Christ or his disciples. The " prophet '' 
must not discourse in an unknown tongue. 

II. It could hot be understood until it was accomplished. Intelligence, moral 
perception, and spiritual illumirjatiou waited upon the finished work. It was, so to speak 
a moral creation, which beforehand only the Author could comprehend, and afterwards 
still he alone perfectly. Bach step in the evolution of it, up to a certain point, only 
deepened the mystery. When Christ realized his work of salvation in act, his peojile 
began to realize it in thought and experience. 

III. And then only could it be understood through the spiritual life it 
CALLED FORTH. Christ had to evoke the very faculty by which the plan and spirit of 
his work were to be discerned. It is " unto Jews a stumbling-block, and unto Gentiles 
foolishness ; but unto them that are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of 
God, and the wisdom of God " (1 Cor. i. 23, 24). The world by wisdom knew it not, 
" but we received, not the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God ; that we 
might know the things that are freely given to us by God. . . . Now the natural man 
receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him ; and 
he cannot know them, because they are spiritually judged " (1 Cor. ii. 12 — 14). It is not 
until we learn the true character of God, and, in the light of that, the nature of sin, 
that we can from the heart approve of the career of Jesus as " the way of salvation." — M, 

Vers. 33 — 37. — Who shall he greatest 1 The selection of Peter, James, and John for 
exceptional association with Christ ; the primacy of Peter suggested by the words of 
their Master on a certain occasion ; and tlie spirit of the sons of Zebedee, shown in the 
request made by their mother, a little later, on their behalf (ch. x. 35 41), were cir- 
cumstances that soon attracted the attention of the others, and gave rise to discussion 
as to relative superiority. In dealing with this unseemly dispute, our Saviour showed 

I. That it was a question that ought not to de asked amongst Christ's fol- 
lowers. (Vers. 33, 34.) 1. His question elicited no reply. They were ashamed that 
he should have detected them. It was evidently contrary to his spirit, as they felt 
although they might be unable to explain. 2. That it is foreign to the genius ol 
Christianity is further shown by the evils it has created within the Church. A vast 
percentage of the failures and scandals of Christians has arisen from this contention, 
whether carried on in silence or expressed. Nevertheless that it is deeply seated in 



IH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. id 

human nature is shown by Its persistency from age to age. A motive of action we an 
ashamed to confess when a sense of Christ's presence is upon us cannot be a right one. 
And in proportion as the presence of the Master's spirit is felt, it is suppressed oi 
destroyed. 

II. The principle by which it should be settled when it abises. (Ver. 35.) 
" If any man would be first, he shall be last of all, and minister of alL" This is, and 
probably was meant to be, slightly enigmatical. Without altering the future of the 
sentence (" he shall be ") into the imperative (" let him be "), as some, without suflBcient 
lyarrant, have done, it is still possible to read in it several distinct meanings. It might 
mean that that was to be the penalty of such presumption ; that Gc4 would so regard 
presumptuous men; that this was a discipline to which they should subject themselves ; 
that the avenue to official pre-eminence was the greatest serviceableness and humility ; 
or, lastly, that7^ highest sxcdlence in the kingdom of Ood is his who abase* and forgets 
himself altogether in the benefit and advancement of others. It is in the last sense 
that Christ should be imderstood, if we are to take the general spirit of his teaching 
for our guide. In the Christian the virtue and usefulness are ends in themselves, and 
not stepping-stones to external, official pre-eminence. At the same time, there is a 
colourable suggestion, supported by experience, in the first three interpretations. The 
second last is the spirit of the Roman curia, which in literal expression looks so like 
the precept it contradicts. The sitting down of Christ, and his summons to all, prove 
the importance of the lesson. 

III. An illustration of the principle. (Vers. 36, 37.) " A little child," perhaps 
one of Peter's family. He gives an example in his own behaviour, simply and in- 
genuously, by embracing the child. 1. The lowliest in the kingdom of Ood should 
receive the purest sympathy and consideration. This is the most disinterested and 
unselfish service. The noblest deeds in God's world are of this kind : " Pure religion 
and undefiled before our God and Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in 
their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world " (Jas. i. 27). We can 
" receive " to the heart when we cannot to the home ; to kindness and love when we 
cannot to great earthly advantage. 2. The motive which distinguishes this conduct from 
ordinary human tenderness and affection. It is to be " in my Name," i.e. " on account 
of me," impelled by my example and spirit, and for the sake of my cause. It is only a 
" grace " or quality of the regenerate nature as he inspires it. 3. So regarded, the object 
of our love and compassion is really the representative of Jesus and of Ood. Christ has 
thus commended the children and the poor to the care of his people. And their 
sympathies thus awakened and directed are to be looked upon not as supplementing the 
deficient provisions of the Divine love, but only, in our own degree and measure, 
expressing and executing the infinite, loving will of " our Father in heaven." Herein, 
therefore, the lowliest service and the highest coincide. " See that ye despise not one 
of these little ones ; for I say unto you, that in heaven their angels do always behold 
the face of my Father which is in heaven " (Matt, xviii. 10). — M. 

Vers. 38 — 42. — The comprehensiveness of Ohrisfs service. The connection with 
what preceded is to be sought in John's keen sense of having transgressed the spirit 
of the beautiful words just uttered. Christ would acknowledge all who professed his 
name ; John had to confess that he had forbidden such a one from working. This leads 
to Christ's indicating — i i ■ 

I, Marks of his true servants. The general link between the several classes is 
bis " Name," i,e. conscious oneness and sympathy with him as the Son of God and 
Saviour of the world. Accepting that as the test, he lays down : 1. A general principle 
of comprehension. (Ver. 40.) It is negative. If a man does not oppose him, he is to be 
considered as an ally and a friend. There is no neutrality in man's relations to Christ. 
This was especially the case in that age : the devil was too active in human nature to 
suffer any opposition to be undeveloped. The powers of darkness and of light were in 
deadly antagonism, and all who were aware of the conflict were certain to have their 
sympathies engaged for the one side or the other. This seems a dangerous principle, 
and apt to lead to entanglement or disaster. " Divinely dangerous." Yet is it the 
teaching of the Spirit of God, and beautifully harmonious with it. 2. That those are 
his servants who do mighty works in his Name, This mere statement suggests how 



26 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, las, ix. 1—66, 

profoundly the work of Christ was leavening the community. There were many 
besides his professed followers who were influenced by his spirit. (1) That they should 
be able to do these works (which were of a miraculous nature) showed that they must 
already be in communion with his spirit. To cast forth devils could not be to further 
the cause of their prince, or to be aided by him. And so of the complementary work 
of awaking spiritual life in conversion, etc. Such work is manifestly of God, and these 
results prove his presence and approval. (2) The honour and cause of Christ will bf 
dear to such, even as to those more openly and professedly connected with him' 
Christ's servants do not work magically, by the mechanical force of dark formulas, bul 
by sympathy and moral oneness with him. 3. That sympathy and help Uywards a 
disciple, as such, is itself a proof of discipleship. (1) The slightest sign of this spirit 
is to be welcomed in faith and hope, as a firstfruits of greater things to come. (2) But 
in itself it is already truly a great service, and as such will be certainly rewarded. It 
seems almost more precious, in its connection, than the " mighty works ; " for these may 
sometimes incommode, and be mingled with much error and evil, but the merciful 
kindness is ever serviceable, and flows from no other fountain than the heart of God. 

II. The spieit in which thksb are to be eesaedbd. The child of grace is to 
be trustfully disposed, and ready to put a chiiritable construction upon the merely 
negative behaviour of men. And, moreover, it is to be recollected that the principle is 
not one of judgment, but of policy. " Jesus would impress it upon his disciples that 
they must honour and protect the isolated beginnings or germs of faith to be found in 
the world " (Lange). Towards all who do not oppose Christ there is to be an attitude 
of hopeful and trustful encouragement (cf. Matt. xi. 42). 1. Christian acknowledgment, 
"Forbid them not." Involving (1) brotherly recognition— not mere toleration; 
(2) fostering and protecting care ; (3) devout thankfulness and humility. 2. Eemem- 
biring their relation to the tame Master. (1) He acknowledges them ; (2) he will 
afterwards reward them ; (3) we shall be sternly and awfully judged if we " cause 
them to stumble." " The word for millstone indicates the larger stone-mill, in working 
which an ass was generally employed, as distinguished from the smaller hand-mill of 
Luke xvii. 35. The punishment was not recognized in the Jewish Law, but it was in 
occasional use among the Greeks (Diod. Sic, xvi. 35), and had been inflicted by 
Augustus (Sneton., ' Aug.,' Ixvii.) in cases of special infamy. Jerome states (in a not« 
on this passage) that it was practised in Galilee, and it is not improbable that the 
Romans had inflicted it upon some of the ringleaders of the insurrection headed by 
Judas of Galilee. The infamy of offending one of the ' little ones ' was as great as 
that of those whose crimes brought upon them this exceptional punishment. It was 
obviously a form of death less cruel in itself than many others, and its chief horror, 
both for Jews and heathen, was probably that it deprived the dead of all rites oi 
burial " (Plumptre, in ' New Test. Com.'). This punishment, such as it was, was but 
a shadow of the more terrible penalties of the spiritual state. — M. 

Vers. 43 — 19. — The value of deliverance from spiritual snares. I. Illubtbated bt; 
1. Relative importance of that which is sacrificed and that which is saved. They are 
as parts to the whole : as external limbs or members compared with the entire nature, or 
central ego. " Our Saviour of course specifies hand and foot only for rhetorical purposes. 
It is a fine, bold, graphic way of bringing home to the imagination and the bosom the idea 
of what is near and dear to our natural feelings. He speaks in hieroglyphics " (Morison). 
They represent also our natural lust, tendencies, and carnalized faculties. 2. Terrible 
consequences to tlte wicked in the world to come. " Gehenna ; " " the Gehenna of fire." 
" (iriginally it was the Greek form of Ge-hinnom (the Valley of Hinnom, sometimes oi 
the " son " or the " children " of Hinnom), and was applied to a narrow gorge on the 
south of Jerusalem (Josh. xv. 8) " (Plumptre). It became the common cesspool and 
place for consuming filth. Dead bodies of great criminals were probably cast forth 
without burial into it; and fires were continually burning for the destruction of the 
jffal. It is, of course, only a type of the punishment of the lost. " There is a com 
mingled reference to two modes of destruction— vermicular putrefaction and fire. "When 
men's bodies are destroyed, it is generally either by the one agency or by the other. 
Both are here combined for cumulative rhetorical effect. And the dread climax ol 
the whole representation is found in the cepselessness of the twofold operation' 



OH. a. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK, 21 



(Morison). There are two elements in this destruction, viz. : (1) internal corruptions — 
" their worm ; " and (2) external consuming forces— " fire." Both of these are to be 
understood of their spiritual analogues. 

II. MORALLT STIMULATIVE BECAUSE OP APPEAL TO FREE-WILL AND BPIBITUAL 

AGENOT OF UAN. These considerations would have no weight but for this. Just as 
one can cut off a band or a foot, and pluck out an eye, so one can restrain errinc 
desires and affections, and curb unruly appetites. This is the sin of the ruined one, 
viz. he is self-iuinei. And all corrupting influence one exerts, returns upon himself 
to his own destruction. Self-sacrifice is, there/ore, the only way of salvation. The 
power to do this is given by Christ. " It is better to make any sacrifice than to retain 
any sin " (Godwin). "The meaning is not that any man is in such a case that he 
hath no better way to avoid sin and hell [than being maimed] ; but if he had no better, 
he should choose this. Nor doth it mean that maimed persons are maimed in heav«n ; 
but if it were so, it were a less evil " (Richard Baxter). — M. 

Vers. 49, 60. — Christian purity — its origin and influence. These verses have been 
the subject of much controversy. They are obscure and difficult ; but the context is 
of great assistance, and a uniform interpretation of the term " salted " in the first and 
second clauses of ver. 50 will do much to remove the hindrances in the way of 
construing them together. Manuscript authority is not strong enough to compel the 
rejection of either clause, although our revisers have omitted the latter. Everything 
turns upon the sense given to " salted." It is evidently " purified," " preserved frorn 
corruption," in the second clause. So ought it to be understood in the first. " Con- 
sumed " is a sense implied in the sense " purified," and secondary to it. The whole 
emphasis of the passage is thus in favour of Christian purification. Again, the second 
clause of ver. 50 does not appear to have been quoted merely in confirmatory or 
illustrative allusion, but as a statement of the consequence which will flow from the 
first ; the conjunction having a slightly illative force. 

I. How SPIRITUAL PURITY IS PRODUCED AND SUSTAINED. 1. " With fire : " a 

figurative term, relating itself to the fire that is not quenched of the preceding passage, 
and the description of the baptism of the Holy Ghost (Matt. iii. 11, 12). " Even when 
manifested in its most awful forms, it is still true that they who ' walk righteously 
and speak uprightly' may dwell with 'everlasting burnings'" (Plumptre). "Thy 
God is a consuming fire " (Dent. iv. 24) ; and that to the evil in his people, as well as 
that out of which they are taken. This may refer (1) to the gen/ral spiritual experience 
of the child of God as subject to the influences of the Holy Spirit; (2) to Divine 
chastisement ; (3) to " the spirit to which our Saviour refers in vers. 43—48, the spirit 
that parts, for righteousness' sake, mth a hand, a foot, an eye " (Morison). It is " an 
alternative fire," " which indeed scorches the sensibility to agony, but which in the 
end consumes only what is bad, and leaves the soul freed from those moral combustibles 
on which the penal fire of Gehenna could feed." " 'E.e is preserved from corruption, 
and consequent everlasting destruction, hy the fire of unsparing self-sacrifice " (ibid.). 
2. This is the universal experience of true Christians. Because it is essential to the 
Divine life in the soul, if indeed it be not rather identical with it. Have we endvu-ed 
this " scourging," without which no son is received by our Father? Is this our spirit? 
Herein we can examine curselves. 

II. Its INFLUENCE. It affects : 1. Christians (1) individually ; (2) collectively. 
" Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with another." Purity of aim and spirit 
will obviate misunderstandings, and allay bitternesses between true believers. 2. Their 
lacrijices. It is in a sense the spirit of Christ's sacrifice communicated to theirs. As it 
was a law of the Levitical code that " every sacrifice should be salted with salt," so 
it is a law of the spiritual life, fulfilled througli the spirit of self-sacrifice communicated 
to the particular act and object of sacrifice. This applies to the whole outcome and 
expression of the spiritual life of the children of God, their thought, word, action, as 
well as to their gifts to the cause of Christ. 3. The general life of the world. " Ye are 
the salt of the earth." An indirect and incomplete, but still a positive blessing to the 
world of the unconverted. For this constant renewals of grace are required, from s 
source independent of ourselves. Watchfulness, prayer, ceaseless self-sacrific* in tba 
tpirit of Christ, — M. 



28 THE GOSPEL ACCORDmG TO ST. MARK. lea. ix. 1—50. 

Ver. 36. — Christ and the child: a sermon to children. The disciples of Jesus had 
been disputing amongst themselves which of them should be the greatest in his kingdom. 
Though they were ashamed to confess this, Jesus knew all about it ; for he overhears 
even whispered and secret conversations. He rebuked their ambition by calling a little 
child to him, who was glad enough to come to One so loving ; and taking him up in his 
irms, he bade his disciples become childlike, not caring for money and high positions, 
out being glad in the love of the Lord. Probably the child never saw Jesus again ; but he 
would never forget him. Legend reports that his name was Ignatius, and that he grew 
up to be an earnest and devout man, who at last bravely died for the faith. But the 
treatment of this child by Jesus is only an example of his treatment of children now. 
He loves them, and they should love him. 

I. Why did Jkstjs call the child to him? 1. Because there was something in 
the child which Jesus liked. We do not call to us and take into our arms those we 
hate and avoid. It was not sinlessness that Jesus saw in the child, but simplicity. 
He was something like what Jesus himself had been in the home at Nazareth, when he 
was subject to his parents, and so sweet, humble, and gentle that every one loved him. 
Children are not perfectly innocent ; they do many things that are wrong, and need to 
be forgiven. Jesus did not say to the child, " You can do without me," but, " Come 
to me." So, when he saw the young man who said he had kept the commandments, 
Jofius " loved him ; " yet he did not leave him as he was, but bade him go and sell all that 
he had. 2. Because there was in the child something he wanted. He wanted the 
child's lave. " My son, give me thine heart." The way to be loved is to love ; and 
Jesus loves us, not as crowds, but as individuals. Each can say with Paul, " He loved 
me, and gave himself for me." The child knew this from the look and tone of the 
Lord. 3. Because there was something he hoped to do for the child. He meant to save 
him. To be saved from sin involves something more than being forgiven. If bad 
temper asserts itself, you maybe forgiven for an outburst; but it rises again and again. 
Jesus would conquer that temper so that it should never trouble you any more. 

II. Why did the child go to Jesus? He might have hesitated' and said, " He 
does not mean it;" or, " The disciples are rough, and will push me back, or laugh at 
me ; " or, " Perhaps I had better wait a little, till I am older." Instead of this, he went 
at once, and went as he was. There are reasons why you, as children, should go to him. 
1. Because conscience says you need him. Conscience is more sensitive, and speaks more 
clearly in cliildhood than in age ; and this is an evidence that childhood is the appointed 
and the best time to hear God's voice. 2. Because affection says you need him. Some 
children feel much secret grief because they have an impression that no one cares 
much for them. Their brothers and sisters are more popular than they are, so they 
are always supposing that they are being slighted. Or perhaps they are at school, and 
are thoroughly homesick among strangers. How pleasant it is to feel that One who is 
always near loves you personally, intensely, fervently ! and how naturally should your 
love flow lorth responsively to him ! 3. Becavse energy says you need him. A child ia 
naturally active. The fingers itch to touch what is forbidden, to try what is unknown ; 
and mischief often results from no evil intention. All tliat pent-up energy is from God ; 
stored up for the doing of life's work, and the bearing of its burdens. And the Lord 
wants in his kingdom these vigorous frames and powerful minds, that he may sanctify 
and bless them — that the children may lead off the hosannas in which the world will 
join in the New Jerusalem. 4. Because hope says you want him. Every child has 
some hope of becoming better and greater. It is a sign that Paradise is lost, but that 
heaven is possible, else we might be satisfied. Many boys and girls have quiet times, 
little spoken of to others, when they say, " I wish I could be better ; that I could get 
over this evil habit ; that I was steadfast, pure, and true ; that I loved God, and was 
glad he loved me." That is the time when Jesus is near, when he stretches out his 
arms and says, "Come unto me;" and in answer to the secret prayer he will take the 
little one in his arms, put his hands on him, and bless him. — A. R. 

Ver. 41. — Christian beneficence. Loving consideration for others and generous 
kindness to them are among the fruits of the Spirit and the signs of true discipleship. 
Their effects it would not be easy to exaggerate. The law of kindness for Jesus' sake 
18 of all things the most Hkely to remove prejudices against Christianity, and to bring 



«H. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 29 



together those whose interests are separate, so as to ensure the salvation of society. 
Even on lower grounds, therefore, this law demands our obedience, for there is much 
in our social condition to cause anxiety to the Church. Questions once carefully 
ignored are being boldly discussed ; classes of men whose ignorance and poverty made 
them political nonentities are now powers in the State. Capitalists and producers are 
discussing anew their respective rights; owners of land are being openly asked whether 
the proportion they have received of its value is not greater than their due. And in 
all these movements agitators are exaggerating claims, some of which have in them 
germs of right. Meanwhile it is to be feared that religion, as a factor in the 
settlement of such disputes, is being disregarded, and debate is rife whether indeed 
the Christian faith is longer credible. Anything which would suddenly change the 
relations of various classes, any outburst of the communistic or nihilistic spirit, would 
bring about far more evil than good. Evils must be abolished now as they were in 
the early days of the Christian faith. When slaves were held in cruel bondage, and 
profligacy assumed hideous forms, and accumulated wealth appeared side by side with 
abject want, Christ and the teachers who followed him aroused no servile war, but by 
word and life showed a more excellent way. They taught that the highest bliss was 
not in abundance of possessions, but in abundance of spiritual life ; that the loftiest 
dignity was to be found not in the indulgence, but in the denial, of self; that all a man 
possessed he held as a responsible steward ; and that those removed from others in social 
position were brothers and sisters to be cared for. All this was exhibited in the life 
of One who went about doing good, and was seen in its ultimate victory on the cross 
where Christ died for us, that we henceforth might live no more to ourselves. One 
phase of this law of kindness is brought before us in our text, where its manifestation 
is recognized as a germ of discipleship. 

I. The dutt op Christian beneficence is asserted throughout Scripture. Under 
the old dispensation, the blessedness of him who considers the poor was exemplified in 
the experience of Job, and of the widow of Sarepta, and of multitudes besides. The duty 
was made still more clear in the New Testament ; and this is noteworthy, because the 
disciples of our Lord were themselves poor, so that no one of them could give out of 
his superabundance ; and even of our Lord himself this was true, though he so often 
showed that it was more blessed to give than to receive. On this principle the Church 
acted. Spontaneously Barnabas sold his estates to aid those who were in special 
difficulties because they were cast out of trade and home, and his example was 
contagious. There was no law passed that Christians should do this ; but though 
as a compulsory law it would have been an unsound dictum for all times, it was right 
and good when Christians, moved by pity for their poor persecuted brethren, distributed 
as every man had need. Spontaneity gives worth to such acts. He who thus gives, 
though it be but a cup of cold water, shall not lose his reward. 

IL The objects of Christian beneficence. All less favoured than ourselves have 
a claim, not necessarily on our money, but on our help and sympathy, in some form, 
when an opportunity comes for service in Christ's Name. 1. Human relationship has 
its claims on us, and he who does not " provide for his own," even though he benefits 
some religious organization, fails in his duty to his Lord. 2. Neighbourhood has claims 
on us. No follower of Christ can be like the rich man, who would give alms to be seen 
of man, but would let poor Lazarus die at his gate, fighting for crumbs with the dogs. 

3. Fellowship in the same Church has claims on us, though those needing our aid may 
be least in knowledge, least in capacity, least in attractiveness, or least in desert. 

4. But we are to do good untc all men, though especially to such as are of the house- 
hold of faith. Christ died for all, and in his Name, for his sake, in his spirit, we must 
seek to aid them, even though it only be by a cup of cold water. 

III. The bbabons fob Chkistian beneficence are numerous, but we may mention 
one or two. 1. All we have is from Ood. His providence has made us to differ. Our 
birth, our inheritance, our education, our natural capacities, — these are in no sense the 
results of our own creation or choice. He who gave us these, demands that we should 
use tliem in part to promote the peace and the comfort of those for whom his Son died. 
" Freely ye have received, freely give." '2,. Our superabundance is for others. V/hen 
our cup runs over, the droppings are not for ourselves but for others. When oui 
harvect is gathered, room must be made for gleaners as well as for reapers. Wastf 



30 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. ix. 1— sa 

IB against God's law. The breath we throw off from our lungs is wanted by nature 
The rain poured down so lavishly is not lost. The refuse flung on the soil is to reappeal 
in new forms. All nature rebul^es the waste and extravagance of which we are often 
guilty ; and Ambrose has well said, " It is no greater sin to take from him that rightly 
posse'sseth than being able not to give to him that wanteth." — A. R. 

Vers. 43, 45, 47. — Causes of siumhling. "If thy hand . . . if thy foot . , . if thine 
eye offend thee." The passage from which these few words are chosen is stern and 
severe ; yet it was uttered by the gentle Teacher who would not break the bruised reed 
Christ Jesus was not like the Pharisees, punctilious over little things, so he would not 
have uttered these words needlessly. He was not ignorant of human temptations and 
weaknesses, but had the most perfect knowledge of our nature. He was not one ol 
those scribes who would bind heavy burdens on others, and yet not touch them with 
one of their fingers, but was tempted as we are, and by a life and death of sacrifice 
endeavoured to put away the sin of the world. Words stern as these, coming from One 
who had generous views of sinners and unerring views of sin in its nature and effect, 
deserve our serious consideration. Our Lord thought them so important that he now 
repeated them, although none who had heard them previously in his sermon on the 
mount would be likely to forget them. The general lesson taught is this — that it ia 
better to die than to sin, and so to wrong ourselves and others ; but we confine our- 
selves now to the causes or incitements to sin here suggested by the "hand," the 
"foot," and the "eye." 

I. Of what is the hand an emblem? 1. Companionship. We shake hands with 
those to whom we are introduced or with whom we are friendly, not with those who 
are unknown or hostile. If we have quarrelled, and reconciliation has been effected, the 
outstretched Ijand is a sign that we are reconciled. It is often said that a man is known 
by his friends, and it is perhaps equally true that he is made by his friends, especially 
in the time of youth, when character is plastic and habits are readily formed. Some 
communication with others is a necessity of school and business life; but friends may 
be chosen ; and it is of the last importance that they be chosen well. Yet Christians 
will sometimes form a lifelong companionship with those whose worldliness will 
inevitably lead them astray from the ways of God. " If thy hand " in such a com- 
panionship " cause thee to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from thee." 2. Work. The 
hand is the medium through which we put forth our skill and strength. Daily work 
may have " holiness to the Lord " written on it, or may be the means of spiritual 
injury. There are shops in which disho^^sty is a necessity ; there are positions young 
girls are called upon to fill which cannot but injure their modesty and purity ; there are 
undertakings which can only succeed by a sacrifice of truth. Whatever thtir externa] 
and material advantages, these are amongst the causes of offence which our Lord calls 
on us to sacrifice. 

II. Of what is the foot an emblem ? By it we make progress. It may be taken, 
therefore, as a figure for getting on in the world. Parents are sometimes too eager for 
this on their children's behalf. They are like Lot, who sought the place of prosperity 
and was regardless of its temptations. It were far better to be less swift to attain 
wealth and position than to have the terrible awakening that will come to many at last. 
" What shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own 
soul?" 

III. Of what IB the bye an emblem? Through it most offences to the sotil'a 
purity come. Fatal has been the issue with many of " seeing life." David saw lusted 
and fell into adultery and murder. Eve saw, longed, and put forth her hand and took 
the forbidden fruit, and so came death into the world, and all our woe. Achan saw the 
garment and the gold, and covetousness led him to disobedience. Better to have been 
blind than to have seen that. How many now fa"l into evil ways who assure any one 
remonstrating with them that they are only goir. g to that place of temptation because 
they wish for once " to see what it is like"! There are books, too, which, from the 
doubts they insinuate or from the morality they implicitly commend, should bo 
abjured. It may be sometimes an intellectual loss, but it results in larger gain ■ and 
the law of the gospel is that which is here, and which St. Paul repests in the woida 
" Mortify therefore your members which are upon earth." — A. R. 



OH. a. 1— 50.J THIS GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. 31 

Vers. 43, 44. — Better die than sin. Christ is speaking here of injuries which we may 
do ourselves or others. Most men guard themselves carefully agaiast physical injury 
They insure against accidents, avoid miasma, and attend to the first appearance of the 
germs of disease. Yet sometimes they are like a commander who is on the alert against 
external assault, but is unsuspicious of treachery within. In a moral sense, it may 
often be said, " Aman's foes are they of his own household." The allusion to the hand, the 
foot, and the eye indicate that the causes of sin are found in our own nature ; that evil 
is natural to us as the use of these members. Sins spring from within : " Out of the 
heart proceed evil thoughts." When acts are repeated, habits are formed which become 
part of ourselves. Then these habits are allowed for and excused by others, so that we 
no longer get our attention directed to them as otherwise we might do. A notoriously 
selfish man is not asked to help others; a passionate or suspicious temper becomes 
regarded as a personal peculiarity. Yet, though it seems a part of ourselves, God says, 
" Cut it off, and cast it from thee." 

I. God's tkeatment of sin is eadioal. We naturally shrink from the severe 
method indicated here. Who has not suffered an agony of pain rather than apply to 
the surgeon or dentist, although it must come to that at last? Nothing short of 
amputation of evil habit will save the life of the soul. Some are satisfied that they 
have confessed, received absolution, and done penance at the bidding of a human 
priest. Others are told to exercise discretion even when tiie taste and smell of intoxi- 
cants are sources of peril, and their only hope is to cut them off. Many excuse the 
young in their follies, and say, " They must sow their wild oats." Ay, but they will 
never plough them up, and no subsequent sowing will alter the effects of the first. 
" Whatsoever a man sows, that shall he also reap." Now, if we see deformity in a child 
which will mar its beauty for life, the pain he would immediately suffer would not 
prevent our cutting it off; and if there be a moral weakness or an evil habit that 
deforms spiritual beauty, the treatment must be as radical. When the moth is in a 
garment, the careful housewife does not leave a few and run the risk. When a man is 
bitten by a mad dog, the hot iron will sear the flesh, though it causes agony. When 
a chili dies of diphtheria, the clothes are burnt and the little toys, which the mother 
would gladly keep, lest the other children should take the infection. The house is 
purged so as by fire. The treatment is severe, no doubt ; but Christ did not come to 
lead us in the path of ease, but of self-denial. He knew that it was not painless to cut 
off the hand or the foot and to pluck out the eye, but he declared it was better to suffer 
what was represented by this than that the man with all his powers should be cast 
into helL If this word comes as the sword of the Spirit to cut your heart in tviain— 

"Oh, throw away the worser part of it. 
And live the purer with the other half." 

Christ "died to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself," and in his Name we are called 
upon to " crucify the world with its affections and lusts." 

II. God's cai-l to obedience is uegent. 1. We are urged to this for the sake of others. 
What anxiety would be relieved and what joy would be imparted to Christian friends 
if, by the transforming power of God's Spirit, you were delivered from evil! Besides 
this, by delaying repentance you may be causing others to stumble. There is a word 
in this passage about children— little ones, young people who may be influenced by you 
for evil. If you laugh at serious impressions, jeer at another as a samt, discourage 
earnestness, and lead to folly or guilt,— take heed, for it were better that a millstone 
were hanired about your neck than that such a crime should curse you. Parents 
especially can hold back their children from evil, and encourage them to good, if they 
prayerfully seek to do so. By allowing sceptical or immoral literature, by encouragmg 
worldly companionships, they may foster a life of sin, and check the hfe of God m the 
Boul Still more power have they by example and personal influence. 2. We are 
uraed to this for our own sakes. Christ was the King of Truth. He never deceived, 
misrepresented, or exaggerated. Ponder, therefore, his solemn words, " It is better for 
thee to enter Ufe maimed," etc. This is not a literal description of hell. It is an 
allusion to Isa. Ixvi. 24, where the prophet describes apostates from Jehovah lying 
outside the holy city in the valley of Hinnom, where refuse was cast, and the 
worm of corruption died not, and the fires of destruction were not extingmshed. Thw 



82 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. ix. 1—60. 

was used as an emHem of " everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord." 
Figurative as the language is, it is ominous, and warns us against the untold terrors 
which await the impenitent — the retribution which follows unrepented sin. A man 
may escape the consequences of sin here, but the punishment must ultimately come. 
True, " God is merciful." But when a man on the sea-shore disregards warning, and 
the tide comes in, his cries and prayers are of no avail, and soon his dead body is flung 
up as a useless waif He has defied the merciless law of a merciful God. Put yourself 
in harmony with that law and it brings benediction, but oppose it and it brings 
destruction. The amazing sacrifice of Christ is only explicable on the theory that sin 
has effects beyond those which are visible here. " How shall we escape, if we neglect 
80 great salvation?" — A. R. 

Yto. 1—8. — The Transfiguration. A brief interval of six days occurs, "days of 
the Son of man," of which no record remains. How much of even this brief ministry 
to men seems to be lost! Yet is tlje account of each day to be given when, to every 
man favoured with his presence and teaching, it is said, " Render the account of thy 
stewardship." The silence of the record is an appropriate prelude to the sublime event 
which follows. " He went up into a mountain to pray." " Peter, James, and John " 
— " the flower and crown of the apostolic band " — were the privileged three who alone 
witnessed the scene, though the few graphic words of the historian, " kept and told to no 
man until after the Son of man had risen from the dead," have presented to the eye of 
the Church in all ages a clearly defined picture of it. And yet in viewing it we are 
dazzled by excess of light. Few and simple must be our words. " He was trans- 
figured," a word which is afterwards explained to apply to " the fashion of his counte- 
nance." It was "altered;" so St. Luke. St. Matthew adds, "his face did shine as the 
sun ; " while " his garment became glistering, exceeding white," " white as the light," 
" so as no fuller on earth can whiten them." Beautiful addition — so naive, so simple ! 
That Divine nature, which in the incarnate body was always transfigured before the 
eyes of men, now burst forth to view, radiating from within ; the hidden divinity 
shining through the veil of the flesh until its veil of raiment became radiant with 
light. 

I. In the history and development of the incarnate Son this event must have had 
its high import. What is personal to himself, however, is almost entirely hidden. Of 
the "talking " we hear only one word. The two men, " which were Moses and Elijah," 
" the founder and the great defender of the old dispensation," " spake of his decease." 
Very soon after " the days were well-nigh come that he should be received up," and 
" he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem." Henceforth his steps tend to the 
cross. 

II. But, whatever purpose was answered in respect of Jesus himself, the revelation 
most assuredly was, in the highest degree, important to the disciples, and through them 
to the Church at large. 1. Here is beheld the harmony, the unity, of the Law and the 
prophets and the Christ. 2. Here, within the " bright cloud " which " overshadowed 
th«m," though "they feared as they entered into it," they were made "eye-witnesses 
of his majesty;" they witnessed the "honour and glory" which "he received from 
God the Father." 3. They heard the " voice," and heard it " come cut of heaven," 
which bore testimony for all to receive: "This is my beloved Son." In this lay the 
" honour and glory " which " he received." So thought that one of the three who 
declared, " It is good to be here," and who would fa-in have built tabernacles on this 
"holy mount." This testimony had already been borne when, at the baptism, "a 
voice out of the " name " heaven " declared to him, " Thou art my beloved Son." Here 
the witness is o^him to others: " This is my beloved Son;" and with the additional 
word of command, " Hear ye him." Once again afterwards, when the Father glorified 
his Name, there came "a voice out of heaven" directly speaking to him ; though, as he 
declared, " this voice hath not come for my sake, but for your Bakes." How truly 
might he say of all that he received, "not for my sake, but for your sakes"! Now, 
not to Peter only, but also to James and John, is it revealed, " Thou art the Christ, the 
Son of the living God." Now they with him share this blessedness which " flesh and 
blood " could not impart ; now we, and with us all the Church, rejoice in the know- 
ledg* of this primary truth. How our hearts long to see h^ glory and kear the 



CH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 33 

heavenly voice, and dwell on " the holy mount" of vision ! And yet, how " good" 
soever it might be, it is better for the cultivation of qur hearts in righteousness, and 
far better for the suffering, sinful world, that we go down into the valley to struggle 
with the evil spirit, and by faith and love and obedience glorify our living Head, and 
seek a meetness for those "tabernacles" which are not made by human hands. — G. 

Vers. 14 — 38. — TTie Tiealing of the lunatic youth. Descending from "the holy 
mount, " where he had " received honour and glory from God the Father, " a scene 
presented itself in direct contrast to "the majesty" of which the favoured three had 
then been "eye-witnesses." Around the disciples "they saw a great multitude, and 
scribes questioning with them. " They had suffered a painful defeat. One of the 
multitude had brought to them his son, having " a dumb spirit ;" and he spake to the 
" disciples that they should cast him out ; and they were not able " ! A more pitiable 
object could scarcely be imagined. " Prom a child " he was " epileptic, " and suffered 
"grievously;" "the spirit ofttimes" casting " him both into the fire and into the 
waters" as if "to destroy him ;" and so dire was its influence over him that, as the 
father said, " wheresoever it taketh him, it dasheth him down : and he foameth, and 
grindeth his teeth, and pineth away ; " " it teareth him that he foameth, and it hardly 
departeth from him, bruising him sorely ; " and when it " taketh him" he, in inarticu- 
late tones, " suddenly crieth out." To add to the sadness of the case, the spirit was 
" unclean, " compelling its victim to acts of filthiness. The poor boy, too, suffered the 
grievous aggravation of being " dumb, " so that he could not tell out his sorrows ; and 
he was " deaf, " so that no word of strengthening consolation could be spoken to him. 
It was almost a misfortune to him not to be blind, for he could contrast his sad state 
with that of other youths around him. The father, wearied and disappointed with 
long and daily watching — for it seized him " suddenly"— and unable to find relief, 
brought him to the disciples, and met the sad rebuke of their inability. " They could 
not" cast him out. As a last resource, with timid, wearied heart, and with a hesi- 
tancy that surely found its justification in the failure of all efforts to obtain relief, he , 
brought him to Jesus, uttering the word so descriptive of timid doubt, "If thou canst 
do anything, have compassion on us, and help us. " It is now that he who bears alike 
our sins and sorrows, who "bears with "our weakness and our ignorance, who, even 
in his greatest works, strives so to work as to teach, corrects the imperfect view of 
the father, and makes his demand even upon his faulty faith, gently rebuking his 
pardonable insinuation. " It is not, 'If I can, ' but, 'If thou canst !'" And he adds 
for all ages the all-inclusive teaching, "All things are possible to him that believeth.'^'^ 
Christ's words, even of correction, rouse faith. The assurance that "all things" 
were " possible " to faith drew forth from the tremulous lips the profession of faith, " I 
believe ; " while the tearful eyes (margin) bore witness to the genuineness of the con- 
fession hidden in the lowly prayer, "Help," and therein forgive, "thou mine unbe- 
lief. " It is enough. With his word, in presence of a " multitude" that " came run- 
ning together, " he cast out the dumb and deaf spirit, and commanded him to " enter 
no more into him. " The scene is full of teaching : 

I. On the sad capacity of the HtrMAN LIFE POK StTFFBBING AMD DEGRADA- 
TION. 

II On the glorious power of Christ to heal and restore the utmost dis- 

OBGANIZATION AND DEGENERATION OF THE HUMAN LIFE. It is an instance of hiS 

" power over all the power of the enemy. " "With such a picture before their eyes^ 
who need hesitate to come to Jesus, in any need whatsoever? But the greate* 
teaching lies in the words spoken to the disciples in reply to their demand as to the 
reason why they "could not cast it out, "—"because of your little taith. 

III For us and for all, a third teaching, on the power of prayer and faith, lies 
ODenlV on the face of the Lord's words to the distressed father. It is impossible to read 
the Gospels without learning that in Christ's view the exercise of Di vine power over 
the suffering human life is often suspended on the attainment of certain conditions 
on the part Sf the sufferers. There is a fitness of things. Suffering and need seem to 
come of departures from the Divine order. The voluntary return to that order is most 
aptly, perhaps most easily, expressed by " faith. " It indicates the lowly submissive- 
ness of the spirit. It is the plasticity of the clay which truly prepares it for the hand 
of the potter It is the least, and yet the best, self-fitting work that can be done by 

mark II. 



34 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ce. ix. 1—50. 

any who would experience " the power of the Lord to heal. " It is at once the ac- 
knowledgment of the human impotence, need, and receptivity ; it is the symbol of 
departure from all other and competing helpers ; it is an acceptance of the Lord him- 
self, and in and with him the germ of all healing, whether of body or soul.— G. 

Vers. 28, 29.— T/ie conditions of success inspiritual work. As might have been ex- 
pected, " when he was come into the house, the disciples asked him privately, " " How 
is it that we could not cast it out?" The reply is simple : "This kind can come out 
by nothing, save prayer. " St. Matthew helps us to gain a clearer insight into the 
cause : " Because of your little faith. " " Many ancient authorities add and fasting'" 
(margin). The "little faith" must have approached closely to "unbelief," or to no 
faith, for the Lord adds, " If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed . . . nothing 
shall be impossible to you. " A little thought will compel us to learn much concerning 
the influence of faith and of prayer, if not also of fasting, in the work assigned to the 
disciples and in the general and ceaseless conflict with evil. That there was some 
hindering cause palsying the strength of the disciples is obvious. But recently Jesus 
had "given them power and authority over all devils," "and to cure diseases, " and 
they are suddenly powerless in the use of that authority. That they may have been 
cherishing feelings which were inconsistent with so sacred a trust, the subsequent 
record plainly declares. But our attention is riveted on the words of our Lord in his 
demand for prayer and faith ; and we learn at once, that the bestowment of great au- 
thority, even with high endowments, does not set aside the necessity for cherishing 
suitable conditions of mind in order to the effective discharge of the duties which that 
authority imposes. The calling to be apostles, the investiture with power to cast out 
devils and to cure diseases, does not release from the necessity to be clothed with hu- 
mility ^ — to live in that spirit of withdrawment from the world, and communion with 
the Father, which " prayer, " even if not joined with " fasting, " implies. The mere 
symbols of ofBce are useless in the spiritual realm. Rank in these hierarchies conveys 
no might. Yea, though the very " power" be given, and given by Christ himself, no 
presumption of personal freedom from the need of the lowliest spirit may be enter- 
tained. As Christ ' s own power was arrested by the " unbelief" of those amongst whom 
he would do " many mighty works, " so the " power " entrusted to apostles is defied by 
" the unclean spirit" if the minds of those apostles are not freed from unbelief, and 
not raised to an alliance with heavenly powers by prayer. Entangled in nets that 
beset- even their feet, exposed to temptations that rudely assail even them, they, 
though armed by the great power and authority of the kingdom, become weak, and 
are as other men. Hence we learn that in the spiritual kingdom — 

I. The mere atjthority of office is insufficient for doing great works 
IN THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. Apostles, prophets, preachers, teachers, rulers, are 
all taught that there is a condition of heart needed as well as an investiture of 
.jffice. 

II. No ENDOWMENT OF POWER OK GIFTS SETS ASIDE THE NECESSITY FOR LOWLY 

sniiiTUAL EXERCISES. For while these acknowledge and minister to lowliness of 
heart, they bring their possessor into a true and living sympathy with the heavenly 
kingdom, and make him a meet channel for the conveyance of its healing grace. No 
mere talent suffices. 

III. Faith and rRAYBRPULNESs describe the true condition of the soul of 

HIM OP whom it is to BE SAID, " ThOU HAST POWER WITH GOD AST) WITH MAN, AND 

HAST PREVAILED. " The Spiritual, who wield spiritual weapons, must maintain a 
spiritual sensibility. This cannot be maintained without that true fasting which is 
a withdrawment from the spirit of the world, or without that prayerfulness which 
is a true communion with the Father, or without that faith which is the real might 
of the soul. These are steps in the spiritual progress ; the final attainment being, 
not the feeble word on the lip, " Come out of him," but that perfect oneness with the 
Divine which, while it acknowledges the human impotence, makes the feeble man a 
true and fit instrument of the Divine power. For by that power alone, after all, is 
the devil cast out.— G. 

Vers. 33 — 37. — Honour. By slow steps Jesus had brought the chosen band of the 
disciples onward in that course of instruction which prepared them to ascend "the 



CH. IX. 1—50. J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 35 

holy mount " and behold " his glory, " " glory as of the only begotten from the Father. " 
He had also begun to show unto them that " he must suffer many things, " and " he 
killed, " making them "exceeding sorry." And he had spoken to them of the time 
" when the Son of man should have risen again from the dead ; " but " what the rising 
again from the dead should mean" they understood not. Now by silent and hidden 
byways, secretly, for "he would not that any man should know it," they passed 
through Galilee and came to Capernaum. Jesus, taking advantage of .this quiet, 
"taught his disciples" concerning the dark future that loomed upon him. But their 
minds seem to have been preoccupied, and " they understood not the saying. " Scarcely 
had they entered the house when he demanded of them, " What were ye reasoning in 
the way?" Shame covered their face, the searching question revealing the power of 
him before whom all hearts be open. They were dumb before him, for " they had dis- 
puted one with another in the way who was the greatest. " The distinction conferred 
upon the three, or the signal honour paid to Peter, may have been the occasion for this 
dispute, fanned perhaps by the anticipation of the decease at Jerusalem. Possibly 
there may have been an assumption of superiority on the part of one in that little 
republic. But such a spirit must be instantly crushed ; and on the dark human back- 
ground must the principles of the true heavenly kingdom be thrown forward. In 
calmness " he sat down," and solemnly " called the twelve" to him, and laid down as a 
principle to be then and for ever remembered, that in his house, or kingdom, or broth- 
erhood, things are different from what they are in ordinary communities of men. And 
strange as the paradox may seem, the lowest is the highest, the most laborious ser- 
vant is the true lord, the least is the greatest. " If any would be first, he shall be last 
of all, and minister of all. " Further to impress this truth upon the hearts of the men 
who were contending for the highest room, the chief seat, the father's place in the 
house. " betook a little child" — ^the least in the house, and the furthest removed from 
the head ; lower even than the servants, for they command the little children — " and 
set him in the midst. " The Lord's sermon from this visible text is elsewhere recorded 
at length. The lesson for us to ponder, and often to ponder, for we are in great dan- 
ger of forgetting it, is— He is the chief, the greatest, the first, in the kingdom of 
heaven who does most service in it. The honour is not to him who sits at the head 
of the table — any feeble one can do that ; but to him who, girt with a towel, waits 
on the rest — to him who sees the true greatness of the kingdom ; who so discerns its 
lofty, spiritual, and heavenly character, as to learn his own littleness in presence of it ; 
who perceives that its highest end and aim is reached in rendering the utmost service 
to men. He who has seen the " Lord and Master" of all girded with a towel, stooping 
to wash and wipe the feet of his servants ; he who has most of this his Master's spirit, 
who follows most closely in his Master's steps of toilsome, self-sacrificing service; he 
who, like his Master, does the most and the hardest work in the house ;— yea, he is 
really and indeed the chief, the greatest, the first, in the house. And so, in truth, is it 
in all houses and in all kingdoms ; the truly great are the labourers, the men who al- 
ways see the kingdom to be greater than they, and, seeing the aim of the kingdom to be 
greater than the kingdom itself, are lowly enough and great enough to serve that aim, 
and have their greatness and most honourable place, not in medals, and decorations, 
and plaudits, and rewards, but in the deep if hidden fact, that the kingdom's welfare 
has been most advanced by them, that they have saved it from ruin or advanced it in 
honour, prosperity, and blessing. Then let every one seek eagerly the first, the highest 
place ■ but let every toilsome servant know that, in Christ's view, that is most prized 
which is furthest from self -adulation, from empty vanity, from indolent glorying in 
place ■ that he who most obeys, who hardest works, who lowliest walks— he, even he, is 
chief ' This is the highest tribute paid (1) to all lowliness of mind, (2) to all dili- 
gent industry, (3) to all willmg, self-sacrificing service to the common good.— G. 

Vers 38—50 —Stumbling-blocks. The same spirit which had led to the disputing as to 
" who was the greatest, " had prompted the forbidding of one who, in Jesus' Name, was 
" casting out devils. " The only reason assigned for the authoritative prohibition was, 
" He followed not us " If to pride envy succeeds, and if hatred lurks near to envy, 
malice is not afar off. The simple correction, " Forbid him not, " is supported by the 
assurance that such a one cannot quickly become an enemy-' speak evil of me ; and 



86 THE GOSPEL ' ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. is.. 1— 5Q 

" he that is not against us is for ns." This admonition is urged by a teaching which 
branches out in threu directions, relating to — 

I. The faithful ACKNOWLEDCtMENT AKD EEWAED OF THE LEAST SERVICE KENDERBD 

TO THE DISCIPLES IN THE Name OF Christ — even " a cup of water to annk." 
Very wide apart are the two works, the " casting out devils" and the giving "a 
cup of water to drink." The one act may be performed by a mere child in age or in 
grace ; but the other is the work of the man in grace and years. That the disciples 
were in the wrong in forbidding him who did the greater work, is shown by the 
assurance that he who does the less is acknowledged and rewarded by the Lord of 
all. Did not the disciples know that the casting out of devils was service done to 
them? Were they as ignorant as so many to-day are, not knowing that in the con- 
quest of evil every one's best interests are advanced ? Intimately is the well-being of 
one bound up in the well-being of all. The human body is not more closely knit and 
compacted together than is human society. To do good to any part is to do good to 
the whole. And each part suffers in the suffering, or loss, or injury of any other. Then 
by whomsoever or howsoever devils are cast out, let every true lover of his race 
and every wise lover of himself rejoice. Such a worker is not " against us," but 
" for U8." 

II. The equally faithful punishment of ant who shall cause okb of the 
LowliEBT — one "of the least of these little ones that believe on me" — to stumble. 
But a rude interference with any worker of good is an offence against that good Lord, 
from whom alone men have power to do good. Here not only were devils cast out, but 
they were cast out in the Name of Christ. Plainly this was a servant of Clirist, and a 
disciple, acknowledged as " one of these little ones that believe on me," to whom the 
Lord had given " power and authority." And that power was being used obediently. 
How serious a stumbling-block was tlirown in the way of his obedience by the authori- 
tative prohiliition of the (possibly jealous) disciples ! But how great the penalty — worse 
than to have " a great millstone hanged about his neck," and to bo " drowned in the 
depth of the sea " 1 So jealously does the Lord of all guard the interesls even of " little 
ones." It were better for a man to lose his own life in time than to lead another astray, 
so thut he should lose the life eternal ; better for them both. But what was the greater 
evil to which the layer of stumbling-blocks was exposed ? Was it not the certainty 
that the Lord would do with his own body what he taught the disciples to do with 
theirs ?— " cut off " the " hand " or " foot," " cast out " the " eye " that caused the body 
to stumble, whomsoever that foot or eye or hand might be ? Was the foot cut off when 
Judas was severed from the body, and cut off to save the body, so that through all 
ages, of the twelve chosen, one must be wanting? Sad was the possibility, severe 
the warning ; but how merciful and gracious I Men act on the principle, and sever a 
limb to save a life, bo in spirituals should it be. 

III. The WISDOM of every disciple uttbblt renouncing whatever might 
cause him to stumble, or be a stumbling-block to others. For every disciple 
the principle holds good. It is wise to forego anything that threatens the true life 
rather than lose that life. To retain all and be " oast into hell " — not into the mere 
hiding, or hidden place, but into " the unquenchable fire," the fire into which the 
spirit will be cast; worse than that, into which the body may be thrown, the real 
Gehenna, not the symbolical one — is to lose all. " To enter into the kingdom of 
God," having suffered the loss of that which was dear as an eye, a hand, or a foot 
" is good" i]'<ieed ia comparison with being " cast into " that " hell." There is a final 
fire, a fire that " is not quenched," which is punishment. And there is a present tem- 
porary fire, a salting fire, which is corrective and disciplinary. To this the cutting off 
the hand corresponds. It is a pain-giving, fiery ordeal, with which every one in God's 
good way is " salted." And there is a salt of self-denial, which leads men to be " at 
peace one with another." It is held in the thought, which the " many ancient 
authorities " teach, that if any one would be a true sacrifice to God he must faithfully 
apply the fiery salt to the green, cankerous wound and burn out the evil, lest the 
evil burn out and burn up the life. — G. 

VeM. 2—18.— OUmpses of the glory of Jesus. 1. Special favours fob spboiai 
■KBTI0X8. The three disciples had given up all to follow Christ, had submitted them 



SH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



37 



selves entirely to the Divine will. Only to such consecration is the deepw vision d 
truth granted, and ascent to the loftiest heights of spiritual enjoyment. 

II. Different aspects of Chhist's appeahancb. 1. He wore one appearance for 
the multitude, another for the circle of disciples. In the multitude he was the Prophet 
and the Wonder-worker; to the disciples the Friend and familiar Teacher. The mnlti- 
tude felt that he must be a great Man ; the disciples knew him to be the Anointed One 
and Divine. 2. Among the disciples themselves : there was the familiar and ordinary 
the extraordinary and unusual aspect of Christ. Here he passes out of the earthly 
raediam of vision into one of celestial and supernatural glory. 

" How nigh is grandexu to our dust I 
How near is God to man I " 

3. The manifestation of Christ is one in which extremes meet. The Man of sorrows 
the beloved Son, delighted in of God. The lowly Teacher and Missionary of the' 
kingdom of God ; the enthroned Massiah. The Man, the God, and " both together 
mixed." 4. We cannot always enjoy the higher views in their clearness and brillTancy. 
After the vision and the voice, they look round and see "Jesus only ! " Well for those 
who can ever see and find in Jesus of Nazareth the highest revelation they need of the 
Divine majesty and the Divine love. — J. 

Vers. 9 — 13. — Dark sayings. I. Reserve and delay in the utterances of 
truth. There is an economy and an order in the kingdom of God. It is constantly 
obseived by Christ. Certain truths there are always and everywhere to be made 
known ; others must wait their time. As we are not to pry into the secrets of God so 
neither are we hastily to blab them. Peculiar personal revelations should be treated 
with delicacy, not made an affair of the news-room or the market-place. The hour 
will come when our holiest memories, our deepest convictions, will be extracted from us 
by the need of the time. 

II. Illusions of religious thought. The prophecy concerning Elijah (Mai. iv. 5) 
was misunderstood, being taken literally. It was fulfilled in the person of the Baptist 
(John i. 21 ; Luke i. 17). John came to restore the Jewish people from the wrong 
teaching and preachers of later times, to the earlier and better lessons of the Law and 
the prophets. Another illusion was that the Messiah was to be a glorious earthly 
sovereign, and exempt from suffering. The scribes overlooked the predictions con- 
cerning the sufferings of Christ. So has every age its illusions ; and God in every age 
fulfils himself unexpectedly. Even out of the humble and the lowly, the base things 
of the world, he causes his purpose to unfold, his power to be made manifest. The 
spirit of prophecy teaches that suffering belongs to the present service of God. — J. 

Vers. 14 — 29. — The demoniac. I. Want of spiritual power is caused by want 
OP faith. Faith is a mighty word in the g"spel. It really includes all the energies of 
knowing, feeling, and willing ; it is the entire affirmation of the man in favour of truth, 
goodness, and love. It is life in the power of God. In a sense it is unnatural to be 
without faith, for it is the pulse of the world. If we have not this we are weak, we can- 
not move a step beyond the bounds of actual knowledge — can take nothing for granted. 

II. Faith, when weak, becomes diminished by association with those who havb 
,0NR. We become cowards or braver in company : pessimists or optimists. We trust 
in the good order of the world as God's, or give up everything for lost to the devil. 
" God desires from all eternity cheerful and brave sons," says Luther. Let us keep 
company with cheerful and trustful souls. 

III. On the other hand, STRONa faith is communicative and inspirino (J. H. 
Godwin). Tell an invalid he is looking ill, and you make him feel worse. Tell him 
he is improving, and his faith in his physical future will revive at the brightei 
picture. We are governed by imagination, and faith is a kind of imagination. It ii 
exposed to the most contagious influences for health or disease. Whenever a etronf 
deed is done, or mighty word spoken — 

*• Our hearts, in glad surpri«e, 
To higher levels rise." 



n ■ THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [ch.ix.1-50. 

IV. Faith is the condition both of doino and eeobivino the highest good. 
Faith gives a mental picture, distinguished from other mental pictures in that it is aa 
good as a reality to him who views it. Now, we must have the distinct idea of a good 
to be received before we can place ourselves in the attitude to receive it ; or of the good 
to be done and the possibility of doing it, before we can set about attempting it. Tba 
question then arises — Can faith be commanded by the will? The answer is — Not 
directly. " Paint a fire, it will not therefore burn." But the rebuke of Jesns implies 
that the disciples ought to have had faith. And the lesson is that faith may indirectly 
be obtained, be promoted, fostered, and preserved by communion with God. — J. 

Vers. 30 — 32. — Eenewed prediction of death. I. Unwelcome outlooks should bb 
FIBMLT FACED. 'Tis not well to hide the head in the sand, like the ostrich, and try 
to fancy danger absent because not seen. For, if faced, the worst prospect loses at 
once half, and presently all, its terrors. 

II. The will of God is to be kecoonized, even in the wickedness of men. 
It is by conflict that his will is wrought out. Outbursts of crime ropresent only one 
side of great living forces, and onward moving facts. 

III. Unwelcome truths need to be repeated, but not fob all. There is an 
esoteric and an exoteric in Christianity. We do not tell children all we know of life. 
But there is an age, and there are persons, to whom all should be told that we know. 
Let truth be economized and wisely administered. — J. 

Vers. 33 — 37. — 2%e symlolic child. I. The example of childreit. They an 
humble and trustful in the presence of superior wisdom. Man not always so, but 
ought always to be so. 

II. The secret op power lies in service. Command others by being useful to 
them. Rise in a community by working your way through all the grades of service, 
from the lowest to the liigliest. 

_ III. To STOOP IN LOVE IS TO RISE IN HONOUR. Jesus puts his arms around the 
little ones and around the weak, and is enthroned in the dependent heart of mankind. 

IV. The scale of service, and the inclusion op the lower in the higher. 
The order of duty is not to begin with the high and the remote, but with the lowly 
and the mean. " God is served by obedience to Christ, and Christ by kindness to the 
least and lowest who belong to him " (Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 38— 50.— JIfoWfetZ sins. There are some sins which are singled out for peculiar 
denunciation by the Spirit and Word of Christ. They are extremely opposed to the 
ends and purport of the kingdom. 

L Intolerance. That is, the hindering of good, because the good is not done in 
our way._ Christianity says the good deed justifies iiself. Coining from a good 
source, it is not likely to be associated with evil opinions or teaching. Any one who 
does good nowadays may be said virtually to do it in the Name of Christ To do <rood 
one need not, cannot, pass out of the Christian atmosphere. And experience of history 
confirms the statement of Christ. Good men really love him, whatever difference 
there may be in their mode of conception of him and statements about him All that 
IS done for loves sake is virtually and really done in his Name. 

II. Causing sin in others. Involuntarily people may take offence, "stumble" at 
™r f ° T ''^-7^ "^""1 hA^^^l^e inferences being drawn, nor turn bad reasoners 
or conduct mto good, nor weak brethren into strong. But we can avoid doin<. what 
we know will hurt others. If we are reckless in this respect, the will and thelntellt 
gence are involved in guilt. 'ULBiii 

III. Deliberate preference op pleasure to EionT. The old storv nf tTio ,T,.n 
whodefended his dishonesty by the plea, "One must live/' has its me'll* for u" 
1 he judge replied to the culprit, " I do not see the necessity." So with the Christian • 
luxury 18 not a necessity; pleasure is not a neces.sity ; even life in he ower ensei; 
not a necessity ; but only life in the hi.lier sense-a giod conscience, a sourin purity 

IV. Sin can only bh ouked by .offering. Sin is 5n the intelligence want of 



m. n. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL AOCOEDING TO ST. MARK. tS 

principle; In the will want of energy for true self-realization. Our mistakes and 
troubles throw us upon the true principles of conduct, on the moral law of God. The 
fallacy of expecting blessedness by false methods leads us back to the true. Stem but 
kind is the discipline by which God uproots our follies and trains us for hiinself. — -J. 

"Vers. 1—13. Parallel passages : Matt. xvii. 1 — 13 ; Luke ix. 28 — 36.—^ glimpse of 
glory. L The Tbansfigitbation. 1. Allusions to the Transfiguration. The scene 
described in the above parallel passages is as singular as solemn. There are, however, two 
allusions to it in other books of the New Testament. One is in St. John's Gospel (i. 14), 
"And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his glory, the glory 
as of the only begotten of the Father,') full of grace and truth." The other occurs in 
2 Pet. i. 16 — 18, "For we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made 
known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of 
his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came 
such a voice to him from the excellent glory. This is my beloved Son, in whom I am 
well pleased. And this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with 
him in the holy mount." There is, moreover, an intimation of the same in the three 
preceding verses, where the apostle, speaking of his " decease," uses the same word 
(^loSos) which is found in this passage and nowhere else in the same sense in the New 
Testament, and where he speaks once and again of his aKiiva/ia, " tabernacle," saying, 
" As long as I am in this tabernacle," and " Shortly I must put off this tabernacle." 
As undesigned coincidences are acknowledged to be strongly corroborative of the truth 
of a narrative, so such allusive references as those just quoted are in the highest degree 
confirmatory of the reality of the awful event referred to. 2. Persons present. The 
persons permitted to witness this event were truly privileged individuals — of the chosen 
the more select, and of the loved the more beloved. This inner circle of the disciples 
consisted of Peter and James and John. They alone were present with the Saviour in 
the death-chamber of the daughter of Jairus, they alone were eye-witnesses of the 
Transfiguration, and they alone accompanied him in his agony. 3. Place of the 
occurrence. The place where the Transfiguration occurred was long believed to be 
Tabor, that solitary hill rising abruptly from the great plain of Esdiaelon, the ancient 
Jezreel. This tradition, prevalent since the sixth century, has been set aside in more 
recent times. The locality last named as visited by our Lord was Ceesarea Philippi, too 
far distant from Tabor jind necessitating too great a change of place. It is certain that 
the summit of Tabor was occupied at the time in question by a Roman fortress, and 
did not afford the solitude which the event referred to presupposes. Besides, that town 
of Caesarea Philippi lay under the range of Hermon, so that one of the heights of that 
snow-capped mountain was the most likely place. Hermon is the most cons|iicuous 
mountain in Palestine ; hence its present name of Jebel esh SJieikh, the chief mountain. 
There is, moreover, an expression of comparison in one of the narratives, which points 
in this same direction, for the graphic touch of St. Mark, " white as snow," might well 
be suggested by the snowy cone of Hermon. It must, however, be admitted that the 
words of comparison (Sis x'i") are omitted in i{> B> C, L, A, 1, in several versions, and 
by most of the critical editors, though found in A, D, B, P, G, and eight other uncials ; in 
the Syriac, Coptic, Gothic, and most of the Latin versions. 4. The time of the event. The 
time is specified by each of the three evangelists. Two of them, reckoning exclusively, 
specify a period of six days, and one of them, adopting the inclusive method, speaks of 
it as " about an eight days." This note of time, thus given in all the three narmtives, 
has in it something surely special and significant. Nor is it to be passed over slightly, 
for the element of time in this instance is helpful, not only in tracing the sequence of 
events in the life of our Lord, but also in indicating in some measure the significance 
of the particular event here recorded. Peter had made his famous confession of the 
Christ, and had been commended for the words of truth he spoke. Our Lord had 
followed this up by foretelling his own death and passion. But now, instead of words 
of praise he had to use the language of sharp rebuke, when Peter deprecated our Lord's 
sufferings, and, tempter-like, sought to divert his thoughts to an earthly kingdom, like 
those very kingdoms of the world and their glory which 8atan had proffered in one of 
his Teat assaults. After these and other conversations about Messiah's work and the 
nat^e of his kingdom, a week or thereabouts had einpsed when the Transfiguration 



4C THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. [ch. ix. 1—50 

scene took place — a scene having an important bearing on the disciples at that crisis, 
on the Master in the near prospect of his passion, and on the Church at all periods and 
In all places. 

II. Concomitants of the Tkansfigueation. 1. Mountain scenery. In the scenery 
ef Scripture, as in the natural landscape, mountains form a conspicuous object. They 
are the spots so often selected for Divine manifestations, and so frequently signalized 
by solemn service or severe sacrifice. Why they have been chosen for such purposes 
we may be unable to explain. Whether it is that their sublime grandeur tends to 
elevate the thoughts from earth to heaven ; or that their separation from the plains 
and valleys around promotes meditative seclusion, helping to shut out the world and 
leave the soul alone with God; or whether the fresh free air that surrounds their 
Buminits has a bracing effect upon the human spirit ; — whatever be the cause, the fact 
of their selection remains the same. When Abraham, the father of the faithful, was 
summoned to surrender his son, his only son Isaac, whom he loved, the sacrifice was to 
take place on Mount Moriah. When God was pleased to appear to Moses in the bush 
that burned with fire and yet was not consumed, it was on Mount Horeb. When he 
came down in awful majesty at the giving of the Law, it was on the top of Sinai he 
descended. It was on bleak and barren Ebal the curses were pronounced ; it was on 
fair and fertile Gerizim that the blessings were uttered; while at each curse and 
blessing the living voice of the mighty multitude rolled up the hillsides, pronouncing 
the long " Amen." On Carmel Elijah denounced the prophets of Baal, and destroyed 
the worship of that idol. It was on Mount Zion that the ark and tabernacle found a 
resting-place in David's day, and there in consequence was the centre of Jewish 
religious service ; though it was on Mount Moriah that the temple was subsequently 
built. From Pisgah Moses looked across the flood and gazed on the land of promise. 
On Nebo God took his servant home to heaven. So also our blessed Lord himself 
chose mountains as the scenes of his discourses, doings, and devotions. On the Moun- 
tain of the Beatitudes he delivered those blessed utterances contained in that wondrous 
sermon on the mount. On a mountain in Galilee he manifested himself after his 
passion ; and from Olivet he ascended. And now he leads his disciples to that moun- 
tain apart ; and so retirement, it would seem, was one ground of the selection of a 
mountain on this occasion. 2. The preparation. But more important than the place 
of transfiguration was the Saviour's preparation for it. That preparation, we learn, was 
prayer. In every crisis of his history, and at every great event of his life, we find the 
Saviour engaged in prayer. One main feature of his life on earth was prayer. When 
he was inaugurated by baptism, and when he formally entered on his own ministry, he 
prayed ; for it is written, " It came to pass, that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, 
the heaven opened." Before he set apart his twelve apostles to found his Church and 
propagate his doctrine, he spent a whole night in prayer. When he wrought his 
greatest miracle, "he lifted up his eyes in prayer and said. Father, I thank thee that 
thou hast heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me always." During his agony in 
the garden of Gethsemane he prayed once and again, and a third time, with still- 
increasing earnestness. When he hung upon the cross he prayed, and prayed even for 
his murderers. As he ascended to heaven his hands were uplifted in holy prayer and 
heavenly benediction. And now that he is seated at the right hand of the Majesty 
on high he prays on behalf of his people ; for he is our Advocate with the Father, and 
ever lives to intercede. In like manner, the purpose for which he ascended the Mount 
of Transfiguration was prayer: " He took Peter, and James, and John, and went up into 
a mountain to pray." 3. Peculiarity of the Saviour's prayer. We must mark the 
peculiarity and purport of his prayer. It had this peculiarity, that one element of 
prayer was wanting — indeed, it must have been wanting. There were thanksgiving 
and petition, we know, but there could be no confession. He had no sin to confess" 
no contrition to feel for personal sin, no sorrow on that head to express, and so repent- 
ance in his case was impossible. Yet in his humanity, sinless though it was he 
needed prayer. The purport of such prayer we are at no loss to d'lscover It included 
petition for himself and intercession for his people; while this spirit of prayer served 
as a pattern for all his followers. Not only was he an Expiation, but an Example ; for 
ne left us an example, that we should follow in his steps. The character of his inter- 
cession may be learned from his prayer for Peter, and his great intercession (John xvii.'' 



OH. ns. 1-.50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 41 

for all his followers in all times and in all lands. His petition for the cup to past 
away from him had its answer in the power that sustained him in his agony, in the 
submission of his human will to the Divine, and in the angel strengthening him. 

III. Ghakaotbrs concerned. 1. Representative characters. In additioQ to the 
three favourite apostles, who were merely spectators but not actors, properly speak- 
ing, in this scene, we have Moses, Elijah, and Jesus, all of them in a representative 
character. Here were the Law-giver, the Law-restorer, and the Law-ful filler. The Law 
was given "by Moses ; it was restored, after a time of sad defection, by Elijah ; it was 
fulfilled in all its requirements by Jesus, who came expressly not to destroy the Law 
or abrogate the prophets, but to fulfil them both. They represented still more. Moses 
represented the Law and Elijah the prophets ; both doing homage to Jesus, who repre- 
sented the gospel, or rather Law and prophets merged in the gospel dispensation. 
Here, again, is one that never tasted death, but was transferred in a fiery chariot from 
earth to heaven. No doubt that very translation effected some change analogous to 
death. At all events, he may fitly represent those that are alive and remain till the 
coming of the Lord, who shall not sleep as others sleep, but who shall be changed ; 
'' for," saith the apostle, " we shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed." Here, 
too, is one that died as mortals die, but how or where his body was laid to rest nc one 
knoweth till this day; the only record is that "God buried him." Here, also, is One 
that died a violent death and by wicked hands ; he died and was buried, his grave being 
made with the rich in hiij death. Thus we get a hint that it matters little how we 
die — whether by the decay of nature, or fell disease, or dread catastrophe, or the hand 
?f violence; neither does it matter where or how we are buried — whether in the 
country churchyard, or city cemetery, or the desert sands, or the depths of ocean ; 
whether in the grave of the poor or mausoleum of the rich, whether in obscure privacy 
or with funereal pomp ; in any case, if servants of God, we shall be compeers of Moses 
and Elijah, and shall appear with Christ in glory. 2. A foreshadow of heavenly 
fellowship. Once more, though the apostles were mainly present as witnesses, still 
they were representative men. They were publishers and preachers of the new 
economy, and thus representatives of the Christian dispensation. Here, last of all and 
greatest of all, was Jesus, the Mediator of the new covenant and the Representative oi 
ail times. So in that heavenly state, of which the Transfiguration was merely a fore- 
shadow, saints of all times and of all dispensations shall be found. Believers during 
the legal age, believers in the times of the prophets, believers in the days of the 
apostles, believers from then till now, and onward till the consummation of all things, 
shall be there; " They shall come from the east, and from the west, and from the north, 
and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of God." Even a philosophic 
heathen could exult in the prospect of meeting the shades of departed worthies in a 
future state. " What bounds," he exclaims, " can you set to the value of conversing 
with Orpheus and Musseus and Homer and Hesiod ? What delight umst it be to meet 
with Palamedes and Ajax, and others like to them ! Then we should experience the 
wisdom of that great king who led his troops to Troy, and the prudence of Ulysaes and 
Sisyphus." Oh, how infinitely greater and holier is the joy with which the Christian 
can anticipate that grand gathering of all the faithful in Christ Jesus— patriarchs, 
prophets, apostles, martyrs, and confessors, all who purely lived and nobly died ; not 
only the one hundred and forty-four thousand sealed ones of all the tribes of the 
children of Israel, but " a great multitude, that no man can number," in that day when 
we shall " come unto Mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly 
Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and 
Church of the Firstborn, which are written in heaven! " 3. Becognition. Here it must 
be observed, in passing, that the apostles at once recognize Moses and Elijah, m what 
manner or by what means we cannot tell; whether from their discourse, or by 
information from Christ, or by some spiritual intuition, we do not know. At all events, 
we may fairly infer from this fact that in heaven there shall be distinct reoDgnition ; 
otherwise the crowded ranks of the celestial inhabitants would only present one vast 
collection of unknown and so less interesting faces. Other Scriptures confirm this. 
Thus Abraham seems acquainted with all the circumstances of Lazarus lite, an«* 
Dives knows the state of his brothers on earth. Paul gives us to understand that oui 
mental faculties shall be enlarged and expanded. Can we imagine, then, that memory 



ta THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. dl 1—60 

alone shall be impaired and diminished? Oh, what zest such recognition will give to 
the joys of heaven 1 Who is not alive to the pleasures of social intercourse on earth? 
With what satisfaction does a happy family surround the domestic hearth, or meet 
round the festive board! With wiiat dfli<;ht of family and friends is the wanderer, 
after long years of absence, welcomed to his native land 1 And oh, how great shall 
be the joy in heaven when the faithful minister meets those to whom he had preached 
the gospel, telling of heaven and leading the way 1 Or when the man of prayer meets 
those for whom he had offered supplication in seasons of danger, or difficulty, or 
distress, or disease, or at the hour of death ! Or when the spiritual teacher, whether in 
sabbath school, or Bible class, or cottage meeting, meets those who had been once his 
pupils, but are now his companions in glory! 

IV. Change debcwbed. 1. The glory of his person. Here we are to notice, in 
the first place, the glory of his person. From eteruity he had been in the form (itop(p^) 
of God. This had been his original form, but in the fulness of time he took upon him 
the form of a servant. Now for a while he resumes the form which he had laid aside. 
The form of a servant is changed back (jifT(ii.op^ii9-n) into that of Deity. He " was 
transfigured before them " is the statement of St. Matthew and St. Mark. The veil of 
mortal flesh became transparent. The glory of the Godhead broke through the con- 
cealment. Like a sudden sunburst from behind the murky clouds on a dark and wintry 
day, there was a glorious outburst of Divine effulgence. It irradiated his body, it 
diffused itself over his whole person, it surrounded him with an atmosphere of brightness 
and beauty. Beams of heavenly light flashed from head to foot. The whole man pre- 
sented an unearthly splendour. His appearance was a reflection of that j;lory which he 
had had with the Father before all worlds, and in which he appears among the inhabi- 
tants of heaven. 2. The change of his countenance. " The fashion of his countenance was 
altered" is the statement of St. Luke, who, writing for Gentiles, avoids the word trans- 
formed, or metamorphosed, on account of its association with heathenism ; while St. 
Matthew explains the nature of that alteration by saying, " His face did shine as the sun." 
After Moses' interview with God on Mount Sinai, the skin of his face shone so that he 
was obliged to cover it with a veil as soon as his public official duty had been discharged. 
Similarly, when Stephen, the proto-martyr, was brought before the council, " all that sat 
in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an 
angel." But in the case of Stephen and of Moses it was a borrowed brightness, ■\yhereas 
the Saviour's face shone with native irradiation. It was no reflected lustre, like that 
of the moon in the heavens, deriving all her light from the sun. The light and loveli- 
ness were all his own. The face soon to be marred more than any man, and hia coun- 
tenance more than the sons of men, possessed a brilliancy that was dazzling and that 
outrivalled the radiance of the sun at noon. That face, soon to be smitten and spit 
upon, and from which men hid in scorn and sorrow, now displayed a glory indescribable. 
The veil of humanity became too thin to hide the outshining of the divinity within. 
Like a magnificent temple grandly lighted up on every side and throughout its entire 
extent, from nave to porch and from dome to pavement, the Saviour's face and entire 
person — the whole temple of his body — was bris'htened up and beautified with celestial 
glory. 3. The glistening of his garments. Even his garments shared this heavenly 
transformation. They brightened, they glistened, they dazzled. The sacred penmen 
seem at a loss for similitudes to give us a correct notion of a change so marvellous 
and glorious. " White as the light," says St. Matthew; "shining, e.xceeding white 
as snow," says St. Mark; "white and glistering' — white and flashing forth as 
lightning (e'lao-rpciTrTai/)— says St. Luke. They lay both natnre and art under contri- 
bution for the purpose of describing it. They became "white as snow," says one- 
white as the snowy peak of the neighbouring hill with the sunbeams resting on it • 
" exceeding white," he says again, " so as no fuller on earth can white them."" When 
St. John saw him in apocalyptic vision, his head and hair were white as wool. Ages 
before, when Daniel saw him in prophetic vision as the Ancient of days, his garments 
were white as snow. On the Mount of Transfiguration his human nature was closely 
assimilated to his Divine nature, in which he clothes himself with light as with a 
garment. Such was Christ on Hermon ; what must he he iu heaven ? Such was he 
in his transfigured numanity ; what must be his divinity revealed? What shall 
he be whea, with face unveiled, we shall see him as he is? But, better and mort 



»H. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 4a 

blessed still, in that day we shall be like him. If, under a former portion of thil 
subject, we caught a glimpse of our companionship in heaven, here we get a glance at 
our condition in the heavenly state. 

V. Consequences. 1. One consequence common. Some of the consequences of the 
Transfiguration scene are general, and some special. There is one common to the 
saints of all times and of all climes. That transfigured body of Christ is the model 
and pattern of all the glorified. He is the Head, they are the members. " As we have 
borne the image of the earthly, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly." Here and 
now our bodies, though fearfully and wonderfully made, are bodies of humiliation. 
They are subject to many infirmities, liable to painful and even loathsome diseases, 
doomed to dissolution in a few years at most, while, worst of all, they contain the seed 
of sin, and their members too often are instruments of unrighteousness ; " for I know," 
says the apostle, " that in me (that is, in my flesh) dwelleth no good thing." But 
these bodies of humiliation shall be fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body ; these 
bodies, now "of the earth, earthy," shall be elevated to the condition of the heavenly; 
these bodies, now so frail, shall be endued with immortal health and vigour. Here and 
now the beauty of the fairest face soon fades: then the plainest face shall become 
beautiful, and that beauty shall be truly amaranthine. The features now saddened by 
sorrow, or marred by disease, or disfigured by age, shall become " bright as the sun when 
he goeth forth in his strength," bright as the Saviour's on the Mount of Transfiguration, 
bright as the face of our Lord was seen by Peter and James and John at that time, 
bright as it always appears to the saints in glory. Every blemish shall be blotted out, 
every wrinkle shall be smoothed, every disease expelled, and all decrepitude for ever 
removed. Then, too, on the sightless eyeballs of the blind shall flash the light of an 
eternal day, the ear of the deaf shall be unstopped, the tongue of the dumb sing, and 
the lame man for ever lay aside his lameness. Moreover, the richest raiment of earth 
will be but rags when compared with those robes of brightness which the ransomed in 
heaven wear. In view of all this may we not exclaim ? — 

" Oh for the robes of wliiteTiess \ 

Oh for the tearless eyes I 
Oh for the glorious brightuess 

Of the unclouded skies I 
Oh for the no more weeping 

Witldn the land of love, 
The endless joy of keepiiis; 

The bridal feast above 1 " 

2. An immediate consequence. Another and immediate consequence was to reconcile 
the disciples to the sufferings of their Master, and sustain them amid their own. Then, 
as now, the Jews overlooked the first appearance of Messiah in weakness, through 
haste for his glorious second advent. Then, as now, their pride rebelled against the 
idea of a suffering Saviour, in their anticipation of his glory. Then, as afterwards, they 
looked for a great temporal potentate, to whom all thrones would be subject and whom 
all sovereigns would obey. They antedated the glory of his reign. But this experience 
of heaven upon earth, of glory so surpassing was surely enough to make amends for 
those disappointed hopes. It was meant also to prepare them for the approaching 
crisis, to comfort them when it came, and to confirm their faith in his Divine majesty, 
even when, as a malefactor, he was nailed to the cross. 3. An additional consequence. 
A^ain, it not only helped to reconcile the disciples to the death of their Master, but 
doubtless went far to comfort Immanuel himself in the near prospect of his agony and 
bloody sweat, and of his cross and passion. Elsewhere we are informed that, " for the 
joy that was set before him, he endured the cross, despising the shame." This short gpac« 
of heavenly enjoyment, coming in as a parenthesis amid the wearisome struggles and 
strivings of earthly life, would cheer him onward towards the end. The foretaste thus 
afforded of the coming glory that would crown everlastingly the brief sorrows of the 
oresent would sustain him in the approaching sufferings. The cloud of witnesses that 
surrounds the Christian in his pilgrimage serves as a motive to urge him on, so that, 
laying aside every weight, he runs with patience the race set before him ; so these wit- 
nesses representative of ten thousand times ten thousand, intensely interested in thi 



M THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. ix. 1—50, 



Redeemer's work and intently looking on, would encourage the human spirit of ths 
Saviour, so that, braced with new alacrity, he would hold on the course appointed and 
pass through the baptism of blood. As bis baptism was the commencement of hia 
ministry, hie transfiguration was his consecration to suffering. 

VI. The conveesation held. 1. The persons engaged in converse. Here were two 
'prophetw men, of whom one died and was buried by mystic hands, no one knew how 

or where. 

" By Nebo's lonely mountaiii, 
On this side Jordan's wave. 
In a vale in the land of Moab, 

There lies a lonely grave. 
And no man knows that sepulchre, 

And no man saw it e'er ; 
For the angels of God upturned the sod. 
And laid the dead man there. 

"And had he not high honour? — 

The hillside for a pall ; 
To lie in state while angels wait, 

With stars for tapers tall ; 
And the dark rock-pines, like tossing plumei, 

Over his bier to wave; 
And God's own hand, in that lonely land, 

To lay him in the grave I " 

The other never died, was never buried ; but went straight from earth to heaven — 

" All undrest 

From his mortal vest. 
He stept on the oar of heavenly fire ; 

To prove how bright 

Are the realms of light. 
Bursting at once upon the sight." 

And now these two visitants from the heavenly world have taken their place together 
on that lone mountain apart. Here also were three apostolic men — the foremost of the 
apostolic band : John, with his heart of love ; James, with his high standard of law — • 
both of them sons of thunder with outspoken courage; and Peter, honoured with the 
keys that opened the door of faith to Jew and Gentile. " And why these ? " asks the 
devout Bishop Hall, in his ' Contemplations on the Holy Scriptures.' " We may be too 
curious : Peter because the eldest ; John because the dearest ; James because, next 
Peter, the zealousest: Peter because he loved Christ most; John because Christ most 
loved him ; James because, next to both, he loved and was loved most. 1 had rather," he 
adds, " to have no reason, but because it so pleased him. Why may we not as well ask 
why he chose these twelve from others, as why he chose three out of the twelve ? " 
But with prophets and apostles, the foundation of the future Church, was Jesus Christ 
the God-man and the Church's chief Corner-stone. The converse, however, was confined 
to Moses and Elias and Jesus ; the apostles were only listeners. One is naturally curious 
to know the subject that engaged the attention of that small but wonderfully select 
company. The subject must have been worthy of such an august assembly. 2. The 
subject of conversation. What, then, was the subject that occupied them ? Was it 
political, embracing the fate of kingdoms, or the fall of dynasties, or fast-coming times 
01 calamity and change ? Was it the extent and power and future breaking up of the 
great Roman empire ? Was it the subjection of Palestine to Roman rule, or the rela- 
tion ot the Tetrarch of Galilee to the Procurator of Jiidaa ? Nothing of all this. But il 
the subject was not political, was it one of Jewish casuistry, such as divided the schools 
of Hillel and Shamraai, about binding or loosing ? Was it in reference to the primary 
or derivative prohibitions of sabbath work — the avoth or the toldoth f Was it about 
the Ealakoth or Hagadoth — the rules of jurisprudence or the legends illustrative of 
them, and both afterwards embodied in the Gemara ? None of these, or such as thesa 
was of sufficient importance to command their attention. We might, however, reason- 



lUL IX. 1—60.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MAEK. 4i 

ably enough expect that it would he the beauties of heaven, with its gates of pearl, and 
streets of gold, and jasper wall, and foundations of precious stones ; or the grandeur of 
its minstrelsy and melody of its songs ; or the blessedness of the heavenly state and 
the ecstasies of its joya, or all the untold glories of the beatific vision ; or the unspeak- 
able magnificence of the heavenly hierarchy, with its thrones and dominions and 
principalities and powers. And yet it was none of these. It might have been the 
atmosphere of heaven brought down by Christ to earth, the perfection of his life when 
here below, the power of his miracles, the purity of his precepts, the preciousness of 
his promises, his words and works of benevolence. And yet it was none of these. It 
was perhaps a less inviting, hut certainly not less important, theme. Over and above 
what is common to all the evangelists, each contributes a part peculiar to himself. As 
St. Mark omits mention of the change that passed over the countenance of the Saviour, 
and fixes attention on the garments so white and glistening ; so St. Luke alone records 
the subject about which they discoursed. Our curiosity is thus gratified at least in 
part. True it is that, while we are made acquainted with the topic of conversation, 
the evangelist gives no hint of the conversation itself. And yet perhaps we have an 
echo of that conversation in the writings of those favourite apostles who were privi- 
leged to form the audience on that remarkable occasion. 3. A peculiar term. That 
most interesting subject was the decease he was to accomplish at Jerusalem. The 
expression is so remarkable, it is no way strange that attention has often been directed 
to it. Elsewhere in Scripture death is literally spoken of, or it is represented from its 
physical effect s.s " giving up the ghost," or it is euphemistically expressed as " sleep." 
This latter expression, however, is never applied to the death of Christ, for that death was 
no habe-like slumber — no gentle falling asleep. It was death in all its hideousness, in 
all its bitterness, with cruelly aggravated horrors and fearfully augmented terrors. In 
consequence of these sufferings the believer's death is now changed into sleep, and so 
we read that " them who sleep by (5iA) Jesus will Grod bring with him." The death of 
the Saviour is here set forth as an e|oSos, exodus or departure, so that the term would 
cover all that was peculiar in the exit of Moses, or Elijah, or Christ himself; while it is 
the result of his own voluntary act, and an event, too, in which he was more active 
than passive ; and so the ordinary verb ^davev is not used in his case. Likewise in the 
narrative of his death the evangelists use a similar expression, namely, e^eirvevae, " he 
breathed forth," Si. Luke and St. Mark; "he delivered up the ghost" (irope'Sw/te), St. 
John ; or " dismissed," sent away his spirit (oi(>7)Ke), St. Matthew. The decease he 
was about to accomplish at Jerusalem was thus lifted up out of the rank of ordinary 
dea^-hs, and raised by a whole heaven above them. It was a voluntary surrender : 
" No man taketh my life ; " "I have power to lay it down," he said, " and power tn 
take it again." It was vicurious as well as voluntary ; for he suffered, " the just for 
the unjus't, to bring us to Gud." It was valid for every expectant soul ; because " to 
them that look for him he will appear a second time without sin unto salvation." It 
realized the types of the old economy, for it was the great antitype that finished all. 
It crowned the sacrifices under the Law ; for " by one sacrifice he hath perfected for ever 
them that are sanctified." It fulfilled the promises of the past and guaranteed the 
bestowal of them all ; for " he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for 
us all, shall he not with him also freely give us all things ? " It put new meaning into 
many otherwise dark and obscure statements of Old Testament Scripture. It was the 
death of deaths. It was the gateway to eternal life ; it " opened the door of heaven 
to all believers." It was an offering ; for he gave himself an offering and a sacrifice of 
sweet-siuellin'' savour. It was a propitiation ; for " we have an Advocate with the 
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our sins." It 
was a ransom ; for " he came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give his 
life a ransom for many." Confessors took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, but 
that spoiling was the test of their own sincerity. Martyrs shed their blood unmur- 
murinsly and even triumphantly, but the martyr's death was the preparation for the 
martyr's crown. Yet martyrs and conlessors stood each in his own lot, suffering foi 
themselves and by themselves. Not so Jesus ; for others, not for himself, he drained 
the bitter cup; for others, not himself, he underwent the bloody baptism ; for sing, 
but not his own, he endured the cross, despising all the pain and shame. 4. Character 
of their conversation. The subject, then, as we have just seen, was that death— a death 



M THE GOSPEL AOCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. ix. 1—50 

which patriarchs, ami priests, and prophets, and pious persons under the old dispensa- 
tion looked and longed for ; a death which not only fulfilled the predictions, but 
realized the typical institutions of the old economy; that death which was tha 
complement of the legal economy and the consummation of the Jewish Church, 
and which, at the same time, formed the commencement of a new epoch and of a 
higher order of events. What a glorious subject! More glorious far than the fate 
of kingiloms or the fall of kings; more glorious than all the discoveries of science, 
or applications of art, or improvements of society. In their conversation on this 
iiigh theme they spake, no doubt, of the nature of the decease to be accomplished : 
of its necessity, to realize types and fulfil prophecies ; to " magnify the Law ind 
make it honourable;" to save miserable man and glorify Almighty God, restoring 
peace between heaven and earth, and " by one sacrifice perfecting for ever the sancti- 
fied ; " to overthrow the kingdom of Sat'\n, and diffuse light and life and love through 
all the world ; to extract the sting of death, " destroying him that had the power of 
it, that is, the devil," and throwing the radiance of heavenly glory over the darkness of 
the tomb. They conversed, no doubt, of the travail of the Redeemer's soul, and of his 
mediatorial reward in the eternal approbation of the Father, the salvation of the kst, 
and the praises of the redeemed for ever. Of all subjects this was the most important 
to men, the most interesting to Christ, and the most glorifying to God. This subject 
is still the great theme of the Church militant on earth, and the glorious song of the 
Church triumphant in heaven. 5. Apparently cut of place. But glorious as the 
subject of conversation was, and edifying as the manner of that conversation was, it 
might in one sense seem inopportune. Hence says an old divine already cited (Hall, 
in his ' Contemplations '), " A strange opportunity ! in his highest exaltation to speak 
of his sufferings ; to talk of Calvary on Tabor ; when his head shone with glory, to tell 
him how it must ble,?d with thorns ; when his lace shone like the sun, to tell him it 
must be blubbered and spit upon ; when his garments glistered with that celestial 
brightness, to tell him they must be stripped off and divided ; when he was adored by 
the saints of heaven, to tell him how he must be scorned by the basest of men ; when 
he was seen between two saints, to tell him how he must be seen between two male- 
factors : in a word, in the midst of his Divine majesty, to tell him of his shame ; and, 
while he was transfigured on the mount, to tell him how he must be disfigured upon 
the cross." So thought good Bishop Hall. But this subject is never out of 'place, it is 
never out of time. It is the theme of our praises both here and hereafter, and should 
be the subject of our prayerful meditations till we feel its transforming power, and are 
" changed into the same image from glory to glory, even by the Spirit of the Lord." 

"VII. Conclusion. 1. St. Peter's proposal. " Let us make three tabernacles," said 
Peter, " one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias." Chrysostom thinks that 
Peter's object was to remain away from the holy city, and thus, by remaining on the 
mount and remote from Jerusalem, prevent the Saviour's sufferings. God had taber- 
nacled in Shechinah glory, why should not the Saviour embod^r the same ? But the 

expression of Peter was rather the expression of an ecstasy of delight a plenitud* 

of joy which words could not express. So great was his rapture that he wist not what 

he said. A little of the joy of heaven would be too nmch for flesh and blood it 

would overwhelm us. Besides, Peter was overlooking the fact that the wilderness 
work and warfare must needs be resumed. The journey of life was not ended. Some 
droppings of heavenly blessedness had transported him into rapture, but the full wealth 
of its downpour was not yet at hand. He antedated the bliss of heaven, forc^etting 
for the moment that he was still on earth. More sacrifice, more suffering" more 
Borrow, more self-denial, more days of toil and nights of trouble, must interveue before 
he crossed the Jordan and entered the promised land. 2. The effect of emotion. Peter's 
exclamation partook more of the emotional than of the rational. It was rather the 
ofispring of ardent desire than of deliberate judgment. It proceeded more from the 




ght 

for us to be here," a fine thing, a pleasant tnmg ; not good in a moral senae,"which ii 
differently expressed (iyaflii-), but good i)hysically (itaKhu), which is the expression 
here. If there were a place on earth ot which this might be said, it was that Mount 



OT. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 47 

of Transfiguration. It was, jierhaps, the spot on earth nearest and likest heaven. 
There was a hill, an emblem of lieaven, which is the hill of God's holiness. There 
were two saints, an epitome of heaven, representing as they did the quick and the 
dead — those alive on earth, and the dead raised up at the day of judgment. There 
was the Saviour himself, in uncreated light and unveiled glory, at once the Source and 
Oentre of heavenly blessedness. There was conversation such as may be presumed to 
be held among the redeemed in heaven, for the burden of their song is, " Worthy is 
the Lamb that was slain." There, moreover, was temporary seclusion from the 
toil and turmoil of earth, from the business and bustle of the world, from the sorrows 
and sufferings of this mortal life and strife. There, too, was enjoyment of the 
unclouded sunshine and untroubled rest of heaven. There was a ravishing foretaste 
of the joys of heaven. No wonder, then, that Peter proposed to perpetuate the happi- 
ness, continue the enjoyment, and carry on the fellowship, erecting tabernacles and 
dwelling on the mount. But, on the other hand, there was something selfish, if not 
exclusive, in the proposal, for he was leaving behind his friends and fellow-worshippers 
on the plain below ; he was speaking in forgetfulness of the bodies of the saints that 
slept ; he was acting unreasonably in requiring Moses to forsake the Divine presence, 
after the uninterrupted enjoyment thereof during fifteen centuries, for a tent-like 
dwelling, and Elijah to forget the car of fire in which he had gone up, and now abide 
below ; he was strangely overlooking the recent subject of discourse with which Moses 
and Elijah had been so occupied — the decease that was to be accomplished, the death to 
be endured, the redemption to be effected, the sacrifice to be offered, and the salvation to 
be procured. In entire obliviousness of, or indifference to, all this, his proposal was 
to forestall the future and have a present heaven upon earth. In momentary rapture he 
forgot he was still in a scene of pilgrimage and in a state of sojourn ; he forgot he 
was a stranger in a strange land, which was neither his rest nor his home, and where no 
abiding city is to be found. He forgot that the Christian's life is a journey ; and what 
traveller can reach his destination without the toil of travelling? He forgot life is a 
race ; and where is the racer who is rewarded without a struggle, and who, without 
running, yet obtains the prize ? He forgot that life is a warfare, in which a fight, a 
hard fight, is to be fought before the combat is ended and the conqueror crowned. 
It is only when we shall have fought the good fight, and finished our course, and kept 
the faith, that we may say with Paul, " Henceforth is laid up for me a crown of 
glory, which God, the righteous Judge, will give me at that day." But Peter wist not 
what (KaMcv) ^^ should speak ; he wist not even what he (A-eyci) actually does say ; 
so enraptured was he with delight, so carried out of himself by the extraordinary 
occurrence, and so bewildered with terror at the same time. 3. Due in -part to sleep., 
Further, and finally, they had been "heavy with sleep," but either kept awake through- 
out it, or awoke after an interval, or rather started all at once into perfect wakefulness, 
now wide awake and fully alive to all that was seen or said. They had been asleep, 
wrapped perhaps in their aohas, according to Oriental fashion, on the ground, when the 
celestial light, bursting upon them, roused them thoroughly so as to witness all that 
transpired. 4. Miscellaneous remarks. (1) The disciples thought this was the pre- 
dicted coming of Elijah, but our Lord corrects their mistake, and tells them he had 
already come in the person of John the Baptist ; and as the prediction relating to John 
has been fulfilled, a fortiori will the prediction of Messiah's sufferings be fulfilled. 
Thus the seemingly awkward clause, " and how it is written of the Son of man," is 
best explained (a) as a parenthetic exposition of the preceding clause, and an a fortiori 
confirmation of the succeeding one. There is, however, (6) another explanation which 
takes " how " as directly interrogatory ; thus, " But how is it written of the Son of 
man ? that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought ; " so that, after the coming 
of Elijah had been stated, the object of Messiah's coming is specified by way of question 
■nd answer • " For what purpose is it written that Messiah cometh ? In order that he 
raav come to suffer as a malefactor, not to conquer as a warrior. (2) The apostles were 
sorely puzzled about "the rising from the dead." This does not refer to the general 
doctnne of the resurrection of the dead, which must have been known to them and 
believed by them; but they regarded that resurrection as far off, and understood, and 
rishtlv understood, our Lord to speak of a resurrection near at hand, affectmg himseW 
in some mysterious way which they did not then comprehend, and which they wer. 



4B THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. ix. 1—60, 

only convinced of by that wondrous event itself when it actually occurred. (3) Ths 
conversation before and the miracle after the Ti'ansfiguration are equally recorded by 
all three synoptists. In the narrative the prostration through fear is peculiar to St, 
Matthew ; the subject of conversation to St. Luke, as we have seen ; while the sudden 
departure of the heavenly visitants, and the perplexed questioning about the rising 
from the dead, are only related by St. Mark. (4) His teaching henceforth turned 
towards the cross ; while hia miracles between this and his passion were confined to 
live.— J. J. G. 

Vers. 14 — 29. Parallel passages : Matt. xvii. 14 — 21 ; Luke Ix. 37 — 43. — Healing 
of a demoniac youth, after the disciples' faH'^e. I. Striking contrast. We can 
scarcely imagine a greater contrast than that which is here presented between the 
»cene on the mountain and that in the plain below — the tranquillity of the one, 
the tumult of the other ; the calm repose of the one, the unrest of tlie other ; the 
blessedness of the one, the distress of the other ; the gladness of the one, the sadness of 
the other ; the glory of the one, the gloominess of the other ; the heavenly quietude 
of the one, the unseemly wrangling of the other ; the happiness of the one, the 
misery of the other ; the ecstatic rapture of the one, the excruciating pain of the 
other ; the confidence and comfort of the one, the disputatious unbelief of the other. 
The contrast was just that which we can conceive to exist between the holiness of 
heaven and the sinfulness of earth. The contrast is transferred to the canvas and 
made visible and palpable in the great picture of " The Transfiguration," by Raphael. 

II. Dbsceiption of the illness. This illness may be distributed into three 
elements — the supernatural, the natural so called, and the periodical. By the super- 
natural we understand the demoniac pcssession. This poor boy was under the influence 
of a foul and fiendish spiiit that made him deaf and dumb. The natural element, if 
natural may be applied in any sense to a state that is abnormal and unnatural because 
the result of sin, consists in the fearful manifestations, consisting of epileptic fits, 
madness, convulsions, grinding the teeth, ioaming at the mouth, and pining away. 
The periodical element is the fitful paroxysms, the crises of which were synchronous 
with the changes of the moon, so that " demoniac " and " lunatic " were both applied, 
and properly applied, to this peculiar case. 

III. A DOUBLE PEESONALITY. The change of subject with respect to the verbs used 
in this description brings into view a startling fact and exhibits a strange complication. 
Two personalities, or two personal agencies, are here combined, and the union between 
them is so close and complete that the transition from the one to the other is as 
singular as sudden. Thus the first two verbs descriptive of the sad condition of this 
wretched sufferer have for their subject, though not directly expressed, yet distinctly 
implied, the demon. He it is of whom the poor father of the unhappy boy says, 
" Wheresoever it taketh him " — or, more literally, wheresoever it seizeth {KaTa\d$ri) 
him — " it tearefh, or dashoth down, or hreaketh Qiairei) him." This is very graphic and 
as terrible as graphic. The demon so convulsed the lad as if he would dislocate the 
entire frame or dismember his whole body, breaking limb from limb. But the remain- 
ing verbs in the description, as it passes rapidly from the agent to the sufferer, require 
a different subject ; for it is only the boy of whom it can be said, " He fo'amcth," 
"grindeth his teeth," "becomes parched " (inipaiveTai), or " pines away." The same curious 
commingling of terms— some applicable to the demon, and others to the possessed 
occurs in describing the paroxysm which came on when the lad was brought into our 
Lord-'s presence. In the expression, " when he saw him," the participle is used, and is 
in the masculine gender, so that it appears to refer to the boy, and if so, it must be 
used absolutely ; but if it apply to the unclean spirit, the word irxeC/ta, spirit, is neater 
and thus it must be constructed ad sensum, and indicate the personality of that spirit ■ 
in either case, there is an irregularity of construction arising from this unusual blend- 
ing of personal agencies. Further, when the demoniac or the demon saw Jesus the 
demon or unclean spirit grievously tore (^(nr({pa|€i/, from tnrda, whence spatm, and signi- 
fying " to puU to pieces," not the same verb as that used in ver. 18) or convulsed the 
poor demoniac; while he fell on tne earth and wallowed (akin to the Latin volvo) that 
is, rolled himself (nvKia, equivalent to nvhlvSa,, used of rolling in the dust, in token ot 
grief), foaming. 



OH. IX. 1— 50.J THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. 49 



rV. The abrival of Jesus on the scene. Soon as the crowd saw him, they were 
quite amazed — perfectly astounded, the prepositional element in the compound verb 
implying the greatness of their astonishment. But what caused their excesBive 
amazement? It might be (1) the suddenness of the appearance of one whom they had 
been looking for in vain ; but now that they had ceased to expect him, all at once, to 
their surprise, he is seen approaching ; or (2) it is concluded by some, on rather slender 
grounds, that the term used does not denote mere surprise, much less joyful surprise, at 
the sudden and unexpected appearance of the Saviour, but rather a degree of alarm or 
perplexity on account of expressions to which utterance had been given in the dispute 
between the disciples and the scribes in our Lord's absence, and in reference to his 
power of casting out devUs. There is much more probability (3) in the opinion that 
the astonishment was occasioned by some remnant of the heavenly radiance still 
beaming on and brightening his countenance. This view is strongly supported by 
the analogous case of Moses, of whom we read that, on his descent from Mount 
Sinai, " the skin of his face shone," so that Aaron and the children of Israel " were 
afraid to come nigh him." If this explanation be accepted, there is in the two cases 
a similarity and a dissimilarity : the brightness of Moses' face made the onlookers 
afraid, and deterred them from approaching him; the heavenly splendour that still 
lingered on the countenance of the Saviour affected the spectators in the very opposite 
way, attracting them to him. Accordin<>;ly, while some waited for his approach, as 
appears from St. Matthew's account, which speaks of his coming to the multitude, 
others, detaching themselves from the crowd, sallied forth to meet him, running to hi;n, 
as we learn here from St. Mark ; while St. Luke informs us that on his coming down 
from the hill much people met him. The accounts of St. Matthew and St. Luke are thus 
harmonized by St. Mark's statement, from which we rightly conclude that part of the 
crowd went to meet him, and part waited where they were for his approach. Their 
salutation, including, as we think, welcome and friendly greeting, if not from the 
scribes, at least from the rest of the crowd, is opposed to the notion of perplexity or 
alarm referred to in (2). Our Lord's popularity with the multitude had not yet suffered 
any diminution, nor begun to wane. He finds on his arrival that a somewhat keen 
discussion had been going on between two parties very unequally matched — the scribes, 
with their general learning and special Bilalical lore, on the one hand, and his disciples, 
illiterate and imperfectly enlightened, on the other. The surrounding crowd, divided, 
most likely, in sentiment, and acting as partisans — some favouring the disciples and 
some the scribes — expressed approbatiou and disapprobation accordingly. The subject 
of disputation may be readily inferred from the sequel. Meantime our Lord asks the 
scribes with authority, " What question ye with [rather at, or against (irpis)] them t " 
or, better perhaps, " Why question ye with them ? " What proper ground is there for 
such acrimonious questioning? What sufficient reason can be shown for it? But 
another reading, having the reflexive pronoun, is represented by the margin — " among 
yourselves," or "with one another;" in which case both scribes and disciples are 
addressed in common. 

V. Application of the demoniac's fathee. To our Lord's interrogatory, one of 
the multitude, or rather one out of{iK) the multitude, stepping forward, volunteers an 
answer. He felt that his child's misfortune had given occasion to the altercation, in 
which the disputants had waxed warm, if not angry, and that it devolved of right on 
him to make the requisite explanation. Another and a more urgent reason calling for 
his interference was his paternal solicitude. " I brought \jliviyim, aorist] some short time 
a<To my son to thee ;" such had been his intention, as he had not been aware of the 
Saviour's absence. " I spake to thy disciples, in thy absence ]Xva, denoting here the 
purport of what he said, as also the puriiose for which it was said], that they should 
drive the demon from my son ; but they could not ; " while it must be observed that 
this verb is not an auxiliary, nor even a part of Siva^ai, but a stronger term {laxvaav), 
which, preceded by the negative, means that they had not strength enough for such a 
difScult operation. After stating, in reply to a question of our Lord about the length 
of time the suffering had lasted, that his son had been afiicted in this shocking manner 
from childhood, he went 'on to enumerate other aggravating circumstances of the afflic- 
tion to the effect that the demon often cast him into the fire and into the waters to 
destroy him. He then concluded with the remarkably earnest appeal, " If thou canst 
HARK — n. ■ 



EO THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, MARK. foH. ix. 1— 50. 

do anything, have compassion on us, and help us." The expression iSo^ffrja-oK (from 
0oii, cry, and Bia, to run) is very significant, being equivalent to " hasten to our cry foi 
help;" it is more than succour (from sub and curro, to run), wiich means to run to 
one's aid ; it is " run to our aid at our earnest, urgent cry for help." The compassion la 
taken for granted, being expressed by a participle ; and it also is a very expresave 
word, denoting the yearning of the bowels or heart in tenderness and pity. 

VI. The ISavioub's answer. Our Lord utters a reproof on the ground of their want 
of faith. In that reproof he includes his own disciples, the scribes who had been in 
conflict with them, and the father of the afflicted boy — one and all compretenderl in the 
" faithless generation" of that time. The failure of the apostles to drive out th<, demon 
had been a matter of humiliation to themselves, and of exultation to those hostile 
scribes, who had, no doubt, made the most of this case of unsuccess ; and that failure 
had been owing in part to weakness, jf not want, of faith. The scribes all along had 
acted the part of obstinatety incredulous sceptics. The distressed father, earnest as 
he was, and eloquent as he was in his appeal, betrayed much weakness of faith, saying, 
" If at all thou canst— if in any way thou canst," or " if thou canst do anything." This 
refers the matter of cure to the power of Christ ; the leper resolved the cure in his case 
into the will of Christ, " If thou wilt, thou canst." How prone we are to circumscribe 
the Saviour by our own narrow conditions 1 and yet he shows us demonstratively that 
he is above and independent of all such limitations. He proved to the leper his pos- 
session of the will, and to the demoniac's father his possession of the power ; and to us, 
through both, his ability as well as willingness to do to us and in us and for us 
" exceeding abundantly above all we can ask or think." The limitations are all on one 
side — all on our side, and are owing to the weakness of our frail and naturally faithless 
humanity. The possession in the present instance had been from childhood. The 
distress was thus of comparatively long standing ; it had beco^ne chronic ; it was an 
apparently hopeless case. It had defied the power of the disciples, and baffled their 
utmost skill and strength. While this failure had lowered them in the estimation af 
the crowd, and left them at the mercy of the biting taunts of the sarcastic scribes, it 
at the same time lessened still more the faith of the unhappy parent. The cure, there- 
fore, which our Lord effected in this seemingly hopeless, certainly desperate case, holds 
forth encouragement to the weakest and the worst — those morally so — to apply to him. 

VII. His appliance, 'i^he first direction is, " Bring him unto me : " you have tried 
the power of my disciples ; I now invite you to try mine. You have been disappointed 
by their failure ; but I will remedy that failure by my favour to thee and thine. Yuu 
have been disheartened — too much disheartened; I now bid you take heart of hope. 
T^is next step was to secure the confidence and strengthen the faith of the father; and 
for this purpose he employs his own words and (1) according to the common reading 
he said to him the (T-b) saying, " Ifthmi canst believe, all things are possible to [or possible 
to be done for] him that believeth." But (2) the word irumvaai is omitted in three or 
more of the oldest uncials, in several versions, by the critical editors Tregelles and 
Tischendorf, and by Meyer and some commentators ; and with this omission the sentence 
reads, " Jesus said unto ft«m. As for thy Jf thou canst, all things are possible to him that 
believeth." And (3) some, putting the acute on the antepenult iriarevcrat, take it to be 
Imperative aorist middle, and translate, " Believe what you expressed by your If thou 
canst, all things are possible to him that believeth." Again, (4) others take it interro- 
gatively, " The If thou canst f or What t If thou canst ? " so that the sense is as if he 
asked, " Is this what you say ? " or, " Do you really mean this ? " The man's own 
words were thus thrown back on him, and by this judicious retort he is brought to 
understand that faith in the Saviour's power and propitiousness is a prerequisite for the 
bestowal of the boon he sought; he is also brought to feel that the hand of faith must 
likewise be outstretched for the reception of spiritual benefits and blessings ; at the same 
time he is niade conscious of the great deficiency— the entire inadequacy of his faith for 
the attainment of the favour he is so anxious to obtain. Suspending his petition on behalt 
of his son, but resuming his request with the same term and now in his own interest he 
called aloud, with eyes brimful of tears — ^if this reading (/ierdt Scucpiay) is accepted, at' all 
events— affectingly and touohingly, " Lord, I believe ; help thou mine unbelief." Ha 
affirms the possession of belief, but that belief is so weak as to be «caro3lv worthy of the 
name; that he has »ome &ith, but that faith is small, exceeding small," like a grain oi 



OH. IX. 1—50.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDmG TO ST. MARK. 61 

mustard seed. Persuaded that his faith is too iosigniflcant to satisfy the coBdition, he praya 
[1) for its increase ; in other words, he seeks to be helped against his unbelief. Another 
'nterpretation, though advocated by some good and great men, to the effect, (2) " Help 
me, notwithstanding the weakness of my faith," has but little, we think, to commend it 
to favour and acceptance. Now at length all is ready for the beneficent operation ; the 
people are running together to the place, or running together yet more (m, denoting 
intensity or addition), when our Lord addressed the unclean spirit in terms of stem 
rebuke, and words of unmistakable authority, saying, "I" [^(4 expressed, and so 
amphatio and distinctive] — I, thy Master ; I, whose authority you cannot evade ; I, 
whose word of command you dare not disobey ; I, not my disciples, who were non- 
plussed by the strange and sudden outburst of thy fiendish malignity ; 1 order thee to 
some out of him at once, and never again to enter into him. 

Vin. The completeness of the oueb. The command to " enter no more into him " 
may be attributed to the weakness of the father's faith — to assure him there would be 
no relapse, to convince him there would be no return of the paroxysm ; it may also b« 
}wing in part to the malignant obstinacy of the foul fiend, who now, after crying 
iloud, and after convulsing the poor boy's whole frame with a horrible spasm, came out 
jf him, leaving him all but dead, so that the many said he was dead. The great primary 
let of expelling the demon had been accomplished, but the effect of his long dominion 
over the lad, and the shock to his system at departure, left him so thoroughly exhausted 
ind prostrate that a second miracle was required to supplement the first. In conse- 
;;iuence, our Lord seized him by the hand, or seized his hand, and lifted him up, so that 
he stood upon his feet well and sound and strong, as though the whole had been but 
the memory -of a troubled dream. An explanation was subsequently given to the 
disciples touching their inability in the present case, and their want of success in the 
exercise of a gift which had been bestowed, and which had been most probably effectual 
in other instances. The explanation appears to have respect to the character of the 
demon, and the conduct of the apostles themselves. First, there is mention of " this 
kind," by which some understand (1) the race of demons in general — " the race of all 
demons," according to Euthymius ; others limit the expression to (2) a special kind of 
spirits, peculiarly obstinate and stiffnecked, and consequently more difficult to be 
driven out ; while a recent authority on the subject suggests that the reference is to (3) a 
class of demons which manifested their presence by unexpectedly sudden and frightfully 
severe outbreaks, and for the expulsion of which the exorcist or physician operating 
required uncommon presence of mind and strength of nerve, as well as vigorous exercise 
of faith. But, waiving a discussion of this doubtful kind, and merely expressing our 
preference for the second of the opinions stated, we may notice briefly a strange term 
employed here, namely, go out (elExecu/). If the statement in which this word is used 
is to be interpreted literally, the meaning appears to be that demons of this kind could 
not go out, even if they would, of the persons possessed by any other means or in any 
other way than in the use or by the exercise of prayer and fasting. If this be the real, 
as it is the literal meaning, it is a circumstance of a strange, inscrutable kind ; and, 
among matters more or less mysterious, it is not the least so. We may, however, give to 
the words a freer interpretation and take them in the more ordinary sense, that this kind 
can be expelled by nothing but by prayer and fasting. The conduct of the apostles 
themselves had mo* to do with their powerlessness to cast out the demon in this instance. 
They had received the requisite power, as we read in ch. vi. 7 that, in sending them 
forth by two and two, he "gave them power over unclean spirits;" but they had 
neglected the discipline indispensable to the efficient and successful employment of that 
power Two circumstances in close connection with this neglect are assigned as the 
cause of failure— weakness of faith is mentioned by St. Matthew, and neglect of prayer 
is hinted by St. Mark. We may regard them as standing together in the relation of 
two joint causes, or rather as cause and effect in relation to this matter— neglect of 
prayer being the former, and debility of faith the latter. 

Pbactioal lessons. 1. We learn the important duty of parental solicitude for tha 
spiritual as well as, or rather more than, for the bodily, well-being of their offspring. 
In the case of the Syro-phcenician woman we saw how she identified herself with her 
afflicted daughter, saying, " Lord, help me 1 " Here likewise the father of the demonia* 
makes common cause with his child, in the words, "Have compassion on us, and help 



62 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDmG TO ST. MARK. [oh. ix. 1—66 

Of I" Especially should we travail, as in birtli, till Clirist is formed In their heart, and 
till by grace they ore enabled to renounce the devil and all his works. 2. Great impor' 
tance attaches to the element of time. The demon got possession early of this sorely 
distressed boy, and the demoniac power seems to have grown with the child's growth, 
and to have strengthened with bis strength, so that dispossession had become next to 
an impossibility. The apostles were not competent to the task, and when our Lord, 
in the exercise of bis almighty power, expelled him, it was only after he had made 
horrid havoc of the lad's system, frightfully convulsing him and leaving him lalf-dead. 
So, if Satan unhappily gain the ascendant in a young heart, he will do his best to blight 
the whole life ; he will hold his dominion with tenacity, and, if possible, to the end ; he 
will seat himself firmly on the throne of the affections, and exercise a despot's sway ; his 
dethronement will be attended with the greatest difSculty ; and if, by Divine mercy, his 
power is at last overthrown, it will cost pain of body, distress of mind, and grief of 
heart. Oh, how careful young persons should be to guard against the solicitations of 
the evil one, and to resist his power 1 How determined not to yield to his temptations, 
and to vanquish youthful lusts that war against the soul 1 How resolved, by the aid of 
Divine strength, to keep him out, remembering how difficult it is to get him out once he 
has gained an entrance, and especially if he has gained it early I 3. Every gift that 
God bestows should be diligently cultivated, and husbanded with care. The power 
bestowed on the apostles was, as we have seen, lost through their own remissness. 
Faith required to be kept in healthy exercise and active vigour ; devotion and self-denial 
were required for its maintenance. The neglect or nndue peiformance of these left them 
weak before the power of the evil one, and caused them to be humiliated in the presence 
of their enemies. Thus it was with the apostles and miraculous gifts. How much more 
18 such likely to be the case with ordinary persons in the exercise of ordinary gifts I We 
greatly need to use all the means that tend to strengthen faith ; above all, we must pray 
earnestly, in the beautiful words suggested by this passage, " Lord, increase our faith ; " 
avoiding at the same time any and every indulgence that might weaken faith or Blacken 
prayer. 

"Eestraining prayer we cease to fight; 

Prayer keeps the Christian's armour bright; 

And Satan trembles when he sees 

The weakest saint upon his knees." 

4. This passage cannot legitimately apply to any attempt at working miracleB in the 
present day. The age of miracles is past. The power thus possessed by the apostles 
was not to continue, and needed not to continue, after the great purpose for which 
miracles had been bestowed had been attained. Faith and prayer and fasting cannot 
of themselves confer the power ; they were needed to sustain it only where it had been 
bestowed ; they were required for its successful exercise where it did exist. 5. The 
greatness of the believer's privilege is immense, yet not without certain well-defined 
limits. "_ All things are possible to him that believeth : " this appears to comprise at 
Mice omnipotence in action and universality in possession. To the former we have the 
parallel statement of St. Paul, " I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth 
me ; " or rather, " in (ev) Christ that giveth me inward strength {iySurafiovvTi) ; " and 
thus the strength as to its source is obtainable by virtue of living and lively union with 
Christ, while as to its nature it is spiritual. But the reference is rather to what it is 
possible for us to get than to do ; and so all things are ours, for " we are Christ's and 
Christ is God's." There are here two limitations which, though not expressed, must 
be implied : (1) The first limitation restricts the "all things" to thing's truly beneficial 
—beneficial spiritually as well as temporally, beneficial for eternity rather than for the 
brief relations of time ; they are such things as are thus of real benefit, when regard ig 
had to the believer's condition and present position. (2) The second limitation ha* 
respect to the circumstances of others, that is to say, of those with whom we come into 
close contact, or with whom we have to do and deal in the affairs of life. All thines ar« 
thus possible to be attained by the believer, as far as they are consistent with hw real 
benefit, and compatible at the same time with his relations in the voidest sense— 
relations to his Father in heaven and to his fellow-man on eavih. Such is the poten- 
tiality of faith— it exteiius to ail things; such, too, is i»s practicability, exceptinronlv 
such things as, at the present or in the long run, do not comport with his own person/l 



a», t±. 1-60.1 tfiE (iOStilL ACCORDlirG TO St. MAilfe. 64 



good, as also with his relation to God, whose glory is paramount, and to his fellow-man, 
whose good, as well as our own, we are in duty bound to seek.— J. J. O. 

Vers. 30—32. Parallel passages : Matt. xvii. 22, 23 ; Luke ix. 43 — i5.— Prediction 
of his passion. I. Secrecy. "To everything there is a season, and a time to every 
purpose under heaven." Every man has a work to do, and a time allowed him to do it 
in. Every man, moreover, is immortal till that work is done, and God's will with him 
accomplished. In like manner there was a time allotted for our Lord's mission on 
earth. There was a time fixed for his ministry of mercy to man. When the fulness 
of the time was come, he made his descent into our world ; when the work he came 
to do was done, and when the proper period again arrived, he took his departure fron> 
our world. The appointed interval of his sojourn on earth no enemy could shorten by 
one day, no power could abridge it by a single hour; nothing could interfere with it, so 
long as " his hour was not yet come." Yet, notwithstanding this, our Lord never neglected 
the use ol such means as were proper for the prolongation of his stay on earth till his 
great work should he performed, and the destined period completed. Accordingly, we 
find him at one time returning to Galilee, and " walking no more in Jewry, because the 
Jews sought to kill him." Afterward, when Herod's attention had been directed to 
him, and his abode even in Galilee had thus become somewhat insecure, we tind him 
withdrawing to the more remote and less populous districts of that province. We are, 
moreover, informed that sub.sequently he had gone yet further from contact with his 
enemies, passing beyond Galilee into the Phoenician territory. This he did in order, 
it would seem, to escape observation, for while there he " entered into an house, and 
would have no man know it : but he could not be hid." This course our Lord pursued 
for various reasons. While each particular occasion on which he courted privacy had 
its own specific reason, we can state in general the motives that seem to have influenced 
him in this direction. As already intimated, he avoided such publicity as would bring 
him into hostile conflict with his enemies, so as to precipitate the crisis, and hasten his 
death, before the proper and purposed period. Again he sought seclusion, now for 
required rest, oftener lor more time and better opportunity of instructing his apostles 
for their future work and important mission. But while our Lord thus sought seclusion 
to prevent any interference either with the space of his ministry or with the plan of 
instructing his apostles, there was another eventuality which he carefully avoided, 
namely, any attempt on the part of the people to make him a king ; as, after the miracle 
of feeding the five thousand, we read that, " when Jesus perceived that they would 
come and take him by force, to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain 
himself alone." This was no very improbable contingency. In a moment of excite- 
ment, under the influence of enthusiasm, yielding to the impulse of popular feeling, they 
might attempt to place him at the head of a rebellion, if not a revolution, against 
existing authorities, and try to restore to Israel the temporal kingdom which Israel so 
ardenUy, though mistakenly, sought. This would have been a result greatly to be 
deprecattd. It « ould have left a stigma on the Saviour's name, and caused a suspicion 
about his design, both of which would have been most detrimental to the interests of 
that spiritual kingdom — the kingdom "not of this world," which he came to set up. 
Accordingly, we find that when he had restored the deaf mute, he charged them that 
" they should tell no man." Again, when he cured the blind man at Bethsaida, he 
sent him away to his house, saying, " Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in the 
town " — any townsmen he might chance to meet on his way home. Also, after the 
Transfiguration, "he charged them that they should tell no man what things they 
had seen, till the Son of man were risen from the dead." And now that they passed 
along (mpeiropeiovTo) through Galilee, " he would not that any man should know it." 
Even an apparent exception is easily accounted for: nor is there any real discrepancy 
between the injunction he laid on them after the restoration of the deaf mute (ch. vii.), 
to "tell no man," and the direction he gave the demoniac (oh. v.), to "go home to thy 
friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had 
compas'sion on thee." No doubt it was the same district of Deoapolis where both 
commands were given: but on the latter occasion our Lord was about to leave the 
district in question, so that there was no risk of his ministry being obstructed by 
the matter being blazoned abroad; on the former occasion he was going to tarry for a 



04 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. nt. 1— BO. 



time in the same region, and hence he resorts to the precautioH necessarj ondez 
circumstances which were thus quite different. 

II. He foretells his death. There were three great epochs in our Lord's 
ministry. The first was that of miracles, by which he attested the divinity of his 
mission ; the second was that of parables, by which he developed the nature of his 
kingdom ; and the third was that of suffering, by which he made satisfaction for the 
sins of his people. The miracles began with that at Cana ; the parables, properly so 
called, began somewhere about the commencement of the last year of the Saviour's 
work and ministry. Though his parabolic teaching began at this period to assume a 
more formal shapfl, he bad all along employed on certain occasions parabolic utterances 
of a briefer sort. Thus, for example, in the sermon on the mount the ■preement with 
one's adversary there recommended is of the nature of parable ; the similitude of the 
wise and foolish biiilders, with which that sermon closes, is still more distinctly para- 
bolic ; while subsequently, and before the beginning of his regular method of strictly 
parabolic instruction, we find such proverbial or brief parabolic representations as that 
of the new patch and the old garment, and that of the new wine and the old bottles, 
besides that of the creditor and the two debtors. Still, from the period indicated, his 
teaching by parables became more frequent and methodicaL The reasons of our Lord's 
adopting this method are such as the following : — 1. The harmony existing between 
the kingdom of nature and that of grace, and the similarity in their laws of develop- 
ment. 2. The adaptation to our nature of the historical element, real or ideal, 
contained in them. 3. The amount of truth communicable in this way to the dull 
apprehension of the disciples. 4. Their helpfulness to memory by linking the spiritual 
truth to some familiar natural object, the frequent occurrence of the latter always 
suggesting the former ; and : 5. A judicial veiling of the truth because of past dulness and 
indifference. The constant theme of his teaching henceforth consists of his sufferings 
and death, as is implied in the imperfect tense (^iSiSaaxe, " he kept teaching ") here used. 

IIL Previous intimitations on the subject. The previous intimations had been 
obscure. There had been the intimation of the Baptist when he pointed the Saviour 
out as " the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world " (John i. 29), and 
in the repetition of part of the same at ver. 36. He had himself given several figurative 
intimations of it, as when he spake of his death by violence, and his resurrection in 
three days under the similitude of the demolition and rebuilding of a temple. 
" Destroy," he said, " this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." This had 
occurred at the celebration of the first Passover after the commencement of his public 
ministry. Again, in his discourse with Nicodemus, he represented his crucifixion as 
an uplifting, and its beneficial effects by a comparison with Moses' lifting up the 
serpent in the wilderness, when the bitten Israelite looked and lived. Another 
intimation of his death, and the first allusion to that event recorded in this Gospel 
(St. Mark's), is the removal of the bridegroom, of which he said, " The days will come, 
when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them" (ch. ii. 20; Matt. ix. 15). 
Also, after the feeding of the five thousand, in the synagogue of Capernaum he made 
a reference to it in the words, "The bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will 
give for the life of the world." But the first clear and disiinci declaration is that of the 
preceding chapter (ch. viii.), when " he began to teach them, that the Son of man must 
suffer many things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and scribes, 
and be killed, and after three days rise again." 

IV. Similar declarations in the present and subsequent chapters. The 
first public, or at least the first direct and unreserved announcement of his sufferings, 
death, and resurrection, was made, as recorded in the preceding chapter, after the 
disciples had been convinced of, and Peter had confessed, his Messiahship, saying, 
" Thou art the Christ." On that occasion we learn from the fuller repcrt of St. 
Matthew that our Lord warmly commended Peter's confession, but soon after, as both 
Bt. Matthew and St. Mark inform us, found cause to condemn his indiscreet and 
anwelcome rebuke. The commendation is contained in the words, " I say also unto 
thee. That thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church." The lattai 
clause of the promise just cited has, as is well known, excited no little controversy, and 
called forth a variety of interpretations. 1. Augustine will have it that the rook on 
which the Church is built, according to the Saviour's promise, is Christ himtf^^ 



OH. IX. 1— 50J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 61 

2. Chrjsostom maintains that the confession of faith in Christ, that Peter had just 
given utterance to, is the rock on which the Church is based. We admit the show of 
reason and the plausibility with which both opinions have been expressed and enforced ; 
still we cannot concur in either. Chrysostom's explanation is chargeable with over- 
looking the context. So to some extent, though less so, is that of Augustine ; but the 
latter rests, besides, on a very doubtful distinction between two words which are 
frequently used in classical writers as interchangeable. According to this interpreter 
its import would be, " Thou ait Peter (iriTpos), a small stone ; but I am Christ, a strong 
Rock (irtT^o), and on this Rook, that is, myself, I will build my Church." In the 
Aramaic there is one word {Kipho) for Peter and for rock, just as in French there 
is one word for both — Pierre, Peter, a man's name, and pierre, a stone or rock. But 
in Greek there are the two words already mentioned, viz. Wrpoi and ir^rpa, so that 
in this play upon the word there is a slight variation in the Greek, without, how- 
ever, real difference of meaning. Even admitting the distinction between the two 
words, which has been questioned, if not entirely disproved, the explanation is evidently 
forced. We require to look more closely at the context as furnished by the eighteenth 
verse itself, and by the sixteenth. As recorded in the latter, Peter's answer was, 
" Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." Our Lord, after expressing approval 
of Peter's reply, and assuring him that the truth contained in it was the outcome, not 
of human discovery, but of Divine revelation, takes occasion to state another and no 
less important truth, and that in a form accommodated to the statement of Peter, 
" And I say also unto thee. That thou art Peter [r^rpos, a rook], and upon this rock 
(vfrpa) I will build my Church ;" that is to say, — You have made a good and true 
confession in acknowledging my Messiahship and divinity ; I also, in my turn, will 
confess what I have in store for you in connection with my Church. 3. Your name is 
significant — it means a rock ; and according to your name will he the nature of your 
work. With the foundation of the Church you will have much to do. On your 
preaching of the faith which you have just professed its foundation shall be laid. 
Similarly, elsewhere we read that the Church is " built on the foundation of apostles 
and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Corner-stone ; " whereas apostles and 
prophets are only the foundation in so far as they themselves, knit together with and 
cemented to Christ, lay the foundation hy their exhibition of Christ and declaration of 
the truth concerning Christ. It is as though our Lord had said to Peter, Among Jews 
and Gentiles your work is appointed you. Among the Jews on the day of Pentecost 
your proclamation of the selfsame faith, which you have just confessed, will lay the 
foundation of the Christian Church ; while to Cornelius the same gospel preached by 
you will inaugurate a similar blessed result among the Gentiles, introducing the first- 
fruits of the Gentile world into the Church. Still more, to the united Church of the 
believing Jew and converted Gentile I shall promise and provide security from all 
the devices of the most wily, and all the assaults of the most Satanic, foes. 

V. Why is this commendation omitted by St. Mark? It has often been 
remarked that many things redounding solely to the honour of St. Peter are omitted by 
St. Mark ; while at the same time his infirmities are fully and faithfully recorded by 
the same evangelist, extenuating circumstances being less noticed by this evangelist 
than by the other synoptists. An example of this is furnished in the case before us. 
The blessing pronounced on him because of this noble and brave confession of the 
Christ, the Divine origin of his knowledge and faith, the promise just considered, 
and the further promise of the keys of the kingdom of heaven, are all omitted by 
St Mark But the rebuke to which he soon after subjected himself is carefully 
recorded. Many instances of both kinds occur. This is one of those mcidental 
circumstances that go far to confirm the voice of history in regard to the relation in 
which St. Peter stood to St. Mark and his Gospel, namely, that the latter penned his 
Gospel M disciple and by the dictation, to some extent, of the former. If so, and we 
thii& it extremely probable, we have proof herein of the veracity of the one and the 

humility of the other. . ^, ,... j., a ■ > 

VL Ria^TiTioN OF THE PBEDioTiON. Revertmg to the subject of the Saviour b 
Bufferines, so plainly announced in the eighth chapter, we have a repetition of a simUar 
announwrnent in this ninth chapter, and another, again, ui nearly the same terms in 
the tenth chapter. These repeated as well as direct and unreserved declarations on 



M tfiSi GOSPEL ACdOEt)IiJG W St. MAHK. [ch. tx. 1-56. 

this subject — a subject bo distasteful and saddening to his disciples — show theii 
onwillingness to associate the idea uf death with the Messiah, their tenacity in clinging 
to a temporal king and worldly kingdom, their slowness and lothness to apprehend 
or accept the notion of a spiritual, unworldly kingdom. The idea of a suffering 
Messiah has, therefore, to be dinned into their ears and impressed on their hearts by 
firequent and earnest reiterations. Nor has this subject lost aught of its importance 
or interest even for ourselves and at the present day ; while the faithful iuculcatioa 
of it is as much a duty and a necessity now as when our Lord in person urged it so 
solemnly and so often on the mind and heart of his sorrowing disciples. Though the 
cross was a stumbling-block to the Jews, and foolishness to the Greeks, it is still the 
power of God, and the wisdom of God, to the salvation of every believer. The way to 
the crown is still by, and only by, the cross ; humiliation precedes glorification. The 
preacher of the gospel cannot dwell too frequently or too earnestly on a theme that 
bulked so largely in the sight of the Saviour himself. The doctrine of Christ's suffering 
for us to puc away our sins — suffering, "the just for the unjust, to bring us to God" — 
cannot be too much insisted on ; neither can we be too often instructed in the duty of 
giving ourselves fully, freely, and for ever to him " who loved us and gave himself for 
us." If, moreover, Christ was " obedient unto death, even the death of the cross," in all 
its shame and with all its pain, it surely behoves us, in daily, holy obedience, to take 
up our cross, deny ourselves, and follow him. — J. J. G. 

Ver. 33. Parallel passage : Matt. xvii. 24 — 27. — The tribute money. I, Anothbb 
OMISSION. In the first line of the thirty-third verse we approach the subject of the 
tribute money ; but in St. Mark's narrative we only approach it, and that in the state- 
ment, " he came to Capernaum ; " but in the parallel section of St. Matthew we read of 
the demand for the tribute money, of Peter being commissioned to procure it from " the 
fish that first cometh up," of the exemption Jesus might have cliiimed but waived, and 
the reason of his doing so. Here, again, St. Mark omits the part of the narrative which 
relates to the honour conferred on Peter by our Lord, when he commissioned him to 
work the miracle by which the tiibate money was procured from the fish's mouth. 
But, though St. Mark omits this portion of the recital, the preceding and succeeding 
portions are coincident with those of St. Matthew. The peculiar relation of the 
apostle to the evangelist, already considered, can alone account for the omission. 

n. Gbound of legitimate exemption. In Matt. xvii. 24, 25, we read, "When 
they were come to Capernaum, they that received tribute money came to Peter, and 
said. Doth not your Master pay tribute ? " Then at the last clause of the twenty-fifth 
verse, our Lord asked Peter, "What thinkest thou, Sinion? of whom do the kings 
of the earth take custom, or tribute ? of their own children, or of strangers ? " A 
slight amount of archEeologioal knowledge makes this plain. The word "tribute" in the 
twenty-fourth verse is t^ hiSpaxi/ui; the word "tribute "in the twenty-fifth is Krivaovi while 
"custom," a word of kindred meaning, is t«'\ii. Also in the twenty-seventh verse, the 
word rTarhp, or " shekel," rendered " piece of money " in the English version, occurs. 
The stater, or shekel, equivalent to two shillings and sixpence of our currency, was the 
exact amount of tax payable by two. Now, there is a very wide and important 
distinction between these terms, and a distinction necessary to be kept in view for the 
right understanding of the passage. For (1) the SlSpaxna were equal in value to the 
Jewish half-shekel, or some fifteenpenoe of our money, and may be called a sacred 
tribute or annual contribution paid by every male among the Jews, from tv^enty years 
of age and upwards, for the support of the temple at Jerusalem — to defray the general 
expenses, to provide the sacrifices and other things required for the service. The 
persons who collected it were not the civil tax-gatherers, called publicum, or rather 
portitores ; nor, indued, was the tax a civil one at all, but a sacred one. From over- 
looking this fact, the point of the argument is liable to be missed, as it actually has 
been by several of the Fathers. It is briefly, though correctly, developed by Alford, in 
the following sentence :—" If the sons are free, then on me, being the Son of God, has 
this tax no claim." It requires, however, to be somewhat more fully and plainly 
exhibited. In order to set the matter in a clear light, we promise (2) that the k^ko-oi, for 
which St. Luke employs the classical Greek term <l>6i>os, was a poll or capitation tax, 
like the Soman tributum ; while by tcXtj are to be understood the toll or custom/ 



e». t±. 1-S6.1 ttiE GOSPilL AdCoiii)tN(J ItO St. MAtltt. S? 

iuties, which are identical with the vectigal of the Romans. Further, let it be borna 
in mind that Peter's confession of faith that Jesus was "the Christ, the Son of tlia 
living God," had been made, being recorded in the sixteenth chapter, and so had 
preceded the present conversation. Our Lord now argues from analogy that he was 
entitled to, and might fairly claim, exemption. In doing so, he asks Peter this 
question, " What thinkest thou, Simon ? of whom do the kings of the earth take 
custom or tribute? of their own sons, or of strangers?" It is here admitted by 
implication that civil rulers have a right to impose taxes for the support of civil 
government, but that, in exercising this right, they impose taxes on the other members 
of tlie state, not on the members of their own household. When kings levy taxes, or 
have them levied in the ordinary constitutional way, they impose them on their 
subjects, not on their sons. Peter had confessed Jesus to be the Son of God ; the tax 
demanded was for the support of God's house ; according to the principle of action 
among earthly kings, God, the great King of heaven and of earth, while requiring 
contributions for the maintenance of his service from his subjects, would exenapt his 
own Son, for, from his position of Sonship, which the apostle had recently acknow- 
ledged, and from the principle of taxation in which he had just acquiesced, it was 
necessarily inferred, " then are the sons free." Not as a mere member of the Hebrew 
race, or as an ordinary Jew, but from his dignity as the Son of God, in the highest and 
most exalted sense, our Lord might have claimed exemption from the tax in question. 
This was the gist of his reasoning : but he waived his right ; and proceeds to explain to 
Peter the ground on which he foregoes his privilege, saying, " Lest we should offend 
them," or more plainly in the Revised Version, " Lest we cause them to stumble ; " in 
other words, lest he and his disciples should be regarded as indifferent to, or be charged 
with, neglect of the house of God and the maintenance of its service. — J. J. G. 



Vers. 33—37. Parallel passages: Matt, xviii. 1 — 5; Luke ix. 46 — 48.— TOe lesson 
of humility. The exquisite lesson of humility taught in the remainder of this section 
(the first clause of the thirty-third verse, as it stands in St. Mark, having been already 
considered) may be appropriately taken up in connection with the section of next 
chapter, where the lovely comparison of childhood is again employed. — J. J. G. 

Vers, 38 — 41. Parallel passage : Luke ix. 49, 50. — Rebuhe of sectarian narrown«ss. 
I. The ket-note of the passage. The sentence which appears to furnish the key to 
the understanding of this instructive and interesting passage is contained in the follow- 
ing short sentence : — " He that is not against us is on our part," or, as it stands yet 
more concisely in St. Luke, " He that is not against us is for us." 

II. A SEEMING CONTRADICTION. The Statement just quoted from the Gospel of 
St. Luke (ix. 50) appears to be at variance with another statement further on in the 
same Gospel, where, at the eleventh chapter and twenty-third verse, it is written, " He 
that is not with me is against me." The discrepancy, however, is only apparent. In 
order to perceive this, we must consider the occasions on which the words recorded were 
respectively spoken ; for, as our Lord and his apostles usually adapted their language to 
the occasion, we shall thus best learn the design with which each of those sentiments 
was uttered. Accordingly, we learn that some one not consorting with Christ or his 
apostles was, neveitheless, casting out devils in the Saviour's name, and that John 
forbade him. Our Lord sets John right in the matter by saying, "Forbid him not; " 
that is do not interfere with any who may be attempting anything good in my name. 
And then he assigns the reason ; for " he that is not against us is for us;" he who is not 
directly opposed to us is rather to be regarded as on our side; he who is not preventing 
our progress may be looked upon, at least negatively, as promoting it. Just as is 
intimated by the Apostle Paul on a certain occasion, even though envy and strife 
ahould be the impelling motive, if Christ is preached his cause is advanced, and " I 
therein do rejoice." So here we may fairly understand the words of the Master to mean 
—Whosoever this man may be, or whatever may be his object, he is weakening Satan's 
kinodom by casting out devils, and therefore, so far from being against me, he must b« 
looked upon as an auxiliary in the great war against the great enemy of man. Besides, 
by such forbearance as I thus counsel, he may be drawn into closer and more effectiv* 
oo-operation a°-ainst the common adversary. Such is the plain meaning of the passagi 



68 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. n. 1— 5a 

before iu. On the other hand, in the second passage, our Lord had been charged by 
the hostile, cavilling Pharisees with casting out devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils. 
This charge had called forth the rejoinder of ova Lord, that " every kingdom divided 
against itself is brought to desolation." Such would be the case if Satan cast out 
Satan. The only reasonable alternative was that the Saviour was casting out devils by 
the Spirit of God, and so the kingdom of God had come unto them. He follows up 
this reply by a warning against lukewarmness and an exhortation to decision, that the 
crisis had come when men must choose sides, that they must elect to take part with 
God or with Satan. Neutrality was impossible. In view of two kingdoms so opposed, 
there was no possibility of belonging to both; nay, there was no middle ground between 
loyalty and rebellion. If not on the side of the Saviour, he must be on the side of 
Satan ; if not a subject of the former, he must be a slave of the latter, and so an enemy 
to the cause of Christ : " He that is not with me is against me." 

IIL The same subject viewed feom a peaotioal standpoint. The one text 
implies that men may take different roads to the same place, or reach the same point 
by different routes. This is true morally as well as geographically. It condemns the 
narrowness that refuses to tolerate want of uniformity, and commends forbearance 
towards all who in reality serve the same Master and seek the same object, viz. the 
glory of God, though their forms may be diverse, their modes of worship different, 
and even their creeds divergent in expression. The other text affirms that, in th» 
natural and increasing conflict between good and evil, our hesitation to unite with the 
good is tantamount with adhesion to the evil. The one text does not insist on 
uniformity, the other inculcates unity. Again, conformity to the same standards is 
not an indispensable condition of Christianity, as we infer from the one text ; but 
cordiality in embracing Christ and espousing his canse is of its very essence. We are 
taught by the one that there may be many folds, though there is but one flock ; but 
by the other that, as there is but one Shepherd, union to him is indispensable to 
membership in his flock. Farther, the one makes charity to others imperative, pro- 
vided they have the same great end in view, however divergent the means adopted 
for its attainment; the other requires of us decision for ourselves in seeking that 
end. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 42 — 50. Parallel passage : Matt, xviii. 6 — 9. — Chrisfs love to his UtUe ones, 
and offences, L Love to the little ones. Christ's little ones are either young 
believers or weak believers. A kindness shown tbem is accepted by Christ as done to 
himself. Even a cup of cold water will be rewarded. However much they may be 
despised by men or neglected in the world, they are dear to God and near to the 
Saviour's heart; while angels of highest rank are commissioned to guard them— even 
angels who are privileged to stand in the immediate presence of the great King ; for 
" in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in heaven." 
Angels of all grades have a twofold function — they worship and they minister ; they 
worship in the heavenly sanctuary the Father everlasting (xeiroupyuco), they wait for 
ministry («'> Suucorlav) to man on earth. But those of most exalted dignity are the 
guardians of Christ's little ones. 

II. Consequences of offences. The tin of offending one of these little ones is 
great in proportion to Christ's love to them. How careful men should be, and how 
cautious, not to put a stumbling-block in the way of these little ones I The sin of 
turning weak believers or young Christians aside from the truth, or from the faith, or 
from the path of purity, or a career of virtue, by evil advice or bad example, or by 
casting doubt on the Word of Ood, or by insinuating sceptical notions, or by mockery 
of Divine things, is a sin so gr'^t that a preferable alternative would be for the person 
guilty of it to have a millstijne of large size, turned by an ass (iviKhs), lying around 
his neck, and himself cast into the sea. Such is the fearfully emphatic declaration 
of the guilt and danger of scandalizing or offending the yoimgest child that believes, 
OT the weakest Christian. 

III. Otheb offenoeh. Out Lord passes by a common law of suggestion to speak of 
offences by ourselves and against ourselves. The hand may offend by doing wrong ; 
the foot may offend by going on what is wrong. But if the most serviceable member, 
M the hand, do amiss, or the most nsaful member, as the foot, walk astray, or the most 



on. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDINa TO ST. MABK. 



6S 



precious member, as the eye, look witli delight on objects sinful and forbidden, then 
there must be no hesitation in divesting ourselves of such rather than risk the fearful 
late of those who are tormented in the Gehenna of fire, "where their worm dieth not 
and the fire is not quenched." 

IV. Salted with fire. This difficult expression is taken by some as a promise 
and by others as a punishment. In the former sense, fire is taken in the signification 
of purifying and preserving, and this twofold property it shares with salt. Salt 
preserves from putrefaction, fire purifies from corruption. The sacrifice of old required 
to be offered with salt. According to the Law in Lev. ii. 13, the meat ofiering 
was to be seasoned with salt, and salt was to be offered with all offerings. So, when 
we present ourselves living sacrifices to God, we may be purified by fiery trials; we 
may be called to pass through the fire of affliction, perhaps of persecution, certainly of 
self-denial. But thus purified by fire, like the sacrifice on the altar, salted with salt 
we shall be saved. This gives a good sense, but does not suit the context. In the 
second sense, fire is taken to mean punishing and preserving. Six times does the 
evangelist represent unceasing torments by unquenchable fire ; and as the salt applied 
to the sacrifice was the symbol of preservation, so fire here is symbolical of preserva- 
tion, not, alas ! from punishment, but for punishment; so that the undying worm and 
the unquenchable fire, instead of annihilating, preserve while they punish. Here is 
a fearful figure, and a terrible warning 1 

v. Peace. They are exhorted to keep the salt of moral purity and covenant concord 
rather than have the salt of fiery punishment, and, as the effect and evidence thereof, 
to be at peace among themselves, and so avoid the strife for pre-eminence and the discord 
of ambition. — J. J. Q, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER X. 



Ver. 1. — ^Instead of the words, Into tie 
coasts of Judaea by the farther side of Jordan, 
the passage, by a change of reading from 
Slit Tov to Kai, will run thus : into the coasts 
(borders) of Judiea and beyond Jordan. Our 
Lord was now on his last progress towards 
Jerusalem. It would appear from St. Luke 
(ix. 51) that in the earlier part of bis journey 
he touched the frontier of Samaria. Putting 
the accounts together, we conclude that, 
beinp; refused by the Samaritans, he passed 
eastwards along their frontier, having Galilee 
on his left, and Samaria on his right ; and 
then crossed the Jordan, perhaps at Scytho- 
polis, where was a bridge, and so entered 
Persea. As Judse* and Galilee both lay 
west of the Jordan, this route above described 
would be literally coming " to the borders 
of Judsea and beyond Jordan." Again mul- 
titudes flocked together to him, and again 
he taught them. St. Matthew (xix. 1) says 
that ''he healed them." His miracles of 
healing and his teaching went hand in hand. 

Ver. 2. — And there came unto him Phari- 
gees — the article should be omitted — and 
asked tii™ — they came forward before the 
people, and publicly questioned him— Is it 
lawful for a man to put away his wife 1 St. 
Matthew (xix. 3) adds to the question the 
words, "for every cause." There were 
•auses for which it was lawful. They put 
this question to our Lord, tempting him ; of 
course with an evil intent. This question 



about divorce was one which was much 
agitated in the time of our Lord. In the 
century before Christ, a learned rabbi, named 
Hillel, a native of Babylon, who afterwards 
came to Jerusalem, studied the Law with 
great success, and became the head of the 
chief school in that city. One of his dis- 
ciples, named Shammai, separated from his 
master, and set up another school ; so that 
in the time of our Lord the scribes and 
doctors of the Law were ranged in two 
parties, namely, the followers of Hillel, the 
most influential; and the followers of 
Shammai. These two schools differed widely 
on the subject of divorce. The followers of 
Shammai only permitted divorce in the case 
of moral defilement, while the followers of 
Hillel placed the matter entirely in the 
power of the husband. The obj ect, therefore, 
of this artful question was to entrap our 
Lord, and to bring him into collision with 
one or other of these two opposing parties. 
For if he had said that it was not lawful for 
a man to put away his wife, he would have 
exposed himself to the hostility of many of 
the wealthy classes, who put away their 
wives for any cause. But if he had allowed 
the lawfulness of divorce at all, they would 
have found fault with his doctrine as im- 
perfect and carnal, although he prrfessed to 
be a spiritual Teacher of a perfect system, 
sent down from heaven. 

Vers. 3, 4. — And he answered and said 
unto them. What did Hoses command yon 1 
They professed much reverence for Moses} 



ttti: Gospel AccoiRbiNG to st. Mark. [ch. i. i-gi 



he therefore appeals to their great law- 
giver. And they said, Moses suffered to write 
a bill of divoreement, and to put her away. 
If we now iurn to St. Matthew (xii. 4, 5), 
we shall find that our Lord theu appeals to 
the original institution of marriage. " Have 
ye not read, that he which made them from 
the begiuning, made them male and female, 
und said, For this cause shall a man leave 
his father and mother, and shall cleave to 
his wife ; and the twain shall become one 
flesh? So that they are no more twain, 
but one flesh. What therefore God hath 
joined together, let not man put asunder." 
He thus reminds them that marriage is a 
Divine institution ; that as Adam and Eve 
were united bv him in a union which was 
indissoluble, therefore he intended that the 
marriage bond should remain ever, so that the 
wife ought never to be separated from her hus- 
bknd, since she becomes by marriage a very 
part of her husband. To this purpose St. 
Augustine says (' City of God,' bk. xiv. 22), 
" It was not of the spiiit which commands 
and the body wliich obeys, nor of the rational 
soul which rules and the irrational desire 
which is ruled, nor of the contemplative 
virtue which is supreme, and the active 
which is subject, nor of the understanding 
of the mind and the sense of the body ; but 
plainly of the matrimonial union, by which 
the sexes are mutually bound together, that 
our Lord, when asked whether it were 
lawful for any cause to put away one's wife, 
answered as in St. Matthew (xix. 4, 5). It 
is certain^ then, that from the first men 
were created as wo see and know them to be 
now, of two sexes — male and female— and 
that they are called one, either on account 
of the matrimonial union, or on account of 
the origin of the woman, who was created 
fiom out of the side of the man." 

Ver. 5. — St. Matthew appears to give the 
more full account, of which St. Mark's is an 
abbreviation, if we suppose the scribes 
here to interpose tlieil question, " Why theu 
did Moses peimit a bill of divorcement?" 
the two narratives fit exactly. Our Lord here 
answers their question, For your hardness of 
heart he wrote yon this oommandment. He 
permitted (not commanded) them to put 
away their wives, lest dislike might turn to 
hatred. From the beginning God joined 
them in one indissoluble bond ; but man's 
nature having become corrupt through sin, 
that sin changed and corrupted the iuhti- 
tution, and so was the occasion of bills of 
divorcement, and polygamy. The Law of 
Moses put some restraint upon the freedom 
with which men had till then put away their 
wives ; for thenceforth, a divorctj could not 
take place until some legal steps had been 
taken, and a regular instrument had been 
drawn up ; and this delay might often be 



the means of preventing a divorce which 
might otherwise have been effected in a 
moment of passion. Thus this legislation 
was adapted to the imperfect moral con- 
dition of the people, who were as yet quite 
unprepared for a higher moral code. 

Ver. 10. — The discussion with the Phari- 
sees, related in the previous verses, had taken 
place in public. But now in the house, and 
in private, the disciples asked him again of 
this matter ; so that what follows seems here 
to have been said to them privately. But it 
would appear from St. Matthew (xix. 8) that 
our Lord had already said this in public ; so 
that here he proclaims a new law, or rather 
aflSrms the sanctions of the primitive insti- 
tution, abrogating the " bill of divorcement " 
excepting in the one case of fornication, and 
restoring the rite of marriage to its primsBval 
and indissoluble character. 

Ver. 11. — Committeth adultery against 
her (/ioixStoi eV aiiTTiv). This must surely 
mean the wife that has been put away. The 
adultery is against her, against her rights 
and interests. 

Ver. 12. — This verse should be read thus : 
And if she herself shall put away her husband, 
and marry another, she committeth adultery 

yafiiiati i.X\ov, lioixarai). This reading is well 
supported. 'J?hese words indicate that, ac- 
cording to our blessed Lord's teaching, wives 
and husbands have equal rights in reference 
to divorce; and so the Greek, according to 
the best authorities, is (yaixia-n) " shall 
marry," not (^yofiridri) " shall be married." 
Josephus, however, makes it evident that in 
his time husbimd and wife had bj' no means 
equal rights in these matters (' Antiq.,' xv. 
7. 10). 

Ver. 13.— It is worthy of notice that this 
touching incident follows here, as well as in 
the parallel passage in St. Matthew (xix. 
13), immediately after the discourse about 
the marriage bond. And they brought unto 
him {TTpoaecjxpoy) — literally, were bringing — 
little children (Trai5(o)— St. Luke (xviii. 15) 
calls them "babes " (jSpeV?;)— that he should 
touch them (ifco HxfiriTai avTav}, St. Luke has 
the same word (Vva oTrrriToi); but St. 
Matthew (xix. 13) says " that he should lay 
his hands on them and pray." The imposi- 
tion of hands implies a formal benodictiou ; 
the invoking of Divine grace upon them, 
that they might grow up into wise and holy 
men and women. Why did the dis(dplc8 
rebuke them ? Perhaps because they thought 
it unworthy of so great a Prophet, whose 
business was rather that of instructing those 
of full age, to be spending his time upon 
little children. 

Ver. 14. — But when Jesus saw it (ISur S'e 
i "Irjo-oDj). The Greek shows that there was 
no interval between the acts of the parent! 



OH. X. 1— *a.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MaEK. 



«1 



und the disoiples, and our Lord's seeing it. 
The parents were bringing the children, the 
disciples were rebuking tliem, Jesua was 
perceiring. He was mnoh displeased 
({l7(u't(KTi)a'c); literally, he wat moved with 
indignation. His words imply eagerness 
and earnestness : Suffer the little children to 
come unto me ; forhid them not. The copu- 
lative Kal is not to be fonnd in the best 
authorities. The omission adds force and 
vividness to the words. The simplicity, 
candour, and innocence of little children are 
very attractive. This narrative shows with 
what care children should be educated. 
For of such is the kingdom of God ; that is, 
of such little children as these. The king- 
dom of heaven belongs in a peculiar manner 
to little children. We know for certain that 
little children who have been brought to 
Christ in Holy Baptism, if they die before 
they are old enough for moral accountable- 
ness, are undoubtedly saved. They pass at 
once into a nearer position to the throne. 
" They are without fault before the throne 
of God." 

Ver. 15.— Verily I say unto you, Whoso- 
ever shall not receive tiie kingdom of God 
as a little ohUd, he shall in no wise enter 
therein. Observe the " verily " with which 
our Lord introduces these words. He here 
adds something which extends wljat he has 
just said to those who are, not literally, but 
figuratively, little children. We must first 
leoeive the kingdom into our affections be- 
fore we can really enter into it. It is as 
though Christ said, " It is not unworthy of 
my dignity to take little children into my 
arms and bless them, because by my bene- 
diction thoy become fit for the kingdom of 
heaven. And if you full grown men would 
become fit for my kingdom, you must give up 
your ambitious aims and earthly contests, 
and imitate the simple unworldly ways of 
little children. The simplicity of the little 
ohUd is the model and the rule for everyone 
who desires, by the grace of Christ, to obtain 
the kingdom of heaven. Our Lord's whole 
action here ia a great encouragement to the 
receiving of little children by Holy Baptism 
into covenant with him. 

Ver. 16.— And he took them in his arms, 
and blessed them, laying his hands upon 
them. This is considered the true order 
of the words, according to the best autho- 
rities. The word rendered " taking in the 
arms" (tVavKaAio-d/iej-os) has already oc- 
curred in this Gospel at ch. ix. 86 (where 
see the note). The description here is very 
eraphic. Our Saviour would first embrace 
the little child, folding it in his arras; then 
he would lay bis right hand upon the chJd s 
head, and bless it. . „ . , , 

Ver. 17.— This verse should be rendered. 
And M he was going forth (iieropevon4mv 



miTov) — that Ib, just as he was leaving the 
house — there ran one to him, and kneeled to 
him, and asked him. St. Matthew (zix. 20) 
says that he was " a young man." St. Luke 
(xviii. 18) that he was "a rnler." He had 
apparently been waiting for our Lord, way- 
laying him, though with » good intention. 
He showed zeal — as soon as he saw Jesus 
he ran to him; and he showed reverence^ 
for he kneeled down to him. He wanted 
advice from one whom he must have beard 
of as a celebrated Teacher ; and he wanted 
this counsel as a matter of great interest to 
himself. Good Master. This would be the 
ordinary and courteous mode of accosting a 
person professing to be a teacher, so as to 
conciliate his attention and interest. What 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal lifet 
It is as though he said, "Babbi, I know 
thee to be good, both as a man and as a 
teacher, and a prophet, well able to teach 
me perfectly those things which are really 
good, and which lead to blessedness here- 
after. Tell me, therefore. What shall I 
do?" St. Matthew (xix. 17) says, " What 
good thing (ri iYaSbv iroiijirai) shall I do 
that I may inherit eternal life ?" 

Ver. 18. — Why oallest thou me goodl Ac- 
cording to the best authorities, the words 
in St. Matthew (xix. 17) run thus: « Why 
askest thou me concerning that which ia 
good? One there ia who ia good." The 
word "good" is the pivot on which our 
Lord's answer turns, both in St. Matthew 
and here. The qnestion is doubtless put to 
test the young ruler's faith. If, as may be 
supposed, the young man used the term, 
" good Master," as a mere conventional ex- 
pression, it was not the proper epithet to 
apply to our Lord, who at once transfers the 
praise and the goodness to God, that he 
might teach us to do the same. This ruler, 
by his mode of accosting our Lord, showed 
that he had not as yet a right faith in him 
— that he did not believe in his Godhead. 
Our Lord, therefore, desired to rouse him and 
lift him up to a higher faith. He seems to say 
to him, " If you call me good, believe that 
I am God ; for no one is good, intrinsically 
good, but God. God alone is essentially 
good, and wise, and powerful, and holy. It 
is from him that angels and men derive a 
few drops, or rather some fuint adumbration, 
of his goodness. There is none essentially, 
entirely, absolutely good but one, that is, 
God. Therefore seek after him, love him, 
imitate him. He alone can satisfy your 
longing desires, as in this life with his 
grace, so in the life to come with his glory ; 
yea, with himself. For in heaven he mani- 
fests himself as the supreme good, to be 
tabled and enjojed by the blessed for ever." 

Ver. 19.— In St. Matthew (xix. 17, eto^ 
the record of car Lord's oonvenation win 



«a 



THE GOSPEL ACOORDINa TO ST. MARK [oh. x. 1-^2, 



the yonng rnler 1« more full ; »nd it ihonld | 
be read side by Bide with the more oon- 
densed narrative of St Mark. It will be 
observed that it is upon the oommandmentg 
of the geoond table that our Lord here lays 
•tresB. For the love of God produces the 
love of our neighbour ; and he who loveth 
not hi« brother whom he hath seen, how can 
he love God whom he hath not seen? 

Ver. 20.— Master, all those things have 
I observed from my youth (^i(pv\aianvv); 
literally, I kept, I guarded. St. Matthew 
adds liere (xii. 20), " What laek I yet ? "— 
" What iB still wanting in me, that I may 
inherit the life to come in its fulness of 
glory and bliss? You seem, good Master, 
as a heavenly Teacher, to set forth a higher 
and more excellent way than that pointed 
out by our scribes and Pharisees. Tell me 
what that way is. Tell me what I still lack; 
for I earnestly desire to go forward in 
the light way that leadeth to eveilastiuK 

ife." 

Ver. 21.— Ana Jesns looking upon him 
loved him (liiPKcrfias iaiT$, iiydirnirei' aiirSv). 
This ia another of St. Mark's graphic touchoB 
— an exquisite piece of word-painting, pro- 
bably supplied to him by 81. Peter. The 
words express most vividly an earnest, ten- 
der, searching look. They seem, if it may 
be said reverently, to combine the Divine 
penetration vrith human sympathy and com- 
passion. The counsel of our Lord which 
follows was not a general command, but a 
particular precept, which the young ruler 
epecially needed. One thing thou laokest. 
In St. Matthew (xix. 21) the words are, " If 
thou wouldest be perfect." But our Lord'B 
words here, " One thing thou lackest," fit 
in excellently with the young ruler's ques- 
tion given just before in St. Matthew, " What 
lack I yet?" showing a substantial unity 
in the narrative, with just that variety 
which we should expect in the account of 
the same incident given by two independent 
but eqtiaJly trustworthy witnesses. The 
" one thing thou lackest" of St. Mark, and 
"if thou wilt be perfect" of St. Matthew, 
both point to the game conclusion — that 
our Lord's object was to reveal this young 
man to himself. His stumbling-block was 
his wealth ; and so our Saviour at once 
pierces hi« besetting sin of oovetousness. 
The preoept was a special counsel to him ; 
it directed him to do something which, as 
our Lord saw, was in his case necessary to 
his salvation. He oould not follow Christ 
without parting with this sin, and with that 
which ministered to it. This was his par- 
tlenlar spiritual difficulty. 

Ver. 22. — ^But his oountenanoe fell at the 
Mjing (d Si, (rfvyviaat ivl rip A^). The 
iOBM word is naed in St. Matthew (xvi. 3) 
tor a " lowering," " frowning iky " (pipavhs 



arvyydCav). And he went away sorrowfiil 
(lm7j\6e Aiwoi/neiKO j); for he had (fiy yap ixuv) 
— literally, for he uxu one fhat Aofi—glMtt 
possessions. 

Ver. 23. — ^And Jesns looked ronn& about, 
and saith unto hii disciples (koI vcptjSA.eil'- 
iytevos i 'IritToSs A.^«). St. Mark frequently 
uses this word Tepi&\enie. Our Lord turned 
from the young man, who was now going 
away, and looked round about, no doubt 
with a sad and disappointed look, and said 
to his disciples. How hardly shall they that 
have riches enter into the kingdom of Qod ! 
Why is this ? Partly because the love of 
riches tempts men to heap them up, whether 
lawfully or unlawfully. Partly because the 
love of riches binds the soul to earth, so 
that it is less likely to think of heaven. 
Partly because riches are an incentive to 
pride and luxury and other sins. The 
heathen poet Ovid could speak of riches em 
" irritamenta malorum." Poverty and con- 
tempt of riches often open that heaven 
which wealth and eovetousness Ci ose. 

Ver. 24. — ^And the disciples were astonished 
(^Sa/i/SoScTi))— literally, were amazed — at hia 
words. The Greek word here impliea be- 
wilderment. It is used again below at 
ver. 32. We find it also at ch. i. 27. This 
doctrine of our Lord was so new and strange 
to them. They had been accustomed to 
think little of the dangers, and much of the 
advantages of wealth. But Jesus answereth 
again, and saith unto them, Childien, how 
hard is it for them that trust in riches to 
enter into the kingdom of God ! He uses 
the endearing expression of "children" 
(jtKvd), and takes off somewhat of the edge 
of the severity of the expression, by chang- 
ing the form of it into the words, " how hard 
is it for them that trust in riches to enter 
into the kingdom of God I " There is some 
authority for omitting the words, " for them 
that trust in riches;" so to reduce the 
sentence to the simple form, " How hard is 
it to enter into the kingdom of God I" 
Such is the reading in the two great uncial 
manuscripts, the Sinaitio and the Vatican. 
But on the whole the balance of evidence is 
in favour of that which was adopted in the 
Authorized Version, and has been retained 
by the Revisers of 1881 ; and it is reasonable 
to believe that our Lord qualified the former 
expression, in order to relieve the minds of 
his amazed disciples. 

Ver. 25. — It is easier for a oamel to go 
throogh a needle's eye, etc. This ia a strong 
hyperoolio proverbial expression to repre- 
sent anything that ia very difficult to do 
Dr. John Lightfoot, in his Hebrew exerot 
tations upon St. Matthew's Gospel (vol. il 
p. 219), quotes instances from the rab- 
binical writings of a very similar phrasf 
intended to represent something that ii im 



OH. X. 1— 52J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



possible. For example, he qnotea one rabbi 
disputing with another, who says, " Perhaps 
thou art one of those who can make an 
elephant pass through the eye of a needle ; " 
that is, " who speak things that are impos- 
sible." St. Jerome says, " It is not the abso- 
lute impossibility of the thing which is set 
forth, but the infrequenoy of it." 

Yer. 26. — And they were astonished ex- 
ceedingly (vepurcas iieir\ii(rffoiiTo), Saying 
among themselves — according to the best 
reading the words are, saying unto him (Trphs 
auT(i<')— -Then who can he saved 1 

Ver. 27. — Jesus lookjng upon them (^^ci- 
/3\eij/oj Se auTois). The Greek verb implies 
an earnest, intense looking upon them ; evi- 
dently narrated by one who, like Peter, had 
watched his countenance. St. Chrysostom 
says that he looked on them in this way 
that he might mitigate and soothe the timid 
and anxious minds of his disciples. It is 
as though our Lord said, " It is impossible 
for a rich man, embarrassed and entangled 
with his wealth, by his own natural strength 
to obtain salvation ; because this is a super- 
natural blessing, which we cannot obtain 
without the like supernatural aids of grace. 
But with God all things are possible, because 
God is the Author and Source, as of nature, 
60 of grace and glory. And he enables us, 
by his grace, to triumph over all the diffi- 
culties and hindrances of nature; so that 
rich men shall not be hindered by their 
riches; but, by being faithful in the un- 
righteous mammon, shall make it the means 
of their being received unto 'the eternal 
tabernacle.' " 

Ver. 28. — Peter began to say unto him, 
Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee. 
Peter began to say unto him. He had been 
thinking of himself and his companions, the 
other disciples, in reference to these last 
words of our Lord. It is probable that the 
sacrifice which Peter and the rest of the 
disciples had made when they liecame his 
followers, was small, compared with the 
sacrifice which our Lord demanded of the 
rich young ruler. Nevertheless they forsook 
their all, whatever it was. They had for- 
saken their boats and their nets. Tliey had 
forsaken their means of subsistence. They 
had forsaken things which, though they 
were not much in themselves, were never- 
theless such things as they would have 
desired to keep. Cornelius h \ ,apide says, 
"Such things are forsaken by those who 
foUow Christ, as are capable of being 
desired by those who do not follow hun." 
St Augustine says, "St. Peter not only 
forsook what he had, but also what he 
desired to have. But who does not desire 
daily to increase what he has ? That desire 
is cut off. Peter forsook the whole world, 
snd he received in return the whole world. 



They were as those who had nothing, and 
yet were possessing all things." 

Ver. 29.— St. Matthew (xix. 28) here in- 
troduces the great promise, to be fulfilled 
in the regeneration, that is, at the second 
coming of Christ— at the second birth of 
the world to a new and glorious state. It 
may be that St. Matthew was guided to 
record it, inasmuch as his Gospel was 
written for Jews. Its omission by St. Mark 
and St. Luke may be explained by the fact 
that they were writing, the one to Romans, 
and the other to Gentiles generally. Omit- 
ting further notice here of this great promise 
recorded only by St. Matthew, St. Mark's 
words seem general, common to all faithful 
Christians. This leaving of honse, or 
brethren, or sisters, etc., might be rendered 
necessary from various causes. But they 
are all covered by that one expression, for 
my sake, and for the gospel's. 

Ver. 30. — But he ^all receive a hnndred- 
fold now in this time (E/caTa<'TairAa<r/oi<a). 
St. Luke (xviii. 30) says QiroWairXairloya), 
" manifold more " — an indefinite increase, to 
show the greatness and multitude of the 
recompense. He who forsakes his own for 
the sake of Christ will find others, many 
in number, who will give him the love of 
brethren and sisters, with even greater 
affection ; so that he will seem not to have 
lost or forsaken his own, but to have 
received them again with interest. For 
spiritual affections are far deeper than 
natural; and his love is stronger who 
burns with heavenly love which God has 
kindled, than he who is influenced by 
earthly love only, which only nature has 
planted. But in the fullest sense, he who 
forsakes these earthly tljings for the sake 
of Christ, receives instead, God himself. 
For to those who forsake all for him, he 
is himself father, brottier, sister, and all 
things. So that he will have possessions 
far richer than what earth can supply ; only 
with persecutions (^er^ dLcoyfiwv). Tliis is 
a very striking addition. Our Lord here 
includes " persecutions " in the number of 
the Christian's blessings. And no doubt 
there is a noble sense in wiiich persecutions 
are really amongst the blessings of the 
believer. " If ye be reproached for the 
Name of Christ, happy are ye ; for the spirit 
of glory and of God resteth npon you " 
(1 Pet. iv. 14). St. Peter, who must have 
had in his mind the "with persecutions" 
of our Lord when he wrote these words, 
here shows that the blessedness of the 
Chi'istian when suffering persecution is 
this, that he has a special sense of the 
abiding presence of the Spirit of God, 
bringing with it the assurance of future 
glory. "Rejoice, and be exceeding glad; 
for great is year reward in heaven." Th* 



64 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO S*. MARK. [oh. x. 1—52. 



words are also, of oouiee, a warning to thn 
dieciples as to the persecutions that awaited 
them. And in the world to come eternal 
life. This i« that splendid inheritance in 
which the blessed shall be heirs of God 
and joint-heirs with Christ; and so shall 
poaaess not only the heaven and the earth, 
and all things that are in them, bnt even 
God himself, and all hononr, all glory, all 
joy, not merely as occupiers, but as heim 
for ever; as long as God himself shall be, 
who is himself " the eternal God." 

Ver. 31. — Bat many that are first shall be 
last ; and the last first. Most fitly does onr 
Lord add this weighty sentence to what has 
just gone before. For thus be places him- 
self, bis grace, and his gospel in direct 
opposition to the corrupt teaching of the 
scribes and Pharisees. Perhaps the dis- 
ciples thought within themselves, "How 
can it come to pass that we, the poor, the 
unlearned, the despised, are to sit upon 
, thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel, 
amongst whom are men far our superiors in 
station, in learning, and in authority, such 
as are the scribes and Pharisees, and that 
rich young ruler just mentioned." Our 
Lord here teaches them that the future will 
reveal great olianges — that some who are 
first here will be last there, and some who 
seem last here will be first there. The 
disciples, and others like them, who, having 
forsE^en all and followed Christ, seemed to 
be last in this world, will be first in tlie 
world to come — most dear to Christ, the 
King of Heaven, in their lives ; most like 
to him in their zeal for his cause. 

Ver. 82. — They were now going up from 
Jericho to Jerusalem, going up with Christ 
to his cross and his death. He went before 
them, eagerly leading the way for his timid 
disciples, who were now beginning to realize 
what was about to happen, and that he 
would be condemned and crucified. There- 
fore the evangelist adds, they were amazed 
(Greek, iSa/i^ovvTo) ; the same word wliich 
is used at ver. 24. The words in the original, 
according to the best reading, make a dis- 
tinction between the utter amazement of the 
disciples and the fear of the others who 
followed (oi 5k aico\ov9ovj/Tei itpofiovvroy 
St. Mark draws a distinction between the 
disciples, who would be following him, 
thoagh at a little distance, and the mixed 
company, who were also following him, 
though at a greater distance. The whole 
scene is before us. Our blessed Lord, with 
an awful majesty on his countenance, and 
eager resolution in his manner, is pressing 
forwards to his cross. " How am I straitened 
until it be accomplished I " His disciples 
follow him, amazed and bewildered; and 
even the miscellaneous crowd, who no doubt 
gued upon him with keen interest as the 



great " Prophet that should oome into th« 
world," felt that something was going t* 
happen, though they knew not what — 8om» 
thing very dreadful; and they too wer* 
afraid. In the case of the disciples, Beds 
says that the chief cause of their amazement 
was their own imminent fear of death; 
They were amazed that their Master should 
hasten forward with such alacrity to his 
cross, and they feared lest they too should 
have to suffer with him. He took again the 
twelve ; and once more impressed upon them 
the dread realities which were awaiting him. 
They wtere still slow of apprehension ; they 
required to be told again and again. 

Ver. 35. — And there come near onto Mm 
James and J'ohn, the sons of Zebedee, saying 
nnto him, Master, we would that thou 
shouldest do for ns whatsoever we shall ask 
of thee. St. Matthew (xx. 20) informs ns 
that this request was made by Salome, " the 
mother of Zebedee's children." The two 
accounts are readily reconciled if we con- 
sider that the request was made by Salome 
and her sons, and by her in their behalf. 
This request was made by them not long 
after they had heard our Lord's great 
promise that his apostles " in the regenera- 
tion " should " sit upon thrones," judging the 
twelve tribes of Israel" (Matt. xix. 28), and 
very soon after they had lieard his repeated 
announcement of his sufferings and death. 
But the thought of the glory which was 
to follow swallowed up the thought of the 
suffering that was to precede it; and so 
these two. disciples were emboldened at 
once to ask for prominent positions amongst 
the thrones. St. Chrysostom finds an excuse 
for the imperfection of their faith. He 
says, " The mystery of the cross was not 
yet accomplished ; nor yet was the grace of 
the Holy Spirit poured into their hearts. 
Wherefore, if you desire to know the 
strength of their faith, consider what they 
became after they had been endued with 
power from on high." 

Ver. 38.— It will be observed that in Si 
Matthew (xx. 20), while Salome is repre- 
sented as the person who makes the request, 
the answer is given, not to her, but to her 
sons. Ye know not what ye ask. Our Lord 
knew that the sons had spoken in the 
mother and by the mother. They knew 
not what they asked (1) because liis king- 
dom was spiritual and heavenly, not carnal 
and earthly, as they supposed ; (2) because 
they sought the glory before they had 
gained the victory; (3) because perhaps 
they thought that this kingdom was given 
in right of natural relationship (they were 
his cousins); whereas it is not given save 
to those who deserve it and take it by 
force. Are ye able to drink the onp that I 
drink t or to be baptized with the baptism 



en. X. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



that I am baptized witht It la as thoup;h 
he siiid, "It is by my cross and passiun 
that I am to attain to the kingdom ; there- 
fore the same way must be trodden by 
you who seek the same end." Our Lord 
here describes his passion as his oup. The 
"cup" everywhere in Holy Scripture, as 
well as in profane writers, signifies a man'B 
portion, wliioh is determined for him by 
God, and sent to him. The figure is derived 
from the ancient custom at feasts, by which 
the ruler of the feast tempered the wine 
according to his own will, and appointed to 
each guest his own portion, which it was 
his duty to drink. Our Lord then proceeds 
to describe his passion, which he had 
already spoken of as his cup, as his bap- 
tism. He uses this imnge because he would 
be totally buried, immersed, so to speak, in 
his passion. But it seems probable that 
the idea of jmrificatian entered into this 
image. It was a baptism of fire into which 
he was plunged, and out of which he came 
forth viotorioua. The fire of his bitter 
passion and death tried him. It was his 
"salting with fire." It pleased God thus 
to "make the Captain of our salvation per- 
fect through sufferings." Our Lord aska 
these ambitious disciples whether they 
flould drink his oup of suffering, and lie 
baptized with his fiery baptism. 

Ver. 89. — James and John seem to have 
understood the meiining of the cup; and 
perhaps also of the baptism. They both of 
them drank the oup, though in dilTerent 
ways. St. James, preaching Christ more 
boldly and fervently, became an early 
martyr, having been slain by the sword of 
Herod (Acts xii. 2). St. John also drank 
of this cup, and was baptized witli this 
baptism, when, if we may trust the authority 
of Tertullian ('De Prsesoript.' o. xxxvi.), he 
was oast by order of Domitian into a caldron 
of boiling oil, before the Porta Latina at 
Rome, altliough the oil had no power to 
hurt him. Another legend states that he 
drank a oup of poison, and took no harm. 
On this account he is frequently represented 
with a oup in his hand. 

Ver. 40.— But to sit on my right hand or 
on my left hand is not mine to give ; bat it 
is for them for whom it hath been prepared. 
The Arians gathered from this that our Lord 
was not of one substance with the Father. 
But this arose from a misunderstanding of 
the words. For the antithesis is nut here 
between Christ and the Father; but be- 
tween James and John on the one side 
ambitiously seeking the pre-eminence, and 
thoae on the other side to whom it ought of 
right to be given. St. Jerome wisely says, 
" Our Lord does not say, ' Ye shall not sit," lest 
he should put to shume these two. Neither 
doei he say, * Ye shall sit,' lest the others 
HARK— IJ, 



shoxild be envious. But by holding out the 
prize to all, he animates all to contend for 
it." Our Lord is also careful to point out 
that he who humbles himself shall be 
exalted. But Christ is the Giver, not 
indeed by way of favour to any one who 
asks, but according to the eternal and un- 
alterable principles laid down by the Father. 
Tliat Christ is the Giver is plain from St. 
Luke (xxii. 29), "I appoint unto you • 
kingdom, even as my Father appointed unto 
me." 

Ver. 41.— And when the ten heard it, they 
began to be moved with indignation oonoem- 
ing James and John. How did they hear 
it ? It is most likely that Salome and her 
two sons sought this favour secretly from 
Christ, lest they should excite the envy of 
the others. But they, the ten, must have 
noticed the approach of James and John 
with their mother to our Lord They cama 
in a formal manner, worshipping him first, 
and then making their request (sea 
Matt. XX. 20). The ten would naturally 
be desirous to know the nature of this inter- 
view; and when it was explained to them, 
they began to show indignation. Our Lord 
perceived that they were disputing ; and he 
then called them and addressed the whole 
body. For he saw that they were all 
labouring under this disease of ambition ; 
and he wished to apply the remedy at once 
to all, as we see in the words which f(d- 
low. 

Ver. 42. — In these words our Lord doei 
not find fault with that power or authority, 
whether civil or eoolesiastioal, which la 
exercised by prinoea or bishops ; for this i* 
necessary in every state, and so is sanctioned 
by Divine and human law. What he con- 
demns is the arbitrary and tyrannical exer- 
cise of such power, which the princes of the 
Gentiles were accustomed to. 

Vers. 43, 44. — In .these words our Lord 
enjoins him who is raised above othen to 
conduct himself modestly and humbly . so 
as not to lord it over those beneath him, 
but to consider for them and to consult 
their security and happiness, and so to con- 
duct himself that he may appear to be 
rather their mini&ter and servant than their 
lord ; ever remembering the golden rule^ 
" All things whatsoever ye would that men 
should do to you, even so do to them." At the 
same time, our Lord here teaches all alike^ 
whether superiors or inferiors, by what way 
we should strive to reach heaven, so as to 
sit at the right or left hand of Uhrist in bia 
kingdom, namely, by the wa^ of humility. 
For those who are the lowliest and most 
humble here will be the greatest and most 
exalted there. 

Ver. 45. — A ransom for many (Xdrpair ivrl 
itoAA«i>; fromA^, toloo(e,orsetfree). Not 



es 



THE GOSPEL AOOOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. r. 1-62. 



that Christ died only for the elect. For Chriat 
died for all; and has obtained for all the 
means necessary and sufficient for their sal- 
vation. Tet the fruit of his death and his 
full salvation comes only to those who per- 
severe to the end. When our Lord says 
that he oame "to give his life a ransom for 
many," he regards the vast multitude of 
those who are included within his purposes 
of mercy. He " is the Saviour of all men, 
■pecially of them that believe." 

Ver 46. — And they come to Jericho. 
Jericho, situated in the midst of a fertile, 
well-watered country, celebrated for its 
palm trees, was situated about seventeen 
English miles east-north-east of Jerusalem, 
and about six miles from the nearest bend of 
the river Jordan. In the time of our Lord 
it was one of the most important cities nest 
to Jerusalem. It is now known by the 
name of Bicha or Ericha, and is almost 
deserted. The journey from the Jordan to 
Jericho is through a flat country ; but that 
from Jericho to Jerusalem is very hilly. It 
is supposed that it was upon the rocky 
heights overhanging this city that our 
Lord's temptation took place. Jericho de- 
rives its name, either from " the moon," or 
from the fragrant odours of the " balsam " 
plant, which was extensively cultivated in 
the neighbourhood. Its palm groves and 
balsam gardens were bestowed by Anthony 
upon Cleopatra, from whom Herod the 
Great purchased them. It was here that 
Herod the Great died. It is now one of the 
most filthy and neglected places in Pales- 
tine. To this place our Lord came ; and St. 
Luke (xviii. and xix.) gives a full account 
of his reception there. St. Matthew speaks 
of two blind men ; but he agrees with St. 
Mark in saying that the cure took place as 
he went out from Jericho. St. Luke men- 
tions only one; but he places the cure at 
the time of our Lord's entrance into Jericho. 
How do we reconcile St. Mark's account of 
one only, specially named, Bartimseus, the 
son of Timeeus? St. Augustine says that 
there were two blind men; but that the 
one, better known, overshadowed the other. 
He also says that Bartimseus was a well- 
known character, and that he was accus- 
tomed to sit by the wayside, not only blind, 
but as a beggar. It is of course possible 
that St. Luke may refer to another ease 
altogether. But on the other hand, with 
the exception that he mentions only one, 
and that he places the cure at the time of the 
entrance into Jericho, and not at the time of 
the departure, all the other circumstances 
are identical May not this latter dis- 
crepancy be reconciled thus?— the blind 
man may have sought a cure from Christ at 
Ids first entrance into the city ; but he may 
■at luve been able to be heard on account 



of the crowd. Or our Lord may have passed 
him by at first, in order to stimulate bis faith 
and hope. So the day after, he may hav« 
placed himself at the gate of the city, close 
by where Christ would pass through ; and 
there again he may have urged his request, 
and so obtained healing. Vi. John Light- 
foot (p. 348) says that the careful descrip- 
tion of BartimsBus would seem to imply 
that his father may have been a person of 
some note. Dr. Lightfoot adds that it ia 
possible that Timseus, or " Thimai," may be 
the same with Simaie, blind, from the 
use of the letter thau from samech, common 
amongst the Chaldseans ; so that Bartimseus 
might mean nothing more than " blind son 
of a blind father." 

Ver. 48. — Many rebuked him, that he 
should hold his peace. They rebuked him, 
perhaps, out of reverence and regard for 
Christ, who might perhaps at that moment 
have been preaching to the people, and so 
might be disturbed by the blind man's loud 
and noisy appeal. But the rebuke of the 
crowd gave additional energy to his en- 
treaties ; and he cried out the more a great 
deal, that his voice might be heard above 
them all. He was in good earnest, and 
would not be restrained. A useful lesson is 
here suggested to all. He who desiies to 
serve God must overcome all earthly shame 
and fear; for, indeed, this unworthy feeling 
keeps back many from Christ. 

Ver. 49.— And Jesus stood still (o-tAs t 
'Itjo-oEi)— literally, Jesus stood — and said, Call 
ye him. St. Jerome says that our Lord stood 
still on account of the man's infirmity. 
There were many walls in Jericho; there 
were rough places; there were rocks and 
precipices over which he might stumble. 
Therefore the Lord stood, where there was 
a plain path by which the blind man 
might approach him. The crowd show 
their sympathy. There is something very 
genuine as well as touching in their 
words, Be of good cheer: rise, he caUeth 
thee. 

Ver. 50. — And he, casting away his gar- 
ment, rose — the word in the Greek ia 
oyamjS^o-oi, literally, $prang to his feet — 
and oame to Jesus. He cast away his " gar- 
ment," that is, the loose outer robe which 
covered his tunic. He was in haste, and 
desired to disengage himself from every im- 
pediment, in his eagerness to approach Jesus. 
We seem here to have the description of a 
keen eye-witness, such as St. Peter would 
be. 

Vers. 51, 52.— Our Lord well knew what 
he wanted ; but it was necessary that he and 
those around him should hear from the lipi 
of the blind man the confession of his need, 
and of his faith in the power that waa 
present to heal him. And the blind man laid 



chl X. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCOIiDlNQ TO ST. MARK. 



67 



unto him, Babboni, that I may reeeive my 
■ight "Eabboni," or "Rabbuni," means 
literally, my Master. It was a more respect- 
ful mode of address than the more simple 
form "Rabbi." This expression shows 
that BartimsBus had yet much to learn as to 
the Divine character of onr Lord. But his 
faith is accepted; and he showed that it 
was genuine as £u •■ it went, by forthwith 



following Jesns in the way. There were sis 
occasions on which our Lord is recorded to 
have healed the blind: St. Matthew fix. 
27; zii. 22; zxi. 14); Si Mark (viiL 21; 
z. 46); St John (ix. 1). St. Chrysostom 
says of Bartimteus, that as before this gift of 
healing he showed perseveiauoe, so alter it 
he showed gratitude. 



H0MILETIC9. 

Ven. 1^12. — Marriage and divorce. Our Lord Jesus Is the great moral Legislator 
of humanity. His authoritative teaching applies to all classes and to all relationships 
of mankind. And it is to be noticed that he bases his commands and counsels both 
upon grounds of natural right and reason, and also upon the revealed Mosaic Law. 
With regard to the latter, it is observable that he professes not to destroy it, but to 
fulfil it — to inspire it with a new motive, and to give it a wider range ; whilst he 
allows no authority to mere traditions and usages, but treats them simply upon their 
own merits. 

L Upon what ohb Lord bases the banotitt of uabbiaoe. It is to be observed 
that Jesus goes back behind the old Mosaic Law, which was universally accepted among 
the Jews as the authoritative standard of conduct. 1. There is reference to what we 
should call natural adaptation. If there is design in any arrangement or provision of 
nature, there is certainly design in the division of mankind (as, indeed, of other races of 
living beings) into two corresponding and complementary sexes. Man was made for 
woman, and woman for man; and the equality in numbers of male and female is 
evidently a natural reason both for marriage and for monogamy. 2. There is reference 
to the creative, historical basis of marriage. The record of Genesis is adduced, and 
Jesus reminds the Pharisees that marriage dated, as a matter of fact, from the begin- 
ning of the creation — that our first parents lived together in this relationship from their 
first introduction to each other until the close of life. 3. Jesus asserts marriage to be 
a Divine ordinance. " God hath joined together " husband and wife. The Law of Moses 
came in with its additional provisions and sanction.^ ; but it presumed the existence 
of the marriage state. God, who orders all things well, had seen that it would not 
be good for the man to be alone ; accordingly he instituted wedded life, and hallowed it. 

II. What cub Lord deduces fbom the sanctity of mabbiage. 1. A condemna- 
tion of the custom of facile divorce. It was a common practice for the Jews, when 
dissatisfied with their wives, to put them away for very trivial reasons— even because 
they were not pleased with them, without any offence having been committed. They 
were wont to appeal to a permissive provision in their law as a warrant for acting thus. 
In our own times, in many countries even professedly Christian, it is too common for regu- 
lations of great laxity to bo made regarding divorce. In some countries even mcom- 
Datibilitv of temper is a sufficient ground for permanent separation. Such practices are 
condemned by Jesus as contrary to the Divine intention regarding marriage, and as 
subversive of all sound morality. As the family is the unit and the basis of all com- 
rounities and of all moral unity and welfare, it is of the highest importance that the 
^credness of this Divine institution should be upheld, and that all practices and senti- 
ments which undermine it should be discountenanced and opposed. Lax views upon 
Svorce are to be repressed, as inimical to all social welfare as well as to domestic 
concord. 2 A declaration that such divorce is conducive to adultery. Our Lord does 
not MV that the remarriage of divorced persons is in all cases adulterous; but, speakmg 
of S who are separated for trivial offences, and for any offence short of the most 
RBiious he declares that for such persons to marry agam is nothing less than adultery. 
TW a™ Tint reaUv and in God's sight released from one another, and a second union 
fe&X «Sl -mat therefore God hath joined together. let not man put 

TSation. L Learn our Lord's independence as an ethicd and spiritual Teach«i 
«iKJ^rity to traditional «id even Mosaic authority. 2. Learn his interest U 



68 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDLNG TO ST. MARK. [oh.x1— Ba 



all our hnmim relationshipg ; he consecrates them hy the regard of his grace and by th« 
imposition of his Law. 3. Let Christians discountenance lax opinions and practicea 
upon a question so vital to social and national well-being as the ordinance of marriage. 

Vers. 13— 16.— C%Wrf and the children. That three of the eyangelists should hava 
recorded this incident is proof of the impression it made upon the early Christians, and 
of the importance they attached to it. The Son of man interested himself in all classes 
and conditions of humanity ; and it is not strange that he should have come into 
direct and tender relations with the very young. 

L The children who were brought to Jesus. They were very young, for they are 
called " little children," and they were so small as to be taken up in the arms. Jesus 
had himself been a child, and had passed through the stages of infancy and boyhood, 
BO that from his own experience he could sympathize with this age and condition of 
human life. These children may have been children of the house where Jesus had 
been staying, and of the neighbours. It should be remembered that, not long before, 
Jesus had taken a little child and used him as an example of simplicity and humility. 
We may certainly learn from this incident that no cliild, however young or feeble, is 
disregarded by our Lord Jesus. In every one he sees an immortal, God-given nature, 
capable of fellowship with the Creator's mind, and of obedience to his commands. 

IL The parents of the children. 1. They revered and honoured Jesus them- 
selves, or they would not have acted thus. They would not have treated another 
rabbi thus. There must have been something in our Lord which attracted them aed 
induced them to believe that he would not repel them should they ask a favour on 
behalf of their little ones. 2. They brought their children to Jesus. The babes had 
neither knowledge nor strength to come of themselves ; but their parents acted for 
tliem. Parents should regard it as their duty and privilege to bring their offspring to 
the Saviour. This they may do by instructing them as to who and what Jesus is, by 
leading them into the society of Christ's people. 3. They had a definite purpose in 
bringing the children to Jesus, viz. that he should touch them and should pray for 
them. To tell our children of Christ is, or should be, with a view to their personal 
spiritual contact with him, and with a view to their enjoying both the regard of his 
friendship and the benefit of his intercession. 

IIL The twelve, and their treatment op the childrbn. It is instructive to 
observe that the very persons whose ofBce it was to make Jesus known to men, and to 
introduce all the needy to his notice, and to commend them to his aid, should have ou 
this occasion interfered with the approach of those whom Jesus would have welcomed. 
The twelve rebuked the parents, and forbade the children to be brought to Jesus, pro- 
bably from a mistaken idea that the Lord would not care to be troubled with those so 
young and so helpless. How important that Christians should not interpose to prevent 
children from seeking Christ and the fellowship of his people 1 

IV. Jesus, and his treatment op the children. The narrative gives us a 
delightful view of the Saviour's character, as the children's Friend. 1. What he/e2t. 
A very strong expression is used to denote our Lord's disapproval of his disciples* con- 
duct. He was "moved with indignation" by their demeanour. They were both 
misrepresenting him and inflicting a wrong upon the applicants for blessing. 2. What 
he mid. His language includes a special reference to the occasion, and a general 
statement of a Divine principle. " Suffer the children to come I " " Forbid them not 1 " 
How gracious a revelation of the Saviour's mind and disposition, and how instructive a 
lesson for his people ! The general principle he enunciates is even more valuable ; " Of 
Buch is the kingdom of heaven." The reference is doubtless to the dependence and 
teachableness of little children. God's kingdom is composed of childlike natures. 
The proud, self-sufficient, and self-confident are out of harmony with a spiritual 
society which recognizes a Divine Head and is governed by Divine laws. 3. What he 
did. Doubtless, in these actions, Jesus was obeying the impulse of his affectionate 
nature. Yet he intended to teach the world how gracious is his heart, how compas- 
sionate are his purposes, how vast and widely extended are the arms of his love. Ha 
took them In his arms, verifying the prediction concerning him as the Good Shepherd. 
He laid his hands upon them, signifying his tender interest. He blessed them, praying 
for tham, ud pronouncing over them words of Diviue benediction. 



ea. X. l-l$2.] ITHK GOSPEL ACiOORtlNa TO ST. MABE. Id 



Applioation. 1. An encouragement to Ohristian parents to bring their children to 
the Sayiour. 2. An inducement to the young to look to Jesus as the Giver of true 
blessing. 3. An example to the Church of Christ as to the spirit iu which the Lo^'a 
people should deal with the young — with inexperienced and immature naturea. No 
impatience or contempt, but rather gentleness and consideration, should distinguiah the 
•ttitada of Christ's people towards tbe lambs of the flock. 

Vers. 17 — ^22. — Loved, yet lacking. An interesting character this, coming In the 
Gospel history like a meteor out of the darkness for a brief moment, and then 
Tanishing again, to be no more seen. An interesting conversation this, casting valuabk 
light upon the character and the demands of Christ, and upon the aspirations and 
virtues, the tests and the deficiencies, of human nature. Strange that Jesus should 
love one who came before him in this one short interview ; stranger still that, in this 
loved one, he should find a lack so serious and even fatal, that such promise should 
issue in such disappointment 1 In this young ruler we have a type of a clasa of 
applicants to Christ. 

I. He possessed many things. How much was In this young man's favour! 1. 
His worldly position. Though young, he was a ruler, and the possessor of great riches. 
It was to his credit that, when his worldly condition and circumstances were such, he 
yet acted as he did, evincing a mind set upon higher blessings than this world can give. 
2. His cliarcicter. There is no reason to disbelieve his assertion that be had in his out- 
ward life kept the Law of the Decalogue. Christ did not charge him with hypocrisy 
in this profession; he rather admitted its truth in requiring more than compliance with 
the rules of morality. 3. His reverence for Jesus. This is apparent in his action and 
attitude: "he came kneeling down on the road before Jesus; "and in his address, 
" Oood Master," as well as in the fact that he reverently asked the judgment of the 
prophet of Nazareth upon a most important question. 4. His aspiration after eternal 
life. This was a proof of a noble dissatisfaction and a noble desire ; this question which 
the young ruler addressed to the one Being who was able to answer and resolve it. 

■II. He was loved and tested bt Chbist. 1. Jesus loved liim, doubtless seeing in 
him an ingenuous disposition, a thirst for truth, a reverence for goodness ; doubtless 
looking back upon a pure and honourable life iu the past, and forward to the bright 
possibilities of the future. What an insight we thus gain into the truly human nature 
cf the Saviour! And are there not now those. whom he looks upon and loves, 
beholding in them so much that is congenial to his heart ? 2. Jesus tested him. H» 
did this in love, yet in faithfulness. And in three ways. (1) His faith in Himself. 
Why call him "good" ? The epithet was too honourable if he were man. Was his disciple 
prepared to apply it to him with the clear understanding that it involved his Deity ? 
(2) Hla character. This test the young ruler stood; he had "a conscience void of 
offence." (3) His love and devotion. Was the young ruler prepared to give up all at 
the Master's bidding ? This leads to the observation that — 

III. He lacked ONE THDJO. Consider: 1. Chriafs demand. (1) It wasthat heshonld 
part with his wealth, and bestow all upon the poor. Not that this is universally obliga- 
tory or desirable. It was the form of complete surrender which in this case was most 
appropriate. A hard test, a stem requirement ; yet most necessary " to prove the 
sincerity of his love." (2) The promise. There was an inducement held out, of " treasure 
in heaven," which should more than compensate his loss. Our Lord shows his compas- 
sion upon our human nature in thus alluring to his side. (3) The call. It was to 
discipleship: "Follow me." What an opportunity was, in these words, opened up 
before this ardent, aspiring mind I Who can say what position he might have held in 
the circle of the apostles, in the memory of Christendom, had he responded to this 
heavenly summons ? 2. The young ruler's failure under trial. The saying was too 
hard ; the test was too severe ; the world was too strong 1 His heart sank within him, 
and his countenance fell. And then he went away sorrowful, grieving to leave Christ, 
yet feeling that the grief would be greater of leaving the riches in which he dehghted 
•nd trusted. Had he given, not his admiration, his respect, only, to Christ, but hii 
▼ery heart then it would have been possible to him to have " left all, and followed 
him." But one thing he lacked— the surrender of self, of the spiritual nature, whidi 
yivM, hare involved the nirrenderof aU. 



Afpuoatioh. Christ will be satisfied with notUng less than oar heart, our alL W« 
may have many things, and yet lack the spirit of perfect suirandei and ooiueoratioii. 
The test is certain to be applied ; how shall we endure it ? 

Vers. 23 — SI. — Chriit must le aU. Bometimes our Lord gare ntteranoe to paradox. 
Certainly it was so on this occasion. Any ordinary observer would have pronounced 
the rich young ruler blessed, and would have pitied the poor fishermen who neglected 
their petty craft and followed the homeless and penniless Babbi of Nazareth. But 
God's ways are not our ways. Jesus looked below the surface. To him the case of 
the favoured of fortune and the admired of society was a sad case, and the choice of 
the twelve was the choice of the good part, which none can take away, 

I. The bfibitual dibaovantaoeb and perils of wealth. This is not a popular 
or acceptable lesson ; and most people would be willing to accept, without a murmur, 
the position of danger and temptation occupied by the affluent. However, the warning! 
of the Master are fully borne out by the experience of those who have watched the 
. working of human nature under the influence of riches. 1. To have wealth is to be in 
danger of trusting in wealth. 2. To trust in wealth is not conducive to humility, 
penitence, and faith — the dispositions peculiarly suitable to those who would be saved. 
3. To lack these dispositions is to be disqualified for the kingdom of God. 4. Tet the 
grace of God, with whom all things are possible, is able to overcome difficulties and 
temptations great as these. 

IL The blessedness or eivnio up all fob Christ. 1. Beally and truly tk$ 
Christian swrrenders all ht hat to his Lord. That Lord may give him back, as it were, 
of what was his own, but even when used for himself, it is consecrated, and is still the 
Lord's. (1) Christians may be called upon to give up earthly possessioss. This the 
rich young ruler should have done, but did not ; this Feter and the rest of the twelve 
actually did. It has often been remarked that the apostles did not give up much in 
order to become disciples of Jesus. But the answer is fair — What they had they gave 
up ; it was their all. When plainly called upon to part with property, as, «.^., in 
times of persecution, or for the sake of charity, Christ's people willingly make the 
sacrifice required. Property so lost is truly gained. (2) Christians may have to 
renounce earthly aims and prospects. How often does this happen still 1 Tbe convert 
feels constrained to break away from old associations, which might well be the 
Btepping-stone to honour, station, emolument ; and in sacrificing what the world would 
give, he reaps a rich reward in the approval of his conscience, the progress he makes in 
the Divine life, the increased opportunities of usefulness he enjoys. Such are foianuMt 
is inviting their fellow-men to the better path — 



'Come, leani, yonr follies quitting, 
That this world's gain is loai; 
To his Etild rule submitting 
Who bare for yon the cross." 



(3) Thqr renonnce the pleasures and the applause of the world. The pleasures of lin 
it is their aim to relinquish ; the praise of men they regard with indifference ; for they 
" have left all." (4) All this renunciation is spiritually v^uable just so far ai it 
expresses the renunciation of self-will, and the acceptance of the will of Christ. " I 
count all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus the Lord." 
2. In 10 doing the Christian reaps a rich reward. This is twofold. (1) There is 
recompense in this life. To follow Jesus b in itself an honour and hiipinness. Who 
that loves him would not willingly share his lot? Surrender all you have to Christ, 
and Christ will bestow all he has on you. He not only confers upon his people the 
favour of his heart, he gives them to enjoy the approbation of a good conscience. And 
Jesus points out the provision made by God's goodness for many of his faithful fol- 
lowers. It happened, as he foretold, that many of the persecuted disciples experienced 
marvellous interpositions and unexpected relief; that their confession of Christ was 
the occasion of the attachment and affection, the ministrations and gifts, of those whu 
witnessed and admired their fidelity. (2) There is a yet richer recompense hereafter. 
Simply and grandly does Jesus assure his people that they shall have "in the world" 
to oome etwnal Ufc." I* was an assurance which was repeated by Ohrirtli ipipire4 



«B. s. l-fi&] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. MARE. fl 

apostles, which was addressed from the throne of his glory by the triumphant 
Redeemer to his struggling soldiers upon earth. " Be thou faithful unto death, and 
I will give thee a crown of life." Many a faithful witness and warrior has been 
animated by the glorious prospect, and has learned joyfully to toil and patiently t© 
endure, with the blessed hope of the future before his eyes. The light afflictions an 
light, becauae they introduce the exceeding and eternal weight of gloiy. 

* When the shore is won at last. 
Who will count the billows past?" 

Vers. 32—34. — The reiterated prediction. This was the third occasion upon which 
Jesus expressly and formally intimated to his followers the approaching close of his 
ministry and life. The occasion was the last great journey up to Jerusalem. He 
wished the disciples to understand what their discipleship involved, into what scenes 
they were now about to follow him; that, forewarned, they might be forearmed. 
Observe— 

I. Thb pbkpabation fob this ooMMnOTCATioN. Mark, in a few words, graphically 
and vividly portrays the scene. An unusual state of excitement pervades the company. 
The attitude of the Master, and the expression of the disciples' countenances, display 
the prevalence of common emotion. Jesus goes before, absorbed in contemplation of 
his approaching sufferings ; the group of disciples are amazed at the prospect opened 
up to them in the words of warning they have just heard ; and the people around are 
silent with dread and awe I 

II. Jesus peedicts the plaob op his suppbeinos. They are going up to Jerusalem. 
The city, in which he has often preached and wrought his mighty works, is about to 
reject him. The metropolis is in this act to fulfil the counsels of the nation. " He 
came to hie own, and his own received him not." " It cannot be that a prophet 
perish out of Jerusalem." 

III. It IB POKETOLD WHO SHALL BE THB INSTIGATORS OP THB MABTTBDOH. The 

chief priests and the scribes have opposed him at every point ; have disputed with 
him, calumniated him, stirred up the people against him. And now it is into theii 
hands that he is to be delivered, and they are to take the initiative in his destruction. 
The leaders of his own nation are to compass the 'violent end of him who is that 
nation's Glory and Redeemer. 

IV. It is poebtold who shall be the aoents in his marttbdom. It is a proof 
of our Lord's prophetic foresight, that he predicts that the instrumentality by which 
the leaders of the Jews shall effect their purpose is not a native but a foreign agency. 
He came " a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of God's people Israel ; " and 
it was permitted that he should be " despised and rejected of men," and that both 
sections of the human race should conspire and concur in his martyrdom. 

V. Jesub pobeteZiLS the insults and indignities which shall pbecede hib dxath. 
The circumstantial manner in which the great Sufferer describes beforehand the cruel 
and inhuman treatment with which he shall meet, is pathetic and instructive. He 
reads the very hearts of his foes, and marks their malignity and baseness, their 
hostility to himself and to all that is good. Death is formidable, but the prospect of 
such a death as this awakens horror. 

VI. The eesubebction is poebtold as the completion op the mabttbdom. 
Christ's death was not merely a martyrdom ; it was a sacrifice. Its purpose would not 
have been answered had it not been shown that it was impossible that be should be 
holden of death. Thus was there given to the world an assurance from Heaven that 
this was indeed the Christ, declared to be the Son of God with power. And for the 
sake of the disciples themselves, the Lord Jesus foretells his approaching victory over 
the grave, that their hearts may be cheered and their hopes inspired, that they may 
learn the more truly to reverence him and the more ardently to trust him. 

y^fg, 35 iS.^Triie ministry is true dignity. Some of the most sacred and precloua 

lessons which the Lord Jesus has taught mankind were suggested by incidents which 
occurred in his own ministry. This is true, both of lessons regarding his own grace 
and of lesson* regarding our duty and life. His hand turns all that he touches inte 



•n tHB GOSPEL ACCORDING tO ST. MARK. toH.x.i— 62. 



gold. Who would hare though* that the selfish and thoughtless request of a mother 
and her sons could hsTe led to one of the profoundest statements concerning the 
Sarionr*! mission, and to the publication of one of the most novel and powerful lawi 
that were to govern the aubjects of the Saviour's kingdom ? Yet so it is. 

I. Thb bequest or ambition. There is scope in every position of human life for the 
display of this principle of human nature. The desire to be wiser and better and more 
influential for good than we are is to be commended ; but the desire to have more power 
and honour than our fellow-men is bad, unless it be cherished with a view to their 
advantage. There is such a thing as religious ambition, as the history of the Church 
in all agea abundantly shows. And the passage in the Gospel history now before us 
exhibits the working of this principle in the breasts of some of our Lord's first followers 
and apostles. Observe: 1. By whom this request was preferred. Salome was the 
wife of Zebedee, the owner of fishing-boats upon the Galilean lake. As the sister of 
Mary, the mother of Jesus, she may naturally have thought she and hers had some 
claim upon the Founder of the new kingdom. Her sons, James and John, joined with 
her in this petition for pre-eminence, so that it was in all likelihood discussed and 
arranged beforehand. It is remarkable that these ambitious followers of Jesus, who 
herein showed so little of the Master's spirit, were, with Peter, his most intimate and 
trusted friends, who might have been supposed the most to resemble him in disposition 
and character. A warning which none should neglect, as to the possibility of even 
eminent Christians falling into this snare. 2. On what occasion was this petition pre- 
sented? It is observable that, shortly before, Jesus had promised his disciples honour 
and dignities ; in fact, thrones of dominion and judgment in the kingdom that was to 
be. Yet more recently, however, he had amazed his disciples by informing them of 
events which he plainly f6resaw — his own approaching persecution, suflerings, and 
death. The end was indeed near, and Jesus seems to have foretold its accompaniments 
the more clearly the nearer the time approached. It is singular that the ambition of 
the brothers, instead of being subdued by the mournful prospect, was inflamed by the 
glorious promise. They thought of their thrones more than of his cross. 3. There was 
tome good in this request. It recognized Christ's authority, for the petition was urged 
upon him as upon a King who was able to grant it. It evinced faith in his character 
and in his future ; for unless the kingdom had been a real thing to them they would 
not have sought participation in its glories. Not only did they refer the appointment to 
him; they evidently desired above all things to rule, not only under him, but with 
him. 4. Yet there was still more manifestly what was bad in the request. Their great 
error was that they overlooked the sublime truth, that fellowship is spiritual and not 

circumstantial. To be Christ's, whether upon a throne, or in a hovel, or a dungeon 

that is the aspiration of the true Christian's heart ; the aspiration to share in his outward 
glory (as if that were the best) is mean and contemptible. What a carnal conception 
was theirs of the kingdom ! They laid hold of the emblem, but the underlying truth 
and reality escaped them altogether. And yet, again, we discern in the request a selfish 
desire for personal aggrandizement. They were thinking of themselves wheu they 
should have been thinking of their Lord. They ought to have asked, " How, Lord 
can we serve thee, or suffer with thee, and so please and glorify thee ? " Instead of 
which they were scheming what they might get from Christ, and how a connection with 
him might be turned best to their own advantage. 

II. Thb bebukb of ambition. Our Lord had on several occasions to rebuke the 
pride, vain-glory, and strife for pre-eminence which broke forth now and again even in 
the chosen band of the twelve. This he did by symbolical acts, as when he set the 
little child in the midst and exhorted them to a childlike spirit; and again when he 
washed theur feet, bidding them follow his example of condescension and humility. 
On the occasion before us our Lord censured the conduct of the brothers with a peculiar 
and memorable solemnity. 1. Remark what he re/used. The places asked for he 
would not grant them. He gave them to understand that the bestowment of honours 
in Christ's kingdom is not a matter, so to speak, of favouritism, of private and personal 
feeling. It is governed by great moral laws. It is the result of their opeiation in the 
heart and in society. There is nothing arbitrary or capricious in it. It is the eipressioa 
of the Father'.s wisdom. The future shall reveal what for the present lies hid from alL 
2. Eemarli^ what Jetui fi'vmised. He first puts it to them iu the form cf • question * 



m. X 1— S2j tHE GOSPEL ACCOKDiNa TO St. MARK. W 

but he very graciously passes from interrogation to assurance and promise. These twc 
men who asked for thrones were promised — what ? The cup of sorrow and the baptism 
of euffering. But it was to be his cup, hit baptism. What Jesus meant we are at no 
loss to decide. The cup he drank in the garden of Gethsemane ; the baptism all but 
overwhelmed him upon the cross of Calvary. Of all this they should know something 
by bitter, yet blessed, experience. They had some foretaste of their portion when they 
saw their Master in his humiliation and in his death. After years enlarged their 
Experience. James fell a victim to the sword of the persecutor ; John lived a long life 
of witness, both by work for Christ and by steadfastness in suffering for Christ. Both 
were faithful unto death. Both lost all taint of earthly ambition, and knew the fellow- 
ship of their Lord's cross and passion. 3. Consider how contrary to their expectation* 
was this revelation of the mode in which Christ's disciples should share with him. The 
manner in which the Lord dealt with them showed alike his knowledge of human 
nature and his habitual power of spiritual sympathy. How fitted was his treatment 
of them to draw out and encourage their better feelings! How much higher and nobler 
a view of human nature and its possibilities and destinies was this which Jesus pre- 
sented I And he did it in such a way as not to discourage those whom yet he felt it 
needful to rebuke ; in such a way as to prepare his friends to give, in due time, the con- 
vincing proof that their friendship was genuine, sympathetic, and unselfish. 

III. The eembdt fok ambition. Here, as everywhere, Christianity is Christ. Jesus 
never merely tells us what he would have us be ; he first shows us this in his own 
Person, and then he supplies us with the Divine and all-sufficient motive in his own 
ministry and sacrifice. " For verily the Son of man came not to be," eta 1. Not 
that Jesus absolutely and always refused to be ministered unto. In his infancy his 
mother nurtured him ; during his ministry his friends supplied his wants, and welcomed 
him to their homes. Gracefully and graciously he accepted their kind and affectionate 
service. 2. But that bis chief purpose in his earthly life was to minister to men. He 
observed and pitied those whom he came to save and bless, for tlieir wants were many 
and their woes were great. He supplied their bodily necessities, he relieved their 
bodily privations, he healed their bodily maladies ; he sympatliized with them in their 
griefs, and brought both health and consolation to their hearts. Their spiritual wants 
aroused his deepest commiseration. He taught the ignorant, aroused in the sinful the con- 
science of sin, brought pardon to the penitent, hope to the downcast, and salvation to all 
prepared to receive it. His career on earth was one long ministry of wisdom, faithful- 
ness, love, and power. 3. And his death was voluntary sacrifice and service, in th e highest 
form. The purpose of our Lord's coming was a purpose of" obedience unto death, even 
the death of the cross." There was nothing accidental or unforeseen in the close of our 
Lord's earthly career. He consciously and voluntarily gave his life. What others 
prized, he surrendered ; what others strove to save, he was content to lose. A sublime 
spectacle of self-abnegation 1 But there was a purpose in this act of Jesus. It was 
that he might pay a ransom that he deigned to die. He is the Bedeemer, and redemp- 
tion was his great work. From the bondage and power, from the penalty and curse of 
sin, he died to set us free. Ana observe the expansive benevolence that characterized 
his' redemptive work. It was to ransom many that he died. Not to exalt himself 
merely, as was the carnal aim of his half-trained followers, but to save multitudes, to 

redeem mankind. . , , , , i- i. i. 

IV. The cube of ambition. We must not lose sight of the close connection between 
our Saviour's statement regarding himself, his ministry, and death, and his language to 
the twelve, especially to the ambitious brothers. Observe: 1. Eow the remedy works. 
DifiScult as it is to explain the bearing of our Saviour's redemption upon the Divms 
character and government, there is little difficulty in explaining its bearing upon 
human character and life. The soul that by faith lays hold upon the Redeemer, and 
accents the redemption m the provision of God's free grace, comes under a new impulse 
Mid motive. Gratitude Hid love towards him who gave himself for us lead, both 
naturally and of purpose, to devotion, obedience, and assimilation of character. Such 
motives the Holy Spirit applies to the nature, and thus overcomes the native tendency 
to selfishness and sinful pride. The Christian feels that Jesus Uved and died to redeem 
from aU evU, and certainly from this prevailing fault and folly. Our Saviour is both 
Saitfodrf wd the Motive of «ur mw service. Himself tiw highfist esuupls at 



74 THE GOSPEL ACOOEDINa TO ST. MARK, [oa «. 1— 6«. 

humility and benevolence, he furnishes in his cross the power which Inspires us to 
conflict with sin, and encourages us to hope for victory. It is Divine wisdom which 
has devised the plan, and Divine grace which has executed it, and the results are 
worthy of him to whom we owe them. 2. By what signs the efBcacy of the remedy 
is made apparent. Our Lord clearly saw how contrary is the law of his kingdom to 
that which prevails in earthly society. He observed how men aim at pre-eminence 
and dominion ; and, instead of qualifying this practice, he condemns it ; instead of 
lopping the boughs, he strikes at the root of the tree. " It is not so among you." On 
the contrary, he unfolds the new law : " Foremost in service, foremost in kingdom, in 
honour." Accordingly, if you would know whether an individual, a community, is 
truly Christ's, apply this test. Do not ask — Is the creed orthodox ? Are the devotions 
splendid or fervent ? Is profession loud and ample ? But ask — Is the Spirit of Jesus 
manifest? Is the law of Jesus observed? For "if a man have not the Spirit ot 
Christ, he is none of his." They are truly Christians who, instead of asking — How can 
we enjoy ourselves? how can we raise ourselves? ask, on the contrary — How can we 
live as ministers of one another, and as servants of all ? In the family, in the Church, 
in the world, we have ever-widening circles within which our influence may extend. 
To promote the bodily, the social, the educational, the moral, and spiritual welfare of 
our fellow-creatures — this is an aim worthy of all adoption, and an aim which will 
supply a sufficient and conclusive answer to the somewhat foolish question of the day, 
" Is life worth living ? " To work for others and to work for Christ, — this is what the 
Lord expects from his people. And this is the manner of moral life which leads to his 
approval; this is the pathway to the stars. 

Afpucation. 1. Adore the compassion and humility of the Redeemer. 2. Accept 
the deliverance which he has wrought in the payment of your ransom. 3. Check the 
rising spirit of self-seeking and ambition. 4. Live as ministers of blessing to those 
around you. " Freely ye have received, freely give." 

Vera. 46 — 62. — Blind Bartimceus. It is not without a purpose that the evangelists 
have put upon record so many of our Lord's miracles wrought on behalf of the blind. 
In aU such miracles the " sign " is prominent, the moral lesson is instructive, impressive, 
and encouraging. 

I. We recognize, In the privation of Bartimgeus, an emblem of the shhiee's 
STATE. For : 1. The sinner is without spiritual knowledge. The blind are necessarily, 
by their deprivation of the highest of the senses, cut off from much knowledge of the 
outer world, and of the properties of matter, and consequently of the appeals of the 
Creator to the mind and heart of man. 2. The sinner is a stranger to many pure and 
elevating pleasures. The enjoyments of the sightless are grievously curtailed. The 
votary of sin has indeed his pleasures, but they are impure, debasing, and unsatisfying. 
3. The sinner lacks true guidance. Just as the blind man depends upon others to lead 
him, and unless so assisted goes astray, so the unenlightened are doomed to wander in 
the mazes of error and of sin. 4. The sinner has no assurance, for he has no means 
of safety. As the blind fall into dangers for want of sight, so those whose minds are 
dark know nothing of true spiritual security, and have no well-founded hope. 

II. Here we have an example of the cry of dawning faith. 1. There is pre- 
sumed a sense of privation, of misery, of need. This expresses itself when opportunity 
invites the expression. 2. We observe a recognition of Christ's power and willingness 
to help and save. When Bartimasus heard that it was Jesus who drew near, he cried 
aloud for help, having no doubt heard from some credible quarter of the customary 
compassion and the miraculous powers of the Prophet of Nazareth. 3. This shapes itself 
into a definite appeal for mercy. 4. And this appeal is distinguished by persever- 
ance and persistency. Hindrances and dissuasions are of no avail ; they only incite 
the applicant to more earnest supplications. The soul that truly feels its need, and 
has caught a true glimpse of Jesus, is not to be deterred from entreaties for grace and 
help. Obstacles may hinder the indifferent ; they quicken the zeal of those who are 
earnest. 

III. As INBTANOE OF Christ's COMPASSIONATE INTEREST. When the blind beggar 
cries aloud, Jesus hears ; he pauses to allow an interview ; he bids that the suppliant 
1^ brought to bim. It is ever so. Nothing is so welcome to the Savioui as ttu 



OH. 1.1—52.] THE GOSPEL AC3C0EDINQ TO ST. MAEK. IB 

entreaty and appeal of the penitent and believing sinner. No voice is unheard, no 
wretchedness unfelt, no applicant rejected, by him. The sinner's need is his concern; 
the sinner's cry prompts his interposition. 

rV. An indication of the CnnECH's pbopbb rassioN. The people, attemWe to 
Christ and friendly to the sufferer, call the blind man, raise his hopes, encourage hia 
approach. This conduct is exactly that of our Lord's faithful ministers and of all his 
true disciples. The Church cannot save, but its privilege and its duty is to point to 
him who can save. The vocation of the Chiorch is to tell of Jesus, to point to Jesus, 
to lead to Jesus. This is the true ministry, at once humbling and ennobling ; for 
whilst it presumes the spiritual powerlessness of man, it affords to human benevolence 
an abundant scope, and assimilates it to the pity of the Saviour's gracious heart. 

V. An illustbation op eabnestnbss ebspondino to the invitation of Chbist. 
How picturesquely does Mark tell us that this blind man, casting away his garment, 
" sprang up, and came to Christ " ! A suggestion that he who hears the gospel should 
fling from him all his doubts, should abandon his evil companions and the sin that 
doth so easily beset him, should forsake his evil ways and thoughts, and so should 
draw near to Christ. 

VL The chabactbristio mannbb in which Christ impabtbd the blebsiko sought. 
Th« dialogue between Jesus and Bartimseus was brief, and it was "to the point." 
Question, answer, and final assurance were all satisfactory. The point upon which 
stress is chiefly laid is the faith which makes whole. It is the one condition. When 
this is complied with, all things are possible ; the blind see, the prayer is granted, the 
soul is saved. 

VIL The qbateful eeoognition of the boon confebbed is a lebson to all who 
abb blessed bt Christ. As Bartimseus followed Jesus in the way, doubtless to 
testify to the pity and the power of the Bedeemer, to glorify his Deliverer, and to 
invite others to extol and praise him ; so does it become all those whose eyes Christ 
has opened to witness to the Divine Healer, and to say fearlessly in the presence of all 
nan, " Qe hath opened mine eyes ;" " Whereas I was blind, now I see." 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1—12, — Chrisfs statement of the Divine law of marriage. It is well to note 

his locality at this time. He was approaching the centre of the Judaean party, out- 
lying members of which encountered him as he was entering Judaea from beyond Jordan. 
Nevertheless he no longer observes " counsels of prudence." He freely addresses the 
crowds that throng to his ministry, and confronts the attempts of his enemies to catch 
him in his words. This Divine abandonment is very noble and beautiful, and argues 
that he now clearly foresaw all that was to take place. There are two intentions in 
the reply of Jesus which it is necessary to distinguish, viz. that of defence, and that 
of teaching. His words are to be studied, therefore, as — 

I. A MEASURE OF DEFENCE. That his questioners meant him mischief there can be 
no doubt. The word "tempting" is used for "trying," "proving," and that in an 
evil Mnse. L What, then, was the danger that lay in such a question t According to 
his reply they hoped : (1) To discredit him with the respectable classes, and to found a 
charge against him of overturning the social and religious institutions of the land. It 
is the reproach and shame of nearly all "heresies" in religion that they sooner or later 
attempt to abolish the safeguards of society, and the time-honoured customs of the 
social order. Marriage is a touchstone that betrays the inherent unrighteousness and 
impracticability of a large proportion of them. His enemies hoped on this point to 
array him against Moses. (2) To discredit him with the common people. It was a 
vexed question at the time in the rival schools of Hillel and Shammai, the latter being 
stricter, the former laxer, in their view of the lawfulness of divorce. Probably con- 
vinced of their own view of the case, they relied upon easily confuting his arguments, 
and thereby " showing him up" as a pretender and impostor. 2. But in this twofold 
Khvme they were defeated, Jesus making his interrogators themselves the decbrers oJ 
the Law which he accepted and simply interpreted. He appeared, therefore, as a 



rS t^E GOSPtlL ACCOtlDiNG to ST. MARK. foH. X. 1—52 



defender and not an assailant of the Law. And then he showed how deep the basis of 
obligation really was, and how much less strict the " precept " of Moses was than it 
might have been, and the cause of this. 

II. A PERUANENT DOCTBiNE OF BIOHTE0U8NESB. The historical clrcumstances of the 
time when the precept was formulated were probably considered at greater length than 
could be represented in Mark's account, and the position justified that it was a com- 
promise or provisional measure necessitated by " the hardness of heart " of the Jews, 
the drawing up of a formal document being a check upon hasty and passionate 
ruptures of the marriage tie. He thus proved that morcU obligation is deeper and 
more permanent than convention or external law. He neit considered marriage as a 
law of nature anterior to the social sanction, which does not therefore create the 
institution, but ought only to recognize and enforce it. To this end ?ie traces it to the 
original purpose of Ood in creation, quoting Gen. i. 27 ; and strengthening the inference 
from this by the positive command of Gen. ii. 24, long anterior to the time of Moses. 
It is not for man to interfere with or modify an arrangement so manifestly Divine. 
The only groumd upon which marriage can he set aside is therefore that of one or other 
party to the marriage hand having already broken it by sinful action, and thus 
destroyed it as an actual thing. The Law then simply steps in to defend the rights of 
the pjffty who has been injured, setting that party free from further possibility of like 
injury. This transgression of the marriage bond which amounts to its annulment is 
not stated, but is clearly implied, viz. adultery. The Saviour thereby proves his 
teaching in harmony with the teaching of nature and previous revelation. But the 
gospel which is proclaimed in his Name does more than this. It Seeks to fit man for 
the highest social and religious duties, by purifying and strengthening his moral 
being. — M. 

Vers. 13 — 16. — Jesug blessing the little children: a children's sermon. One of 
the scenes in the life of the Saviour which illustrate most strongly and teautifiiUy 
the genius of the gospeL The imagination loves to dwell upon it, and the heart is its 
best interpreter. There is, so to speak, a climax in the action. 

I. Little childben abb attbactbd to Jesus. There must have been something 
in the aspect, etc., of the Saviour which drew the little ones and their mothers to his 
side. Christianity differs from the systems of idolatry in presenting us with One 
whom we instinctively can love. A little girl, when asked why she thought Jesus 

■ must have smiled, said, " He must have smiled when he said, ' Suffer little children,' 
etc., else they would never have come I " A chief object of preaching and living the 
gospel is to exhibit this charm. 

II. Little children abe invited to Jesus. How many people won't come to a 
place unless they think they are welcome, and therefore they expect an invitation. 
Now, when the disciples thought that their Master was too engrossed with high 
thoughts and important affairs to attend to the children, they took it upon themselves 
to send them away. This was not done through unkindness, but simply through a 
mistake. Christ corrected the mistake, and deliberately invited the litt\e children. 
That proves — does it not ?— in the strongest way that he intends theni to come to him. 
But Jesus does more than invite. 

IIL Little childben abe olaiued bt Jesus. "For of such is the kingdom of 
heaven." That means that little children are very near to him already. They are 
really *i his kingdom, and he is their King. He has a greater right, therefore, to their 
obedience and service and society, than father or mother, or brother or sister. When 
little children are good and loving they are with Jesus, and it is only when they do or 
think what is wrong that they go away from him. And all who come into his kingdom 
have to come in as little children, ie. they are to be childlike — simple, loving, trustful, 
and obedient. 

IV. Little ohildbeit abe blessed bt Jesus. He took them in his arms and 
embraced them. But he also put his hands on them, and gave them his Father's 
blessing. How great a thing did the Jews think a blessing was 1 Let us try and live 
so that we shall at last get the blessing Christ has in store for us. Do you love to be 
with Jesus? Do you do whatever he commands yon? Then you are a subject ol hia 
kingdom, and a ould of grace ; and hereafter you will share his glory. M, 



<M. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACOOBDINa TO ST. MARK. TT 

Vers. 17 — 22. — The great inquiry. This eeems a better title for the nibject than 
" The Great Decision," as we have no reason to believe that the decision come to was a 
final one. But the reference to " eternal life " proves how momentous the occasion was 
to him who inquired. Such a time comes but seldom, yet it comes to every man, 
when he feels that everything else dwindles into insignificance in comparison with 
"life." As to this inquiry, notice — 

L How IT WAS UADB. 1. Earnestly. The manner of the man is vividly portrayed 
by St. Mark: "running, and kneeled to him." This spirit is a primary requisite. 
" Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness." He seized the passing 
opportunity and despised the judgment of onlookers. 2. Intelligently. What he was 
seeking was definitely before his mind. His previous training had prepared him to 
think of the object he sought more or less correctly. He used the word " inherit," 
which implied Boraething different from "have," or "possess" (Matthew). 3. With 
real hut defectively justified acknowledgment of Ohrisfs character. This vague instinct 
which he expressed in the title " Good," had to be grounded in some true apprehension 
of the nature and character of Jesus ere it could be accepted as satisfactory. How 
radical this misconception was appears as he answers the question regarding the com- 
mandments. 

n. How IT WAS ANSWERED. 1. With the needful correction to the question. It is 
of the utmost importance that we clearly perceive what real "goodness" is, and to 
whom alone it can belong, ere we seek it. 2. With a provisional test. The command- 
ments; perhaps those emphasized which bore most directly upon his position and 
circumstances. Self-restraint is a first requisite, and that is witnessed to by the Law. 
But he still stands outside the true conception of " goodness," for he answers from the 
conventional and not from the absolute and spiritual standpoint. " The Law is our 
schoolmwit'* te bring us to Christ," by showing us our imperfection and need of a 
Saviour %. With » final test. " One thing thou lackest : go, sell whatsoever thou hast," 
etc. Self-restraint being insufficient, self-denial, and that specially corresponding 
with his circumstances, is invited. This was the crucial test. It has to be varied 
according to the difference in individual tastes, ideals, circumstances, etc., of different 
people. 4. By a look of love. It was spontaneous, full of attraction, and, up to a 
certain degree, of approval ; then of yearning sorrow and concern. Such questions 
and such a disposition can never be received by Christ with indifference. 

III. In what it eesui.tbd. " His countenance fell," etc. There was grief, disap- 
pointment, perhaps even a little resentment, and also inward shame. Not decision ; 
rather indecision. Tested by highest test and found wanting. Drawn by tenderest 
love of the Son of God, yet unwilling to yield. The grieved heart may yet return : its 
sad disconsolateness Is its most hopeful attribute. — M. 

Vers. 23— 27.— ificles a spiritual drawback. Valuable to the moral as to the scien- 
tific or artistic teacher to have a real instance— a study Irom the life. Yet it is not given 
to many to seize the salient points and analyze the character as Chnst did. He did it, 
too, in a manner the most natural. x - i 

L The satino of Cheist. " How hardly shall they that have nohes enter into 
the kingdom of Godl" It is no proverb culled from the pages of the past, but 
evidently his own instinctive, penetrating "moral" from what they had just seen. It 
was self-evident to him " how hardly," i.e. with what difficulty, such a thing could take 
place. He knew by personal experience the price that was to be paid for the realiza- 
tion of that kingdom, and what its nature would be when reahzed ; but he alone. As 
fruit of his own Inward experience it was a distinct discovery in morals. The disciples, 
not so conversant with the inner nature of the kingdom, were amazed. It was the 
exact opposite of their own idea. They thought that it would be absolutely necessary 
to gain stieh disciples if the kingdom was ever to be realized. It was impossible for 
them to conceive of spiritual power apart from material means and influence. They 
coum not get rid, moreover, of the dream that a political shape would sooner or later 
he assumed by this coming power. Their mistake was deeply rooted in the whole 
habTto? tnoK of the ancient worid. The well-to-do had not only the material 
advantage of their riches, but a certain reflected honour as enjoying the theocratc 
bSg upon the keeping of the 9ommandme^ts. And m the c^se pf the ruler this 



78 THE GOSPEL AOCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. x 1—52 

moiml excellence was not only an ancestral trait but a personal characteristic. Th« 
G^eek who styled the rich and powerful of his nation ol ir/aSol, or koAo/, and the poot 
ol Kcucol, was representative of his age ; cf. the Latin optimaUs, the Saxon good men 
(opposed to Uwd people, lose hinds), the French prudhommes. And the modem mind 
has not yet got rid of the twist. There is a superficial gentleness of manners, refine- 
ment, and honour, identified, by long association, with the " better classes," that is 
easily mistaken for a deeper moral principle. Nor can we ignore the " minor morali- 
ties," the conventional proprieties and respectabilities which wealth generally brings 
in its train. It is only when the emphtuis is laid on character that these are estimated 
at their proper worth. Therefore the necessity for — 

IL The justification of the sATiiia. It is done in a spirit of tender, condescend- 
ing sympathy — "children." 1. Tfie general difficulty attending entrance into the 
kingdom is declared (the clause, " for them that trust in riches," being probably not 
genuine). The reason for this difiSculty is not, however, stated. It ought to have 
been remembered. " Taking up his cross " was the condition imposed upon every would- 
be " disciple." 2. A figure of speech is employed in relation to the rich. The tradition 
identifying the " needle's eye " with a certain gate of Jerasalem is hardly well enough 
supported to be reliable. It was probably but an impromptu hyperbole that flashed 
from the mind of Christ. But it would recall the teaching of the " strait gate." Kd/tiKos, 
a rope, may, however, be the true reading. Everything that exaggerates and pampers 
"self" hinders from the better life. The disciples had learnt that lesson in part 
(ver. 28), but its absolute import and spiritual realization they were not to arrive at 
until their Master had gone away. Their astonishment is not, therefore, lessened, but 
rather increased, by the repeated statement ; and they said, " Then who can be saved t " 
A question which seemed to imply, " If the rich cannot be saved without difBculty, 
the poor will have still less chance." The temptations of poverty were probably pro- 
minent in their minds. From the human point of view this would seem to be a just 
observation ; therefore he qualified his statement, and under certain conditions declared- 
Ill. The batino sdpbbsbded. " With men it is impossible, but not with Ood : for 
all things are possible with God." There is here a double hint, viz. as to the objective 
work which he himself was to do for men, and the spiritual aid which would be 
experienced in men by the advent of the Holy Ghost. The difficulty is wholly on the 
human side. Salvation is thus vindicated as a supernatural achievement — a Divine 
grace, and not a human virtue. — M. 

Vers. 28 — 31. — The hundred/old, L Is Chbistian' self-saobifice worth while? 

1. A guestion repeatedly asked, by worldlings and by Christians themselves : by the 
former because they do not comprehend or perceive the things of God, and by the 
latter from an imperfect experience and an imperfectly matured spiritual consciousness. 

2. Seasonably enough. The privation to which Christianity exposes men is sometimes 
extreme. They are called upon virtually or actually to renounce all things. Peter 
not to be accused of sordidness — of a desire to " make the best of both worlds.'' Life 
and the things of life are precious gifts with which we should not lightly or aimlessly 
part: and the neophyte in Christian life cannot be expected to have all his aims 
perfectly spiritual. Christianity is a means of raising men from the carnal to the 
spiritual, and it does so by gradually spiritualizing the desires and interests of the soul, 
It is an instinct of our being not to part with a real, tangible good unless in exchange 
for another of equal or higher value, although not necessarily estimated from a selfish 
or self-regarding point of view. 3. It is only from the highest point of view and the 
most advanced experience that this question can be properly and adequately answered. 
There is, therefore, a Divine fitness in Jesus, our Example, being the Answerer and 
Judge. Yet out of the most imperfect experience of the Divine life, if that experience 
he properly interpreted, the answer would still be satisfying and justifying. 

II. The conbiubrations by which this question is decided. 1. The measure of 
recompense. " A hundredfold : " an estimate not to be literally construed. It is 
intended to express " overwhelmingly more." " In the preceding verse the connective 
between the items is or ; here it is €md. There is great propriety in the exchange, for 
here the Saviour is giving, as it were, an inventory of tJie Divine fulntu of blessing, so 
lar as it is available for the most ample compensation of those who have sufiered loss. 



OH. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL AGCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 79 

And there is, besides, in the spiritual sphere of things a kind of mutual inTolution oi 
blessed relationships ; the sum total of them all belongs to every true disciple " 
(Morison). 2. The manner of it. It is to be correspondent to the things renounced, 
although not necessarily similar in kind. " With persecutions:" an addition that 
seems strange, but is justified in the experience of the Christian ; as that which is lost 
is (jain (cf. Matt. v. 10 ; Phil. i. 29 ; 1 Pet. iii. 14), so that which is endrm-ed for Christ's 
sake is a new occasion and factor of blessedness. Suited to the differing conditions of 
this life and that which is to come. Here there is variety, objectiveness, material 
embodiment ; there there is one grand reward, subjective, spiritual, viz. eternal life. 
And the relative position of Christians will he very much altered from that which they 
occupy here. The honour and blessedness conferred will depend, not upon accident of 
birth or fortune, but upon intrinsic worth and direct Divine appointment. — M. 

Ver. 31.— 2%e kingdom of Ood a revolution of the world-order. L Bboadsb ebward 

WILL BE ACCORDING TO CHARACTER AND WORK. 
II. It will NOT BE OF DESERT, BUT OF GRACE. 

ni. Evert saint will eecbivb what is essential to his happiness, useful- 
ness, AND SPIRITUAL ADVANCEMENT. 

IV. But there will be degrees in the glory and blessedness of the ebdebmed. 
J. Reflecting the manifold glory of Ood. 2. Correcting and compensating the ine- 
qualities of time. 3. Stimulating to nobler attainment, — M. 

Vers. 32— 34.— (Cf. oh. ix. 30— 32.)— M. 

Yen. 36— 45.— (Cf. ch. ix. 33— 37.)— M. 

Ver. 45. — The greatness of the Son of man. I. How it displayed itsblf. In a 
quasi-concealment : reversal of order and method of worldly greatness. The great of 
this world exercise authority for the most part and generally to their own advantage, 
and the loss and degradation of others. This precedent is only mentioned that it may 
be condemned. The greatness of the Son of man showed itself in : 1. Service. Typically 
set forth in the washing of the disciples' feet (John xiii. 4). Realized : (I) In hia 
position. Incarnate : born into the pain and shame of sinful humanity. In humble 
social circumstances; accustomed to labour and obedience to authority. (2) In his 
work. His whole life, in its example, teaching, and miracles, was a ministry. What 
men needed was help, and he rendered it. And that his doing so might not be 
regarded as accidental, he declares it as the purpose of his coming into the world. And 
in°relation to God, in the demands of his Law, he was obedient, " fulfilling all righteous- 
npss." 2. Sacrifice. The culmination and seal of service. " To give his life "" indi- 
cates the climax of the service in which he was engaged (comp. Phil. ii. 6 : obedient — 
obedient unto death on the cross). The term ministering expresses the spirit of the 
life of Christ. His sufferings and death illustrated and displayed the submission of 
his whole course ; they shed the fullest light on the object of his life" (Lange). 

II. What it was to achievb. It was to be no barren spectacle, or merely personal 
o-lory, but was to exert a practical influence upon the condition of those amongst whom 
he came. The kind of work it had to do corresponded to the needs of man. It was 
for men' the Son of man lived. And as they were in a state of wretchedness and 
danger, he undertook to save them. In respect of this purpose the death of Christ 
availed for: 1. Redemption. His life was given as the mrasom. " It is the first distinct 
utterance, we may note, of the plan and method of his work. He had spoken before of 
'saving 'the lost (Matt, xviii. 11); now he declares that the work of 'salvation' 
was to be also one of ' redemption.' It could only be accomplished by the payment 
of a price, and that price was his own life" (Plumptre). The natural state of men is 
one of bondage to sin. A "ransom" is an equivalent for a man's life or service 
(cf Exod. xxi. 30 ; Lev. xxv. 50 ; Prov. xiii. 8). This price our Saviour gave " instead 
of' '"for") men as their Representative before God — in a certain sense as their 
Substitute (cf. Matt. xvii. 27 ; Heb. xii. 16 ; Rom. iii. 24 ; 1 Cor. vi. 20 ; 1 Pet. L 19). 
2 The redemption of many. " The expression ' many ' is not mtended to mdicate an 
exclusive minority, or & smaller number as compared with all, for the latter expres- 



89 THE GOSPEL AGCOBDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oh. z. 1—6X 

Aaa oeonn in Bom. ▼. 18 ; 1 Tim. U. 4. The term is intended ratlier by way of 
antithesiB to tiie one whose life was the ransom of the mani/ " (Lange). Its efficacy 
was to be felt far beyond the personality in which it first took place. We are invited 
to take wide, comprehensiTe views of the work of Christ. And there is nothing in th« 
language of Scripture to lead to the supposition that only some may be saved. That 
which avails for one will avail for all who choose to comply with the condition of salva- 
tion, viz. faith in the Lord Jesus Christ's death as an atoning sacrifice for sin. The 
sinlessness and perfect obedience of Christ are his qualification for this work. 

III. In what WAT IT SHOULD BE AOKNOWLEDQED. The verso commences with 
"for" — • word connecting it with the previous verses, to which it is appended as a 
reason ifx what la there enjoined. Our duty, therefore, with respect to the service and 
sacrifice he has rendered is: 1. To accept them for ourselves. By believing in the^ 
redemptive work of Christ we honour him, and the Father by whom he was sent. 
2. To imitate his spirit. His kingdom is based upon service, and its dignities and 
authorities are the result of the spontaneous affection thereby secured. Service and 
self-humiliation are not only means toward the attainment of future greatness ; they 
are that greatness already. Offices in the Church are not thereby abolished ; they are 
only interpreted as functions of love : all dignity and authority otherwise derived are 
discountenanced, and convicted as usurpations. 3. To declare his work amongst mtn. 
In so doing we shall truly glorify him, and extend his kingdom to the ends of the 
earth.— M. 

V«Ti. 46 — 52. — Blind BaHimoeus. L Thb behavioub of those who abb nr 
EABNEST ABOUT BEING SAVED. They wiU : 1. Seize every opportunity that presents 
itself. 2. Make the most of it, by (1) putting all their knowledge to the proof, and (2) 
exerting all their powers to attract attention and help. 3. Not he easily discourage, 
i. Easten to do what Jesus commands. 

II. The Bwkit that ought to be shown by Christ's servants towards thosb 
SEEKiNa salvation. Two standards of conduct observed by them, viz. the dignity 
and glory of their Master, and the good of men. The mistake has been in over- 
emphasizing the one or the other of these, or in divorcing them. They are really but 
the two sides of one thing. The glory of Christ is that of a Saviour, t.e. in saving from 
misery and sin, 1. Christ corrects what is faulty in their attitude. 2. Employs them to 
further his purpose of mercy. 3. Infuses his own spirit of gentleness and love. " Be of 
good cheer : rise, he calleth thee," is the expression of the spirit of the gospel at it 
ought to be proclaimed to the world. 

IIL Christ peovino hiuselv the Saviour ov men. 1. By his sympathy for 
distress. He heard the ciy of the beggar notwithstanding the tumult, and the thoughts 
which agitated his mind. It was natural for him to postpone everything to attend to 
such a cry. 2. By inspiring others with his own spirit, and employing them to further 
hispurpoM, 3. By calling forth and exercising the principle of faith in the subjects o^ 
Am ntreif. i. Bffrmiy rtyi wt^letely delivering from distress, pain, and tin. — M. 

Ver. 62.—" Saving faith." L Not one of several kinds of faith, but siuplt 

FAITH PEOPEELT DIRECTED, AND PEACTIOALLY TAKING ADVANTAGE OF ChRIBT's POWER. 

Much confusion on this subject. Theologians have spoken of difi'erent sorts of faith, as 
speculative, practical, historical, realizing, and saving. There is but one faith, a faculty 
of the soul. What is needed is not the faculty, which already exists, but the proper 
direction or destination of it. That is a true faith by which I see and appropriate the 
truth ; that a saving faith by which salvation is seen and received. 
IL Faith dobs not save through its own virtue oe power, but by beingino 

THE soul into CONTACT WITH THE VIETUE AND POWEE — THE SALVATION OF ChRIST. 

It is not the couse of salvation, but the rondition. The only Saviour is Christ, but he 
saves us through our having faith towards him. By our having faith towards Christ 
what is his becomes ours; we enter into union and fellowship with him. His life, 
righteousness, spirit, become ours ; and we are identified with him in his sacrifice for sin! 

III. So ALSO OUB FAITH IS THE MEASURE OF THE SAVING GRACE WE RECEIVB. 

St. Matthew puts it thus : " According to your faith be it unto you." Bartim»u»'i 
ffiitb WM strong and practical, and it saved him, by uniting him to the power »o4 



OH. X. 1—62.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 81 

holiness of Christ. A weak faith will ever entail spiritual weakness. To 1m " made 
whole " we must believe with our whole heart. — M. 

Vers. 17 — 21.— I%e excellences of the young ruler. Too often religious teachers have 
attempted to classify all who are mentioned in the Bible as being either definitely good 
or utterly bad. If the latter exhibit any excellency it is depreciated, or explained 
away ; and if the former have faults, they are carefully concealed. But the Bible gives 
no such definite decision respecting them. It mentions the faults of the saints, and 
exhibits the excellences of those whose character and destiny are left doubtful. Here, 
for example, one is mentioned who was not what he ought to have been, of whom it is 
boldly said, " Jesus beholding him loved him." The feeling with which our Lord 
regarded him was not the result of regard for his social position, which led to a discreet 
hiding of his faults. Amongst us too often one of dubious character, becai'se he hi,a 
wealth or brilliant prospects, is admitted to circles from which he ought to be excluded; 
and a rich man is not told of his sins as a poorer man would be, so that it is the more 
hard for him to enter into the kingdom. But with our Lord esteem was won not by 
what a man had, but by what he was. Nor was our Lord influenced by the young 
man's religious knowledge, for he made small account of theological lore, such as was 
possessed by lawyers and Pharisees. And as knowledge would not win his love, neither 
did ignorance and error prevent it. There was evidently much in this young niler 
ihat was commendable and lovable, all of which found its source in God ; for even 
those who are not decided followers of Christ have in them gleams of heavenly light, 
ftnd must beware of quenching the Spirit. 

L The toung eulbr was genuinb and bimplk. Christ rebuked nothing so severely 
as unreality. He exposed the Pharisees mercilessly, because they pretended to be what 
they were not. He declared that if a man's eye was " single " his whole body would 
bo full of light ; that he who was of the truth (who was a true man) would hear his 
voice. Such was this man. He expressed his real want. He felt that he had obeyed 
the commandments, and frankly said so ; and when told to go and sell all that he had, 
he made no fallacious promise to do so. We should cultivate the grace of truthful- 
ness in all the relations of life. If we are engaged in a common occupation, we should 
be true enough not to be ashamed of it; if in Church relationships, we should never 
ignore them ; if we have done a wrong, we should candidly confess it either to God oi 
man. In proportion as we are true we are nearer to the kingdom of truth. 

II. He was singularly couktbous. He kneeled before the peasant Teacher of 
Galilee, and addressed him reverently. Courtesy is a small thing if it be identical with 
outward mannerism, which observes a suitable deportment, and carefully discriminates 
between those in different social ranks. Bat true courtesy is consideration for others, 
thought fulness for their feelings, respect for their age and experience and character ; 
and this was exhibited by the young ruler whom Jesus loved. There was no rudeness 
like that of the Sadaucees and Herodians, nor any outburst of hot temper at the sacri- 
fice demanded of him. 

III. He was of ibkbpboachable life. So far, at least, as human judgment could 
determine. A young man whose passions had not misled him ; rich enough to indulge 
evil propensity, yet outwardly pure and without reproach. The morality of the 
noblest does not win heaven, but it is good in itself and in its source. The id.ea that a 
profligate is the happier after his conversion because of his sinful experience, is utterly 
false. His experience is more remarkable, but he is not so blessed, nor bo strong for 
Christian service ; for if evU thoughts stain the mind, and sinful habits are indulged, 
these have their effects. 

IV. He was not sblf-satisfibd. Self-satisfaction is one of the greatest preventives 
of good : e.g. the lad who can do without his father's counsel ; the girl who scorns her 
mother's advice; the children who drift away from Sunday schools, to live without God 
and without hope in the world. This is most perilous in spiritual things. No con- 
demnation is more severe than that of the Church which says, "I have need of 
nothinf;" no welcome is more loving than that given by our Lord to the children, 
who could give him nothinc; but love, or to the young ruler who wistfully asked, 
" What lack I yet ? " " He fills the hungry with good things, but the rich he sends 
tmpty away." If your heart is hungiy fat tim love of God, our heavenly Father la 

MASK — ^n. • 



M THE GOSPEL ACCOEDLWa TO ST. MARK. [oh. x. 1—54 

pleased, just as an earthly father is when he knows his child wants him. If your son 
had run away and been hidden for years, and at last was found abroad, what would 
you wish to hear ? Not that he was doing well, and had lost all care for you ; but 
that, although he had everything to make him happy, he was sad because he wished to 
nee his father, and obtain the assurance of his forgiveness, 

V. Bte OAMB TO Christ with an earnest question. What shall I do, not to gain 
wealth or fame, but eternal life ? In the New Testament life is not spoken of as 
equivalent to existence, but it means life coupled with conditions which make it 
blessed, and therefore desirable. Life and holiness are correlatives, as are death and 
sin. So a man may be dead in part, and alive in part. A person struck with paralysii 
may lie for months in a living death, unable to reason, to speak, or to move a limb. 
Sin does that to our moral being. It paralyzes sensitiveness to God's presence, the 
power of speaking to him with naturalness and the capacity for hearing his voice. It 
is an endless existence, with the full enjoyment of these attributes (the exercise ot 
which constitute the joys of heaven), which is involved in the phrase "eternal life." 

VI. He brought his earnest question to the Lord Jesus. It was a great thing 
for a man in his position to do. He faced the scorn of his friends when he ran eagerly 
to Christ and humbly knelt before him, beseeching him to teach and guide him. "And 
Jesus beholding him loved him," as he loves all who in this spirit fall at his 
feet.— A. R. 

Ver. 21. — "One thing thou lackest." This incident occurred on a journey to Jerusalem, 
which our Lord undertook between the Feast of Dedication, at which the Jews sought 
to stone him, and the Passover, during which he was crucified. Hostility, therefore, was 
both before him and behind him, but his serenity was not rufSed, nor his willingness 
to bless impaired. There was never in him a sign of tJie indiscriminate judgment 
which leads us to condemn a whole nation or sect as being outside the bounds of 
Christian charity. He was, and still is, gracious to one seeker, even though he dwells 
among the heathen ; and hears any prayer, though it rises from a godless home. We 
notice here also our Lord's freedom from the pandering to popular passion, which haa 
often been the snare of statecraft, and sometimes of the Christian Church. We naturally 
bend before an adverse current of opinion, and count it good policy to withhold the 
advocacy of our opinions for a season. But here was a crisis in Christ's ministry which 
would lead to his reception or rejection, when the decision of each one would make a 
weight in the scale of popular judgment. Judicious hedging just then might avert 
hatred or win a convert. Here was a ruler of the synagogue — a man of wealth, 
position, and good repute — who was willing to become a disciple; but he was met 
with words of discouragement, and the great Teacher put his claims before him in the 
strongest form. The fact is, that he thought more of the suppliant than of himself. 
He would rather bring him to deep repentance than have his showy following. With 
all his estimable qualities, the young ruler had spiritual deficiencies, which were seen 
by the Searcher of hearts, and revealed to himself by the test applied to him. What 
were these ? 

I. He was mistaken as to the nature of " goodness." " Good Master, what good 
thing shall I do ? " asked he. Chrbt at once put him in the way of discovering his 
mistake by answering, " Why callest thou me good ? " etc. He did not decline the 
apijellation, but repelled it when used in this superficial sense. He wanted him to 
weigh his words, to know what they implied, to say exactly what he meant ; and this 
he requires of us. He reminded him that God was the Source of all goodness, because 
he would not have him regard any good act or good person as isolated or independent, 
but in connection with the God of goodness. He was himself " good ; " but why? 
Because he was one with God. The young man might do a " good thing ; " but 
how? Not as an isolated act, but by loving God supremely, and living in him. He 
enumerated the commandments as declarations of the will and character of the good 
One, which could only be obeyed in fulness when supreme love to God was the master 
passion of the soul ; the duties to his fellows being menUoned because these constituted 
the easiest test of obedience. 

II. His great dbficienot vas an abbbikje or oohplbte selp-mtdbkhdeb. Wh«o 
told to sell all that he had, this was not the special " good thing " which would gm 



OH. X. 1—62.] THE CiOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 83 

eternal life ; but the command was given because the attempt to obey it wonld reveal 
the fact that he did not love the Lord with all his heart and soul and strength. Thii 
is the one important thing so often lacking, short of which so many halt, but which ia 
essential to the righting of life. If we set down a series of noughts we may say they 
only want one figure to make them millions ; but that one figure is all-important. So 
is it with " the one thing " lacking to many a moral life, namely, the consecration to 
God, of which prayer is the natural expression. 

III. He bboke down undbb the test applied. Thecommand, "Sell whatsoever 
thou hast," was to be obeyed literally by him, but not by all. Christ came in contact 
with other rich men, and did not call upon them to do this. But it was the best thing 
to teach this man the special lesson he needed. The test our Lord applies to those who 
come to him varies greatly, but in some form it comes to all such. It may appear to 
be so trifling a thing as the giving up of an amusement or pursuit, or so peculiar a 
thing that no one has previously been asked to do it. But it is the test of character to 
that one, and the trifle is fraught with future destiny. That which is not a source of 
peril to some may be disastrous to others. A blessing in some circumstances may 
prove a curse in others. The lighted candle, which is useful in the home, may be a 
destroyer in a mine. Anything which seems a source of danger must be abjured for 
Christ's sake. The young ruler did not make the required sacrifice when it was called 
for. He went away sad ; and if he went away for ever, it was to far deeper sadness, 
for he left the Saviour of the world — the King of heaven. Dante says that in lus 
journey through hell he saw him " who with ignoble spirit made the great refusal." 
But was the refusal final? We hesitate to believe it. We hope that this inquirer, 
who was so sincere, earnest, and humble, only went away to consider the question, not 
in the excitement of the moment, but alone, on his knees, and that then and there he 
gave himself up^ to be Christ's consecrated servant for evermore. — ^A. R. 

Vers. 35 — 45. — The request of the stmt of Zebedee. As we read the history of our 
Lord's dealings with his disciples, we are amazed at his unfaltering patience. They 
had preconceived theories about his kingdom which, in spite of his teaching, they held 
fast till after his death and resurrection. They constantly expected him to assume 
tem.poral power. Why he delayed they did not know; the reason for his present 
obscurity they could not conceive ; but to all his allusions to suffering they gave, and 
were resolved to give, a figurative interpretation. With all this persistent misconcep- 
tion our Lord was patient. In this he has left us an example of the patience we should 
cherish towards those who, as we think, misunderstand the truth. James and John, 
the sons of Zebedee, were two of the favoured triumvirate, and their mother, Salome, 
was a near relation of the Virgin Mary. It was she who expressed the request of her 
•ons, first asking for an unconditional promise — such as a Herod might give, but our 
Lord never. The Old Testament counterpart of this scene is the coming of Eebekah, 
with her son Jacob, to win the blessing of the firstborn. 

L The request of the disciples. 1. It was the offspring of ignorance. They little 
knew what it would be to stand on the right hand and on the left of their Lord in the 
day when the word would be fulfilled, "I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men imto 
me." Well might he say, " Ye know not what ye ask." We often set our desire* on 
some object which is vain or wrong. " We know not what we should pray for as we 
oucht ; '' and sometimes we learn by a bitter experience that it is best to put ourselves 
trustfully in God's hands. Lot found it so. Of the Israelites, too, it is said, " God 
gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul." 2. It was the dictate of 
ambition. Ambition is a wholesome stimulus, if only it is free from selfishness. A 
teacher can do little with a child who is always satisfied with the lowest position in the 
class. If your ambition be a lawful one it will not allow you to shirk difficulties, or to 
get over an obstacle by a doubtful expedient, but it will lead you to a patient and 
faithful doing of what your hand finds to do. You will go higher, as you faithfully 
fulfil the duties of the lower sphere. Ask yourself whether the object you are aiming 
•t is worthy of a Christian man ; whether the time spent in its pursuit couldbe better 
employed • whether God or self is supreme in the motives which are prompting effort, 
etc Ambition can be and ought to be tested. Some people are like precious stonee, 
glittering but non-productive j others are like the plainer miUstonea, which, by steadfiuit 



M THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. foH. x. 1—6^ 

work, minister food to the hungry and wealth to the nation. 3. It was th« outcome oj 
lelJUhnest, One of the best tests we have of the lawfulness of ambition is this question—' 
How does it affect my feelings towards others ? There is reason to fear that ^he idea of 
these disciples was that the chief places in the kingdom should be allotted to them, 
regardless of the claims of their brethren. No wonder, then, that they were rebuked by 
their Lord, and that when the ten heard it they had great indignation. Self-seeking 
ever tends to separate friends, and to arouse discord in the Christian Church. Selfish- 
ness is the root of the indolence that dishonours the disciples of Christ ; it is the cause 
of civil dissensions ; it is the spring of the bloody wars that desolate the world ; aud 
when it asserts itself in sectarianism it checks the advance of Christ's kingdom, and 
brings upon the Church paralysis and death. Against it Christ Jesus declared ruthless 
war. He declared that men must deny themselves if they would follow him ; he taught 
us to love our enemies, and still more our neighbours, and said that if a man would 
be really great, he must minister to others for his sake. 

IL The reply of otra Lokd. He pointed out the distinction between real greatness 
and seeming greatness, and declared that dignity in his kingdom was bestowed accord- 
ing to a certain law — the law of moral fitness. A similar law asserts itself everywhere 
ill God's economy. Each plant and animal have their own habitat, and for their well- 
being we are compelled to study those conditions which the Creator designed for them. 
The disciples supposed that honour was at the arbitrary disposal of the Lord on the 
ground of personal favour. It was so with the positions held under the Roman govern- 
ment. The favour of an emperor might appoint a Pontius Pilate Procurator of Jud^a, 
in complete disregard of character and suitability. It was not to be so in Christ's ' 
Church, whether on earth or in heaven. There would be distinctions of rank and honour, 
but they would be given by God to those worthy of dignity, and fit for it. In the 
kingdom of righteousness nothing would be arbitrary, or dependent upon caprice. To 
some extent tliis is so in the attainment of knowledge. Knowledge cannot be given by 
a teacher because a pupil is a favourite, or because a pupU wishes to be first among 
competitors ; but it is the reward of individual work and consequent fitness. And great- 
ness in heaven will not consist in so many pleasures or dignities, but in the enjoyment 
of so much life, in the developments of power and in the possibilities of service. These, 
then, are some of the principles laid down in our Lord's reply : 1. Prepared places are for 
pry^ed people. (Ver. 40.) 2. Humble ministry is the source of highest escaitation, 
(Vers. 43, 44.) 8. Chrisfs mission, is the pattern of Christian service. (Ver. 45.)— A. R 

Vers. 46 — 52. — Blind Bartimaus : the publicity of Chrisfs miracles. Our Lord 
stood face to face with men. He said with truth, " I spake openly to the world, and in 
secret have I said nothing." His life was spent in the glare of publicity. His miracles 
were not performed among chosen witnesses, who might be interested in the propagation 
of what was false ; nor in the secrecy of some convent or retreat. They were wrought on 
the mountain- side, in full view of five thousand men, besides women and children ; in a 
synagogue full of worshippers hostile to his claims ; or on a public road, crowded with 
pilgrims going to the Passover. This not only strengthened the evidence of the super- 
natural, but it was a sign that the blessings signified by such wonders were not intended 
for a class but for a race. Therefore we must beware lest we, by act or word, should be 
saying to any earnest seeker, what the crowd said to Bartimseus, " Hold thy peace 1 " 
By our coldness we may faicitly rebuke enthusiasm, and by our inconsistencies we 
may destroy the desires of the contrite. Christ can save us from this. He can by a 
word transform ns, as he transformed that crowd, so that those who had just been saying, 
" Hold thy peace," became ready to say, " Be of good comfort, rise ; he calleth thee." 
Subject— /n this miracle we have reminders of some characteristics of our Lord. 

L The powkb of Jesus. Its exemplification outside Jericho was appropriate both to 
the beauty of the city and to its memories. Jericho was an oasis in the desert. There 
palms flourished and roses grew. Whether approaching it from the robber-haunted road 
from Jerusalem, or from the Dead Sea valley, it was significant of the Paradise Christ 
came to restore, which would be beautiful with the flowers of his grace and fragrant 
with tk« sweetness o^ his love. And here JoshuA, the Jesus of the Old Testament, had 
proved the power that was his because the Lord was with him. The angel of the 
covenant wmch appeared to him was a precursor of the mighty Couq'^eror wh» cams 



•H. 1.1-52.3 Mfi (j0St»EL ACCOtlDtNG -W St. MAtlK. 8( 

now. As the giant walls of the city had fallen by the simplest means, so now the dark- 
ness was conquered by light through a single word. 1. This power i$ manifest if you 
consider the condition of the sufferer. Blindness then was common, unalleviated, hicur- 
able. No wonder that it was ,used as an en^blem of insensibility to spiritual facts and 
things. There is a sphere of thought, hope, and desire which many never know. In- 
telligent and active, they ask, " Are we blind also ? " and the Lord says, " Because being 
blind you say, We see, therefore your sin remaineth." Because there is no sense of want 
there is no cry for a blessing, and because there is no such cry the light is not givau. 
" The god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not." Tests may 
be applied to the spiritual condition as to the physical malady which represents it. An 
oculist is not satisfied with a casual question; he patiently and variously tests the 
organ, by presenting objects and asking respecting one after another, "Can you sea 
this ? " So we may test ourselves by seeing what sin is, and what God is to us. 2. 
This power appears greater as you contrast it with the weakness of men. Like those in 
the crowd, we can see the Lord and hear his voice, and as far as sympathy and prayer 
go may lead others to him. But after all the main issue rests between each man and 
Christ. If there is no spiritual contact he is left in darkness. Sometimes the most 
unlikely are chosen. A publican like Zacchseus is visited in a city of priests, and a 
blind beggar on the road is invited to join the festal prucession. 3. Thispower appea/rt 
in the exercise of its Divine freedom. Bartimseus was not dealt with as were those of 
whom he had heard. The man bom blind had been told to wash in the pool of Siloam, 
and he of Bethsaida was led out of the town uncured. Yet no one would question the 
reality of the change in the other. Each could say, " Whereas I was blind, now I see." 
Let us not expect the same experiences, but only the same effects of Divine contact with 
Christ. He is willing to lead us into light, but each one of tis in his own way. 

II. The PITT or Jesus. Describe the pitiable condition of Bartimaaus. It is sad 
enough for a rich man to be blind, but it is a terrible aggravation of the privation when 
he who endures it has to beg his daily bread. Nor did Bartimaeus know, as we do, 
Ckxl's love in Christ. He had not the assurance that " all things work together for good." 
He had not seen the cross which sanctifies sadness to each believer. In his darkness he 
cried to the Light of the world, and not in vain. The pity of the Lord always sur- 
passed infinitely that of those around him. The disciples rebuked the children, but 
Jesus said, " Suffer them to come." Simon the Pharisee condemned the sinful woman, 
but Jesus let her bathe his feet with her tears. Judas blamed the waste of the ointment, 
but the Lord said, " She hath wrought a good work on me." The crowd said, " Hold 
thy peace, " but the Lord said, " What wilt thou that I should do unto thee 1 " 

m. The peesenoe of Jesus. A crisis had come in the life of Bartimjeus, when a 
single resolve would make all the difference to his future. Jesus was "passing," and 
therefore was within reach ; but he was " passing by," and therefore would soon be 
beyond reach. Such crises appear unexpected to us ; but he who knows the heart sees 
that they are not really so. Bartimaaus had heard of the words and works of Jesus 
before this, and, shut up to his own thoughts, he had pondered them in the dark ; so he 
was ready now to salute Jesus as " the Son of David." Similar preparation has been 
going on in your heart, A trouble has solemnized your thoughts ; a tender touch at 
home has aroused new sensibility ; a word has startled you to consideration ; and now 
you are nearer Christ than before. "Jesus is passing by." Unseen, as by Bartimfflus, 
yet able to hear the believing prayer for mercy. See to it that the world's " Hold thy 
peace 1 " does not stifle the cry for help. — A. R. 

Vers. 1 12. — Divorce. Again with low motives, "tempting him,*' the Pharisees 

propound a question as to whether it was " lawful for a man to put away his wife." 
Opinions were divided, and the Teacher was in danger of offending one or other party by 
his reply. This was the trap " to involve him with the adulterous tetrarch, in whose 
territory he was." But he wisely referred them to Moses, and their thought, which wa» 
for evil, he turned to good ; for he took occasion by it to show the grounds of Moses' 
" commandment " to have been to their condemnation, their " hardness of heart ; " and 
he further took occasion to lay down for all Christian times, for the blessedness of the 
Christian home and for the preservation of Christian morals, the true, the wise, the 
beneficial law of marriage, founded upon the conditions of the original creation ; and ha 



B6 ,THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. x. 1— 5i 

defined with anthority and precision what constituted "adultery.* These wordi 
remained to condemn the disobedient, and will remain to " judge him In the last day." 
The indissoluble bond of the marriage relation Jesus here affirms, and in the old words, 
spoken at " the beginning," " the twain shall become one flesh." To the propriety, the 
goodnew, the blessedness of this law many Christian centuries bear their unequivocal 
testimony. The purest institution and the best, so hallowed, so beneficent, promoting 
in the highest degree individual happiness, the peace and sanctity of family life, the 
purity of public morals ; preserving national health, stability, and greatness ; guarding 
against wild lust, and a long train of envy, jealousy, revenge, and other passionate 
crimes ; preserving the honour and dignity of women, the love and careful training of 
children ; imposing responsibilities, but cherishing virtue and peace and joy. The 
family life is the symbol of the heavenly community; the marriage bond the type of 
the Eedeemer's relation to his people, who are " the bride, the wife of the Lamb." It is 
God's ordination, and is very sacred ; nor may it be set aside, but " for the kingdom of 
heaven's sake ; " nor may its bond be broken, but for the one cause of fornication, from 
which it is the most efficient guard. Its rites were honoured by Jesus, and its " holy 
estate adorned and beautified with his presence and first miracle." The wisest legisla- 
tion tends to the conservation of the family, whose multiplied relations, whose sweet 
fellowship, whose united interest, and whose common possessions give rise to the lofty 
idea of the home. Conjugal, parental, filial, fraternal affection are cherished. Obedience 
on the one hand, care and providence on the other; discipline and wise authority: the 
sense of dependence arising from want ; responsibility arising from the power to meet 
that want ; common interests and common aims, go to make each home a miniature 
kingdom. Teaching to those in authority the beneficence of rule, and to those under 
authority the lessons of submission, the home lays the foundation for stable national 
life ; whue mutual interests and obligations teach all to respect the rights and just claims 
of the entire community ; whilst each learns his responsibility to the whole, and his deep 
interest iii the general welfare. The nation that honours the home and the sanctities of 
family life is honoured of God. The Christian teaching, reverting to the condition of 
things as it was " from the beginning of the creation," shows how truly it is in harmony 
with natural law, which is the expression of the Divine will. — G. 

Vers. 13 — 16. — Little children. Parental anxiety led thoughtful women to bring 
" unto him little children, that he should touch them," according to a custom which 
has its approval in the hearts of all races and all times, of presenting young children to 
persons of sanctity and age that they may invoke a blessing upon their young life. 
Such are biought to Jesus, " that he should lay his hands on them and pray." Touched, 
perchance, by a remembrance of the humiliating lessons which the presence of a child 
must now have suggested, " the disciples rebuked them." Why obtrude children on 
the attention of One who is so competent to deal with adult wisdom? But he who 
came to correct error and false views, who had redeemed and established the essential 
marriage laws, now raises child-life to its rightful place. " Moved with indignation " 
at the indiscretion of the disciples, he said, " Suffer the little children to come unto 
me ; forbid them not : for of such is the kingdom of God " — words which (1) are 
inscribed as on a banner of defence, that has floated from that hour over the heads 
of "little children;" words which (2) have been an admonitory corrective of per- 
sonal vanity and assumption ; (3) have expounded the spirit of the heavenly king- 
dom ; (4) have expressed^ thn qualification needed by all who would enter within its 
gates ; (5) have been seized upon as affording a justification for the admission of 
children into the visible community of the Church by the sacrament of baptism ; and (6) 
have, especially in these later days, become the stimulus to diligent endeavour to bring 
the young under religious training and to give them the benefits of religious instruc- 
tion. By so much did the Master's words of truth rebut the disciples' error, and found 
up<m it a teaching of unlimited benefit. Thus did Christ pay his tribute to the 
precjousness of lile, even in its infancy and imperfectness, and throw the shield of hii 
protection around it. Thus did he compel the attention and effort of his Church in all 
ages to be paid to young life, knowing its susceptibility and the important bearing oi 
its right treatment on the general condition of human society. " Forbid them not " 
transfonn* itself into .a command to the heart of the Church, ever attentive tc catch th« 



CH. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACJCORDING TO ST. MABK. SI 



Lord's will, to remove every hindrance from the way of • child's participation in 
ipiritual benefits. And " auffer them to come unto me " becomes an equally authori- 
tative command to bring them unto him ; to place them in close alliance with him, 
and, if with him, then with his kingdom. For if he, the Head of the house, receive 
them, they of the household may not reject them ; and if he take them up in his arms, 
surely they may come withiu the embrace of his Church. If they lie in his bosom at 
the head of the table, they may not be denied a place in the house, or be denied a 
portion of its bread or a measure of its care ; while their purity, helplessness, trustful 
dependence, and tractableness form the typical example of that spirit which he desires 
shall characterize all the subjects of his kingdom, all the members of his household, in 
every age. — Q, 

Vers. 17 — 22. — The rich young ruler. Never did a more becoming question escape 
from human lips than when "there ran one" — ^"a certain ruler" — ^"to him," and, 
kneeling at his feet, " asked him, Good Master, what [what good thing] shall I do that 
I may inherit eternal life ? " With characteristic calmness Jesus drew him away from 
the thought of his ability to do any " good thing," and from his question concerning 
that which is good. Only the good can do good things, and " none is good save One, even 
God." Therefore thou art not good ; therefore thou canst not do any — that is, every 
— good thing. But there is • way unto life, even that of the commandments. " If," there- 
fore, " thou wouldest enter into life, keep the commandments." They lead unto eternal 
life. Along that path, he replied, I have ever walked. " All these things have I observed 
from my youth." And this was no vain boast, for " Jesus looking upon him loved him." 
But the thought of doing good things, and of establishing a claim to eternal life as to 
an inheritance, still fills the young ruler's thoughts, and the bold demand is pressed 
to the utmost — " What lack I yet 1 " Alas 1 " one thing thou "—even thou — " lackest." 
Then, hesitatingly, knowing so well " what was in man," Jesus offers to this loved one 
the highest attainment : " If thou wouldest be perfect," if thou wouldest lack nothing — 
jyi — ah, if I Jesus was neither unkind nor severe in his demand. The young man 
pressed him for a reply, and the prize was within his reach. Whether he could pay 
the price, whether he really was prepared to do any good thing, as the " what good 
thing " implied, whether he valued the eternal life so highly as his words seemed to 
indicate, must be proved. " Go, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and 
thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me." Alas! "his countenance 
fell, . . . and he went away sorrowful : for he was one that had great possessions." He 
was not the only sorrowful one. A lowering cloud must have passed over the brow of 
the Eabbi himself. It is not out of place to inquire — What did Jesus offer him for his 
riches ; and what did he lose by retaining them? The offer embraced — 

I. Pbrfeotness or charactbb — that which can be gained only by great sacrifice 
and effort, by withdrawment from the world, by such apprehension of the spiritual as 
to lead to the surrender of the material ; that faith in God which Ufts the trusting heart 
from its confidence in the " possessions " which the eye can see and the hands handle, 
and which promise " much goods" for "many years," to that " treasure in heaven " which 
fadeth not. For imperfect man there is a perfectness, to which he shall he led if he 
forsake all and follow Jesus. From that path the young ruler at this time turns 
away, perhaps to reflect, to repent, to turn again to the Master who was patient, and 
finally, after earnest struggles, to join the company of those who made the sacrifice 
of all things for the kingdom of heaven's sake. Again be it said that he who for- 
sakes all for Christ's " sake and the gospel's " sake enters upon a path that leads to 
perfection. 

II. A second part of the offer made to the young man was " trbasueb in heaven " — 
" in the world to come eternal life." It was this the young man desired ; but he knew 
not that the heart could find its "treasure in heaven" only by consenting to have it 
there alone. He who would really have " eternal life " must be content to be freed from 
anything and everything that withdraws the heart from that life. The living unto this 
present world does so withdraw the heart. Therefore the earthly possessions must he 
sacrificed. That many rich men enter, though " hardly," into the kingdom of heaven, 
and retain their place therein, is a sign of the prevalence of Christ's grace. Yet thes* 
ceasA to "trust in riches," or the "deceitfulnesa of riches" would choke In thmn th« 



M TfiE GOSPEL AOCORDmQ TO ST. MARK. tcn-»-l-S2 

•aeds of eternal life. For the present, at least, the rich, eager, honoured young rulei 
cannot say his whole treasure is in heaven, 
III. But Jesna further offered him a flags amongst the most honotjeed band o> 

MEN THK WOBLD HAS KNOWN, AND A SHARE Df THE MOST HONOURABLE WORK. " Come, 

follow me." Who can tell what might have been the effect of his sacrifice? Hia 
example might have saved Judas. He might have enriched the world with a fifth 
Gospd. He might have drawn many of the rulers to believe. But for the time he lost 
his chance, and the world is the worse for his decision, as it is the worse for every error 
of men. What did he gain ? His " great possessions." But only for a time — it ma j 
have been a very brief time. And, when enjoying the fruits of his wealth, would the 
thought ever spring unbidden to his mind, " I purchased this with the price of eternal 
life; for this I gave up the hope of being perfect; this I chose rather than follow the 
•good Master'"? He who forsakes all for Christ finds all in Christ; but he who has 
any possession which he would not forego, even for eternal life, loses both the life and 
the possession. Well may the hope be cherished that this one on whom the loving 
look, if not the loving kiss, of Christ rested, turned again, and laid all at his feet, yea, 
" and his own life also," or joined those who " were possessors of lands or houses," and 
who " sold them, and brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them at 
the apostles' feet." Gently did Jesus thus teach the rich ruler that with all his wealth 
he lacked at least " one thing." He that would have eternal life as an inheritance must 
establish his claim, and that claim must be faultless. One flaw is sufficient to invali- 
date that claim. Further, the Lord taught that eternal life is ours, not by this title of 
inheritance, but is a gift of God. — G. 

Vers. 33 — 31. — The entry of the rich into the kingdom of heaven. So impressive » 
scene as that which had just been witnessed needed some explanation, and was well 
suited to be the basis of important teaching. With much meaning, therefore, " Jesus 
looked rcund about," and, arresting the attention of his disciples, taught them further 
concerning the entry of the rich into the kingdom of God. 

I. It is difficult. It is difficult for the rich to enter the kingdom ! But that 
difficulty lies, not as the disciples thought, simply in the possession of riches, but in 
the proneness of men to love riches. And how short is the step from having riches 
to loving them I Only by exertion, only by the painfulness of self-denial, by giving up 
trust in riches and fondness for them, can the rich enter the kingdom of heaven. How 
hard is this to them who have abundance I How easy it seems to them who possess 
little 1 So difficult did this appear to him who knew all men, that the parabolic illus- 
tration has no extravagance, though to the disciples it shut out all hope, and rightly 
so from their point of view, as was confirmed by the Master's word, made the more 
impressive by his tender look — " With men it is impossible." Happily, however, there 
are springs of hope for men other than those which rise from among themselves. " The 
things which are impossible with men are possible with God." So it comes to pass that, 
concerning the entry of rich men into the kmgdom of heaven, it may be proclaimed — 

II. It is possible. Yes, it is " possible with QxA," without whom, indeed, nothing 
is possible. The human inability to effect salvation stands in direct contrast to the 
efficiency of Divine grace. Many things hinder the salvation of men ; but few have 
more power than " the deceitfulness of riches," which lure to self-security and self- 
indulgence, which lead men to think they are better than other men, and are not in 
the same danger or need. The voice of riches is a syren voice ; the hold of riches on 
the heart is firm as a death-grip. Riches prevent the lowliness, the childlike feeling 
of utter nothingness, of trustful timidity, of tractable weakness. They inspire a falsa 
sense of strength, and security, and abundance, and superiority. Often are they the 
devil's counters with which he buys men's souls. But " with God " the mighty may 
be made to feel themselves feeble, the wealthy to be truly poor. Great is the trust 
reposed; great the difficulty of fidelity. But "with God" even this may be done. 
And in our days, as has been happily in all the days of Christ's Church, men have 
learned to forsake all— even when that all was much — to follow Christ in lowly 
humility, in the poverty of self-abasement. Let the poor know that if they lack the 
hindrance which riches throw in the way, they also need the help of God ; if they will 
rise and accept it, that help shall be firmly given. And let the rich know that help awaiti 



•a. ». 1-62.3 TfiE (ioSPEL ACCO&BlNQ TO St. MAttK, »» 

them ; If they will 8toop lowly and ask, it shall not be withheld from them. Then shall 
" the brother of low degree glory in his high estate : and the rich in that he is made 
low." All of ns are poor before God ; all by him, and by him alone, may be made rich. 
In proportion as the rich become poor shall they be truly enriched ; and it shall be 
proved that they who press through difficulties hard as the passing of a camel through 
a needle's eye, are not left unrequited. Of the entry of the rich into the kingdom of 
heaven it may further be said- 
Ill. It IB BEWABDED. How gently did the Lord of all warn his disciples of days 
of poverty and loss which were coming upon them apace, when both voluntarily, in the 
fulness of their love, they would sell " their possessions and goods, and part them to all 
according as any had need," and when with ruthless hands all would be torn from 
them ; when "houses" and "lands" would be confiscated ; when from the fellowship 
of brethren and sisters, of mother and father, and even from their own children, they 
would be separated " for the gospel's sake " I But how graciously did he assure tliem 
of the " hundredfold " which should be repaid them " now in this time," though " with 
persecutions ; " and the great reward which should be theirs in the hereafter — " in the 
world to come eternal life." Who of the many disciples of those early times of 
Buffering and persecutions was not rich in " house, or brethren, or sisters, or mother, or 
father, or children, or lands " ? And who that " left " these for his " sake and for the 
gospel's sake" did not — does not and will not ever — find, in the imdying love and 
fellowship of the great spiritual community, and in the eternal riches of the heavenly 
inheritance, more than the " hundredfold " ? Yet shall there he no pre-eminence, but 
a true equality ; for the " first shaU be last, and the last first." — Ot. 

Vers. 35—45. — The post of honour. How soon are the Master's words misappre- 
hended 1 James and John, concerning whom it is recorded that on the call of Jesus 
"they straightway left the boat and their father, and followed him," come now 
apparently to secure the promised reward. With cautious words, and by the aid of 
their mother, the demand is urged upon that good Master on whose lips are ever the 
gracious words, " What would ye that I should do for you?" We would fain " sit, 
one on thy right hand, and one on thy left hand, in thy glory." Ah ! the old leaven is 
not yet wholly purged out. The self-seeking, the love of supremacy, place, and honour 
still lurk within. The chaff mingles with the pure grain. He who holds the 
winnowing fan is at hand ; and with decisive though gentle words, heavily weighted 
with their sad import, corrects their error. He had but recently " in the way ' told 
them " the things that were to happen unto him." Direful were the words, " The Son 
of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests and the scribes ; and they shall condemn 
him to death, and shall deliver him unto the Gentiles : and they shall mock him, and 
shall spit upon him, and shall scourge him, and shall kill him; and after three days 
he shaU rise again." But these words could have had little influence, for they 
understood none of these things." Perchance then they understood not " the cup that 
I drink," or " the baptism that I am baptized with," or there had not been so ready 
» response, "We are able." With prophetic eyes the Master sees the future of these 
brethren, and declares, "The cup that I drink ye shall drink ; and with the baptism 
that 1 am baptized withal shall ye be baptized. Doubtless "this saying also was 
hid from them " untU the very hour when that cup touched theu: lips, or the waters ot 
that baptism fell upon them. But even this could not entitle them to the high place 
thev desired; certainly not on the grounds they desired it— that of arbitrary selection. 
It is given to them " for whom it hath been prepared." Out of all this the lesson arises- 
I That the posts of bkal honoub abb not ATTAnraa) by mere favoub ob by 
ABBiTBABY ALLOTMENT. All such endowment, either in the kingdom of heaven or 
among men. would instantly rob the distinction of all worthmess and make it a sham 
The incident presents aa example of that kind of false estimate of honour which 
BUDDOses that it can be conferred without regard to the fitness of hun who seeks it. It is 
true medals may be placed on the breast of him who has never fought,and the ribbon 
mav^orn him who never did one deed of distinction; but such a decoration is a 
St or an empty title-a mere ribbon which a child might wear. No mere will of 
the ruler en make a life honourable and worthy. Signs of a sovereign beneficence may 
l» hrped upon favourites, but they add no lustre to the character of him who >• 



90 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. x. 1—62. 

adorned or enriched. And the posts of honour in the highest of all kingdoms are not 
assigned arbitrarily to favoured ones. As the kingdom is open to all, so are its seats 
of honour. Bach receives according to his deserts — "according as his work shall be." 

II. So is learnt a second lessun like unto the first: all true HONoas lies im 
8EBVI0B AND MERIT, NOT IN ITS RECOGNITION. How often are men attracted by the 
revrard 1 They esteem the honour which attaches to attainments, to position, to wealth, 
to learning, or brave deeds. The eye is on the medal. Such seldom do much that is 
worthy, or make themselves really great. The man who works for praise and prizes is 
■elfish and little, and the world in its deep heart hates both. He has his reward. Others 
steadily do their duty, undiverted by anxiety respecting honour ; these finally achieve 
true distinction. So is it in all kingdoms. 

III. In the SPIRITUAL KINGDOM HONOUR 00MB8 TO HIM WHO IS MEET FOB IT. 

Christ has no favourites to lift to emolument and dignity. He who would reach the 
highest place must climb up to it. But how many truly and wisely desire to stand 
well in the heavenly kingdom ? They desire a happy freedom from evil, a lot among 
the sanctified I It is well. Yet the words of the great Lord come back to such, " Ye 
know not what ye ask." Would you be spiritually great? Would you make high 
attainments in spiritual knowledge? Would you do good works in the spiritual 
kingdom ? How much of solf-denial, of patient labour, of disciplinary correction — 
" the chastening of the Lord," which we should " regard not lightly " — ^how much of 
sacrificial endurance is needed 1 How many hours of quiet communion must be passed 
with the Redeemer if we would catch his spirit 1 How much ot fasting and prayer, 
and diligent self-culture, and patient self-denial! How many strong acts of faith 1 
What baptism of fire, what bitterness of the cup, is needed to make the disciple like his 
Master 1 But after all another spirit is to prevail. Christ's disciples are e^orted not 
to aim at superiority of position, at rank and order. Let the Gentiles " lord it over " 
one another. "It is not so among you." The greatest is the least truly. The 
minister, the servant of all, is chief and first. The true lesson being, " In my kingdom 
there is neither first nor last, highest nor lowest, near and afar off. Dismiss the 
thought of primacy. Look not for high places. Such there are not in my kingdom. 
Look for posts of service. Fix your eye on your ministering, and remember that the 
Lord of all came to give all — even ' his life a ransom for many.* " — G. 

Vers. 46 — 52. — BartiTnoem. On the roadside near Jericho sat a blind beggar, 
making his appeals to the pilgrims that passed up to Jerusalem to attend the feast. 
" A great multitude " accompanied Jesus on his leaving Jericho on his way to the 
holy city. The tramp of many feet and the hum of many voices caught the quick 
ear of the sufferer, and "he inquired what this meant." Learning it was "Jesus of 
Nazareth," he, having evidently some knowledge of the great Healer, cried aloud, 
" Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me ! " Thus did the blind sufferer of that 
day formulate a cry — a prayer for all sufferers and sinners in all subsequent ages ; a 
cry which will ascend to heaven as long as suffering saddens the history of our race. 
The hindering, self-occupied crowd strove to silence the cry. But the very impediment 
to his earnestness only gave greater intensity to it, and " he cried out the more a great 
deal " the same pitiful words. As every «arnflst, fervent prayer, this entered the ears 
of the Lord of Sabaoth, without whom not one sparrow falleth, and who again and again 
had laid an emphasis of attention on individual sufferers and sinners. Standing still, 
for a cry of need arrests him, he silenced their rude, unfriendly words by, "Call ye 
him." Then the same selfish spirit veers round to the favourite, and they cheer him 
and bid him rise. Casting aside his loosely flowing garment, he sprang to his feet 
and came to Jesus." Brief and beautiful is the colloquy, in its sweet and simple 
haste. '• What wilt thou ? " " My sight." " Go . . , thy faith " hath brought it thee. 
Straightway he receives his sight, and follows in the way. Brief as this narrative ii, 
it holds much teaching. 

L On the true method op pbateb. 

II. On the SPIRIT OF HIM TO WHOM PBATEB IB ADDRESSED. 

Prayer springs from a sense of need, and it must express the sincere desire of him 
who prays. Words thrown into the form of a petition do not of themselves constitute 
prayer ; without the heart of him who utters them they are dead, being alone. H« 



CH. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 91 

who asks with his lips only cannot expect him to hear who looketh on the heart 
Prayer mnst needs be offered to One who it is believed is able to answer. Jesus laid 
down the clear an<l definite rule in his demand, " Believe ye that I am able to do this ? '• 
" The prayer of faith " is the true prayer, though the patient Lord will " forgive " even 
the "unbelief" of timidity. Nevertheless, the Lord declares the immediate cause of 
the answering cure in this case : " Thy faith hath made thee whole." Prayer must 
be prepared to push its way through surrounding discouragements and opposition ,, 
nor will it exceed propriety if it the more fervently plead by how much it is hindered 
and impeded. Prayer must, moreover, have respect to proper objects. Here one 
iniperfectness in the life called forth the one petition when the "What wilt thou that 
I should do ? " opened wide the permission to ask many things. Surely to him who 
came to redeem life, it was a perfectly right subject of petition : " That I may receive 
my sight." Thus we learn that for the freeing of the life from its incumbent evils, and 
for whatever will lead that life on to perfectness, we may ask, and ask in the full 
assurance of faith, in the readiness and ability of the Lord of life to hear and to answer. 
Happy the man who has learned thus to pray. — O. 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Tht law of marriage. 1. The dibeotions of Soriptubb follow 

THE OLDER LAW OF NATDBB. 

XL The sanctity of mabbiage is founded on nature. 

IIL In its IDEAL, MARRIAGE IS FOB LIFE, AND INDISSOLUBLE. 

IV. Yet the actual condition of human natubb compels some relaxation. 

V. But what is permitted is not, thebefoeb, to be appboved or followed 
PBAGTICALLY. Christianity is throughout ideal. It makes appeal to our higher nature. 
At the same time, it admits the difficulty of carrying our ideals unexceptionably into 
practice. — J. 

Vers. 13 — 16. — TOe llessing of the children. L The contrast : what men think 
important, and what God recognizes as op worth. Children are " only children." 
They are often " in the way." They are " out of place." They are to be " sent out 
of the way." But Divine intelligence and love shed a bright light upon the little 
ones. They are living parables of the Christian spirit. Ever are they to be associated 
with Christ. Learning, wealth, rank, — all draw away from our true attitude, nay, tend 
to falsify our spirit. 'Tis the sight of the children that must win us back. 

II. Christianitt the religion of bbveeencb fob those below us. In them 
God is found. " The religion of reverence for what is above us is ethnic religion._ This 
delivers from degrading fear. The religion of reverence for what is around us is the 
philosophical. The philosopher stations himself in the middle, and must draw up to 
him all that is lower, and down to him all that is higher. This is the religion of 
wisdom. Reverence for what is under us, — this is Christian, and is the last step man- 
kind was fitted and destined to attain " (Goethe). The lowly, the hated, the despised, 
the contradictory, are glorified by the insight and the sympathy of Christ. — J. 

Vers. 17 23. — The rich marUt temptation. I. The eich man feels the need of 

salvation. " Money answereth all things," but only in a limited sphere after all. 
Riches bind as well as set free ; close certain doors to the spirit, as well as open them 
to others. The poor man knows "straitness" of one kind, the wealthy man another. 
Could he but unite the advantages of wealth with freedom and joy of spirit I 

II. Salvation is possible to the eich man. But the practical conditions may 
be different from those in other cases. It is some idea, some phantasy, a pride, or a 
dread or a lust, that every man needs to expel from his mind in order to salvation. 
In some way the idea of his riches stood in the way of this man's bliss. But the way 
to -ialvation was pointed out to him. It would be wrong to generalize the direction of 
the Saviour. All that can be said is that there doubtless are cases where entire 
renunciation may be indispensable to salvation. The principle is : the false opinion 
of ourselves must be given up, and our being must be grounded on the truth, if w« 
would " enter into life." 

Ill It is one op the haedbst things in the woeld to eenounoe bicheb. now 
▼ery rare are the cases where this is done I For money represents our root in earth. 



92 iJfflE OOSPEL ACCOEDma fO St. MARK. tob. x. 1— S2. 

Let ufl, without affectation or hypocrisy, confess that it is so. Power, service, and 
estimation of others, a flattering self-representation, — this is what riches mean. To have 
urowu into this circle of ideas, and to be asked suddenly to break them np, 'tis a 
wrench, like parting with \ik itself. But let us not exaggerate in any particular. 
Renunciation of any object with which the imagination in its dearest play is inter- 
woven, is hard. It may be as hard for some to give up the retirement of a humble 
home for Christ's sake, as for others to renounce etation and splendour. — J. 

Vers. 24 — 27. — Moral imposiibilities. I. " Mobal impossibilities '' IB A phrase of 
HUMAN EXPBRIBNCB. Like all such phrases, saws, and proverbs, it represents the side 
of truth that is obvious and turned to general view. Men being what they are, 
certain changes in the character and conduct are not likely, are scarcely probable or 
possible. So we argue, and justly. So Jesus speaks, using a very strong figure of 



n. " Moral impossibilities " mat nevertheless be oveeoomb. As Napoleon, 
in the physical sphere, blotted the word " impossible " from his dictionary, so is the 
Christian taught to do in the moral sphere. In one light, it looks unlikely that any- 
body can be saved, considering the power of sin, the " weight," and the " besetment," 
and the apparent lack of moral energy. But nothing that is conceivable is impossible. 
Nothing that is morally desirable may not be expected to come to pass. 1. We are 
prone to a scepticism about our own nature, which we ought to overcome. It is not 
justifiable, in the light of the facts of history, of personal experience, of the might 
and love of Gk>d. 2. A deep faith in the possibilities of human nature is inspired by 
the love of God. Love is the spring of th^ human mechanism, the leaven that works 
in its lump, the struggling force contending against immense disadvantages, but 
destined to final victory. " AU things are possible with God I " — J. 

Vers. 28 — 31. — Compensation. I. To expect compensation fob worthy loss la 
natcbal and bight. The gospel encourages this. Compensation is founded on the 
law of things. God hath set the one over against the other. The conservation of 
energy is a law that applies to the life of the soul. " It will be made good to us." 
We cannot help feeling that the integrity of our being has a worth which must be 



n. Christ enooubaobb this expectation to the highest dkobek. Self-abandon- 
mMit to the good cause will bring its reward. God pays a high rate of interest. 

"Fear not, then, thou child infirm ; 
There's no God that will wrong a worm. 
Laurel crowns cleave to deserts, 
And power to him who power exerts. 
Hast not thy share? Chi wingM feet, 
Lo I it rushes thee to meet ; 
And all that Nature made thy own. 
Floating in air, or pent in stone. 
Will rive the hills and swim the sea 
And, like thy shadow, follow thee." 

" Every stroke shall be repaid. The longer the payment is withholden, the better for 
you; for compound interest on compound interest is the rate and usage of this 
exchequer." " The martyr cannot be dishonoured. Every lash inflicted is a tongue of 
fame ; every prison a more illustrious abode ; every burned book enlightens the world ; 
every suppressed or expunged word reverberates through the earth from side to side." 

IIL This pbinoiplb has unexpected applications. Success is not always what 
it seems ; nor apparent failure. There will be great " reversals of human judgment " 
(see Mozley's fine sermon on this). " Those who begin early and do much are not 
always preferred." Some show in the front eaily in life's race, but fail of the goaL 
Others lag at first, and come out first in the end. Gain in power may be loss in time ; 
or ielf-extension involve loss of intensity. The great lesson is to live for the soul, for 
the inner and spiritual world. Everything gained then is gained for ever ; and lewn- 
ing loss and failure are converted into means of progress.—^. 



«B. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 98" 

Vers. 32 — 34. — Tlie coincidence of opposites. Once more the forecast of shame »nd 
death. 

I. Men fi.t re thh face of theib rerBBBST, and treat thbib benefactors as 
ENEMIES. Christ foresaw that the ruling party would he aagry with him " hecause 
he told them the truth." And we partake of this guUt. We are blind to love ia its 
disguise. We hate that which reproaches us. It is an error of the understanding and 
of the heart. 

II. Providence bbingb good out of oub evil, and furthers oub salvation in 
SPITE of ourselves. So limited is the power of passion, it gains but a momentary 
end. The patriot or the traitor falls by the hand of the assassin or the judicial 
murderer ; and his principle takes the deeper root, watered by his blood. Christ's 
resurrection is the eternal type of all moral victories. — J. 

Yfp. 35 — 45. — Ambition. It is ambition for place and power that is here illustrated. 

I. It is natural in the sense in which all human instincts abb natural. 
1. To be without ambition of some kind is a defect of organization ; a negative, not a 
positive ; a weakness, not a virtue. Man is man because he aspires. He ceases from 
his worth when he becomes content to remain what he is. Milton speaks of the last 
" infirmity of noble minds." It is an infirmity of which a man will be ashamed to be 
ashamed, though he will try to conceal it under that name from others. Shakespeare 
makes one of his characters exclaim, " If it be a sin to covet honour, I am the most 
offending soul alive." 2. This passion reveals our social nature. We delight in the 
picture of others' respect, love, obedience, esteem. Such pictures goad us to our 
noblest actions. 8. Vice lies not in the passion itself, but in the wrong direction of 
the will, the mistake of our proper objects. We are ambitious to govern when we 
are only fit to serve ; to teach when we should still be learning ; to act when we have 
need to be acted upon ; to be artists when we are only fit for clay, to be moulded by 
the Divine Artist ; to be assessors of Christ when our initiation into the ways of the 
kingdom has only just begun. ' 

II. Christ's correction of ambition. 1. By showing its ignorance of its proper 
objects. There is a condition attached to every distinction. The price must be paid. 
Have we counted the cost? One illusion is that we separate the pleasure from the 
means to it in our thought. Another is that we represent to ourselves incompatible 
things, e.g, a high place with a satisfaction only to be obtained by working up from a 
low place. Crabb Eobinson said that having read, as a young man, Mrs. Barbauld's 
essay on the vanity of inconsistent expectations, it had cured him for life of idle 
wishes. 2. By showing its impossibility. Places are reserved in Providence for those 
fit to fill them. In the kingdom of God there is no putting of wrong men into wrong 
places. The principle of spiritual selection unerringly prevails in the kingdom, and 
" the fittest survive." The path of self-denial and suffering is open to all. It coincides 
at many points with that of duty for all; and it may be throughout coincident for 
some. It leads to blessing, but that blessing is internal If we confound the inward 
blessing with the outward place, we deceive ourselves. If God gives us the higher, 
let us not envy those to whom he is pleased to allot the lower. 

III. Christ's exposure op the unsocial character of ambition. 1. The 
other disciples were indignant when the failings of the brethren were brought to light. 
Our secret vices never look so hideous as when we see them mirrored in another. For 
then the illusion of self-love has vanisiied, and we stand before the naked and ugly 
fact. 2. To desire to be above others is not Christian. To dominate and exact is the 
reverse of the Christian temper. It makes self the centre the world revolves around. 
To serve, to be useful, is the Christian temper ; this makes human good the centre of 
every sphere of life— the family, the Church, the nation. 3. The example of Christ ia 
the eternal light for conduct. His glory arises out of service, as m an immortal 
passage St. Paul teaches (Phil. ii.). Without method there is nothmg sound. We need 
a method of thought and life— to put the first before the second. The whole is belore 
the part humanity more than the individual; there must be givmg in order to 
receiving; and for the highest possible objeoti of our aspiration nothing less than the 
wnole life must be paid. — J. 



94 THE GOSPEL AOCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. x. 1—52. 

Vera. 46 — 52. — Blind Bwrtimoeus. Viewed from the side of Christ, the incident 
may teach — 

I. The oPENiNa of the etes of the blind is the mission of Cheistianitt. 
If the physical boon be great, let it express for us the far greater spiritual boon. 
Ignorance is painfully felt by large numbers. Few who have not received a good 
education but bitterly feel the lack at some period or other of their life. In spreading 
knowledge freely we follow the example of Christ. 

II. The mission of Christianity is peculiarly to the lowly and the mean. 
It is easier to be kind to our inferiors than to avoid jealousy among our equals. The 
gifts that bless both giver and receiver the most are worth much, though they cost little. 
From the side of Bartimaeus we may reflect — 

III. LONO SITTINO m DABKNBSS MAY PREPARE FOR THE WELCOMING OF THE LIGHT. 

Yet in the darkness the lamp of hope may be kept burning, as did Bartimseus. " lu 
our griefs we find reliefs." As every night gives place to morning, so the very consti- 
tution of nature prophesies the deliverance of mankind and of the individual. The 
memories of the dark hours of life mingle with attained joys. Life would not have its 
full significance without these mingled threads in the texture. 

IV. Perseverance is ever rewarded. Faith proves itself by constancy, and is 
in fact the perseverance of the whole man towards his hope, the realization of his life 
in God. In the change of events, things will change for the Isetter to him who endures. 
" All things come round to him who waits." " Yet a little while, and he who is on the 
way shall come." The tarrying of God is in our imagination. To gain one sight, to 
see God and the world in God, — this compensates for an age of waiting and watching, 
suffering and toil of the spirit. — J. 

Veri. 2 — 12. Parallel passage : Matt. xii. 3 — 12. — Doctrine of divorce. L Events 
IN THE interval. There is a gap in the narrative of St. Mark between the events of 
the preceding and present chapter. We need not do more than intimate them, and 
that for the continuity of the history. They are the following : — 1. His journey to 
Jerusalem on the occasion of the Feast of Tabernacles. 2. Occurrences by the way : 
(1) Inhospitality of certain Samaritan villages; (2) rebuke of the "Sons of Thunder " 
by the Saviour; (3) journey continued through Samaria rather than Peraea ; (4) cleansing 
of the ten lepers as he passed through Samaria. 3. The sending out of the seventy, 
and its similarity to the previous mission of the twelve. 4. Presence and preaching at 
the Feast of Tabernacles. 5. Various discourses during that feast, as recorded iu the 
eighth chapter of St. John's Gospel, and escape from a murderous assault. 6. Ministra- 
tions in Judsea, recorded in part by St. Luke (x. — xiii.) and partly by St. John (ix. — xi.), 
including the following : — (1) Instruction of a lawyer, explanation of " neighbourhood," 
and parable of the good Samaritan ; (2) hospitality of the family of Bethany, disciples 
taught to pray, and return of the seventy ; (3) cure of a man born blind, our Lord's 
comparison of himself to the Good Shepherd, celebration of the Feast of Dedication at 
Jerusalem, retirement to Bethabara beyond Jordan, and subsequent raising of Lazarus 
at Bethany; also his retirement to Bphraim. 7. His tour through Fercea, referred 
to iu Matt. xix. 1, 2, and Mark x. 1 ; his teaching during that tour, recorded by 
St. Luke (xiii. 22 — xviii. 10), including, among other things, (1) the multitudes 
from all quarters in the kingdom of God, the great feast and generous invitation, also 
true discipleship ; (2) parables of the lost sheep, lost coin, and prodigal son; (3) 
parables of the unjust steward. Dives and Lazarus, importunate widow, the Pharisee 
and publican. 

II. A NEW departure. The Pharisees now change their tactics, and adopt a new 
mode of opposition. They, in fact, make a new departure. The old hostility remains 
bitter as ever, or perhaps is increasing in intensity, but the manner of its manifestation 
is new. Up till this period their method of attack consisted in fault-finding— objecting 
to the conduct of our Lord and his apostles, or taxing them with violations of the Law ■ 
henceforth it consists in questioning — captious questioning— for the purpose of eliciting 
his opinion on doubtful or debatable matters in order to entangle him. The subjects 
on which his views were sought were those keenly discussed by the Jews of that day, 
and an answer could scarcely fail to give offence to some party or expose him to peril 
on some aide. The present question was eminently one of this class. It was likely 



•H. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. 9fi 

to entrap him into the charge of lax morality on the one hand, or of want of respect for 
the authority of Moses on the other ; perhaps to embroil him with the tetraroh Herod 
Antipas, in whose dominions he now was. 

III. The obioinal marbiagb law. In the days of our Lord one of the burning 
questions was the law of divorce. The school of Shammai limited the law of divorce, 
and allowed it only in the case of adultery ; that of Hillel affirmed its legitimacy in 
case of dislike, or disobedience, or incompatibility in general, thus granting an arbitrary 
or discretionary power in the matter. The ground of the controversy is found in a 
difiicult or obscure expression in Deut.xxiv. 1, 2, where we read, " When a man hath taken 
a wife, and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favour in his eyes, 
because he hath found some uncleanness in her : then let him write her a bill of divorce- 
ment, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house. And when she is departed 
out of his house, she may go and be another man's wife." The difficulty or obscurity 
of this passage arises from the original words ervath davar, rendered " some uncleanness " 
in the text of our version, and in the margin, " matter of nakedness," or more exactly 
still, " nakedness of word or matter." The important point to be determined, and that 
which produced such diversity of opinion in its determination, was whether the expres- 
sion referred to meant lewdness or merely something disagreeable. 

IV. Natdbb of the bill of divorobment. The bill of divorcement was called " a 
writing of cutting off" (sepher kerithuth). This bill or writing of divorcement implied, 
not only a mere separation from bed and board, as some restrict it, but a complete 
severance of the marriage tie. It was a certificate of repudiation, and either stated or 
omitted the cause of such repudiation. If the cause was adultery or a suspicion of 
adultery, the husband might prove himself (Sf/iaioi) just (vide Matt. i. 19), that is, a 
strict observer of the Law in dismissing the guilty wife with a bill of divorcement ; and 
yet, not wishing to expose her, he might send her away privately. If, however, the 
guilty person or the suspected person were brought openly to justice, and the crime 
proved, certain death was the penalty, as is distinctly stated in Lev. xx. 10, " The 
man that coramitteth adultery with another man's wife, even he that committeth 
adultery with his neighbour's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be pmt 
to death." Most commonly, therefore, when a bill of divorcement was resorted to in 
accordance with the Mosaic permission, it was for some less cause or minor offence than 
conjugal infidelity ; and in such cases it served the wife as a certificate of character. 

V. Eeason of this wkitino. Our Lord, in his reply, proceeds to the original 
marriage law ; first, however, accounting for the Mosaic regulation referred to. That 
regulation is regarded by many as a relaxation of the Law ; but it can scarcely be 
viewed in that light, because it would thus appear to be a lowering of the standard in 
favour of wrong-doing. It was rather a remedy for harsh treatment of wives, resulting 
from violations of the Law ; it was rather a relief bill for wives who suffered from the 
unkindness of cruel husbands acting in defiance of the Law. It was a remedial measure 
to check the bad effects of their hardness of heart ; it was to (Ttpbs) this the lawgiver 
had respect. It was, in fact, to minimize the evil results that proceeded from their 
transgression of the Law rather than any relaxation of the Law itself. Of two evils it 
was the less, and even the less owed its existence to their hardness of heart. Besides, 
it was not an express command, as the Pharisees appear to make it from the word 
irerel^MTo in Matthew, but a permissory injunction QTr/rpeifif'), as subsequently acknow- 
ledged by the Pharisees themselves. 

VL Obiginal mabbiagb law. The Saviour argues the indissoluble nature of the 
marriage law from the original unity of male and female, from the extreme closeness of 
the mariiage bond taking precedence of every other union even parental and filial ; 
above all, from its Divine origin. Marriage was thus an ordinance of God ; it was 
instituted in Paradise in those bright and sunny bowers before sin had marred tho 
freshness and the loveliness of the new-created world. Even then God saw that it was 
not good for man to be alone, and accordingly he gave him a help meet for him — one 
that was bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. " Therefore shall a man leave his father 
and his mother, and shall cleave unto [literally, he glued unto] his wife : and they shall 
be one flesh." It was an ordinance of God himself, an ordinance nearly coeval with the 
creation, an ordinance made for man even in his unfallen state of innocence, an ordi- 
nance which our blessed Redeemer himself, when in sinless humanity he trod oui 



M THE GOSPEL AOOORDINQ TO ST. MAEK. £oh. x. l—6i, 

earth and tabernacled among our race, honoured with his presence, and at the celebra- 
tion of which he was graciously pleased to work his first miracle. In Cana of Oalilee, 
at the marriage at which Jesus and his disciples and his mother were present, Jesui 
made the beginning of his miracles by turniog water into wine, manifesting forth hia 
glory, " and his disciples believed on him." 

" Living, he own'd no nuptial vow, 

No bower to Fancy dear : 
Love's very self — for him no need 
To nurse, on earth, the heavenly seea 
Yet comfort in hia eye we read 

For bridal joy and fear." 

The conclusion at which he arrives is in keeping with all this — that an institution 
created by God at first, coeval with our race, and confirmed by so many sanctions, can 
neither be nullified nor modified by any human enactment, nor set aside by any 
authority other than his who created it. " What therefore Goii hath joined together, 
let not man put asunder." 

Vll. 0ms EXCEPTION TAKEN FOR OBANTBD. Conjugal infidelity, as it ii a violation 
of the marriage vow, is a virtual dissolution of the marriage relation. This is implied 
or taken for granted in the passage before us, though it is expressly stated, in the 
parallel passage of St. Matthew, where it is written, " Whosoever shaU put away his 
wife, except for fornication, and shall marry another, committeth adultery." With 
respect to marriage with the divorced wife, there is a great and important diversity of 
SI ntiment. This diversity is in a certain way and to some extent connected with the 
light rendering of the word inroXiTwixiriiv in Matt. xix. 9. 1. Some translate it as if it 
were preceded by tV, and so equivalent to " her which is put away," or " the divorced 
woman." Thus it stands in the common English Version, and reference to the woman 
lawfully divorced, that is, for fornication, is presumed. 2. Others, more accurately, 
render it " her when she is put away," as it is translated in the Revised Version, the 
reference being thus to her who is unlawfully divorced, that is, divorced not on the 
ground of adultery. This view is maintained by Stier and Meyer, the latter confirming 
it by the fact that " under the Law the punishment of death was attached to adultery, 
. . . and consequently, under the Law, the marrying of a woman divorced for adultery 
could never happen." 3. There is, however, another rendering, namely, " a divorced 
woman," that is, any divorced woman. This is the rendering advocated by Wordsworth, 
who says, " In no case does our Lord permit a person to marry a woman who has been 
divorced." This is the view of the matter taken by the Latin Church, which declares 
marriage with a divorced woman under any circumstances unlawful. The Oriental 
and most Reformed Churches, on the contrary, hold that, in the excepted case, both 
husband and wife may contract a fresh marriage. These are the two extreme views; 
but what of the case of unlawful divorce, that is to say, where the wife has been 
divorced for some other and less offence than that of adultery, or iropvci'a, which is of 
widest extent, comprehending ante-nuptial as well as post-nuptial unchastity (/uoixcfo)? 
This is the case to which the guilt of subsequent marriage attaches, for it is that in 
which the marriage bond has not been really ruptured. The delay connected with 
getting a divorce or after its being granted might give time for better counsels to 
prevail; second thoughts might be found prefeiable; angry passion might in the mean 
time cool down, and reconciliation and reunion be effected. — J. J. Qt, 

Vers. 13 — 16. Parallel passages: Matt. xix. 13 — 15; Luke xviii. 15 — 17. 

I. Children brought and blessed. 1. Our Lord's love of children. Our Lord, when 
on earth, had no greater favourites than children. He set them in the midst ; he 
laid his hands on them ; he blessed them ; he invited them to his presence ; he welcomed 
them to his person; he folded them lovingly in his arms. He calls them the lambs of his 
flock ; he provides them suitable spiritual food, and with it he bids us feed them. He 
represents by them his faithful followers ; he reproves his disciples when they would 
have prevented their access to him. He reminds us all that they are precious in our 
heavenly Father's sight, preserved by his providence and proieuted by his power. He 
assures us, as we have seen, that " their angels do always behold the face of my Father 



OH. X. 1-^2.] THE GOSPEL AC00RD1N& TO ST. MABK. 97 

which is in heaven." 2. Individual featwet of the three narratives. The request of 
those who brought the little children, as reported by St. Matthew, is not only that the 
Saviour should touch them, as in St. Mark and St. Luke ; but " put his hands on them, 
and pray." In St. Mark, we are told that Jesus not only touched the little children, as 
requested, but " took them up in his arms." They thus got more than they asked. This 
is usually the way with Christ ; he does more for us than we ask or think. An 
additional feature of the narrative, as supplied by St. Luke, is that some of these children 
were of very tender age — mere infants (fipi^ri). 

IL The change by which we become as little children. 1. A parallel passage. 
In St. Matthew's Gospel (xviii. 3) we have a statement exactly corresponding to the 
fifteenth verse of this tenth chapter of St. Mark, with this difference, however, that 
the former passage goes further back, bringing us up to the turning-point at which we 
become as little children. The verse referred to reads thus, " Verily I say unto you, 
Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the 
kingdom of God ; " the Revised Version has, " Except ye turn, and become as little 
children, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven." This rendering of oh n't) 
ej<reAe7)T6 in the last clause brings out the meaning with due emphasis, and is thus more 
accurate than that of the common version ; the substitution of turn for he converted in 
the first clause is intended to divest the term of the technical theological sense which 
some attach to it. The word arpaipnTf (second aorist passive) may be translated as 
a passive, or as a middle, since the aorists passive have often a middle meaning, 
equivalent to turn yourselves, or simply Iwrn intransitively, as we have it in the Revised 
Version. In its application, as shown by the context, it urged those addressed to turn 
away from their ambitious notions, self-seeking eagerness, and fondness for prece- 
dence. The term is general, we readily acknowledge, and denotes a change such as that 
referred to ; but before men are capable of turning from the courses indicated, and 
of exhibiting the characteristics of little children, they must have become the subjects 
of a special and greater change, of which that immediately referred to is a manifesta- 
tion. We may read the statement of St. Mark, that "Whosoever shall not receive 
the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein," or, as it is more 
accurately rendered in the Revised Version, "he shall in no wise enter therein," in the 
light which St. Matthew's statement sheds on it. 2. Divine agency. We have seen 
that the word in the closely corresponding text is limited by some, and may indeed 
be limited, to its literal sense, and understood of a turning away from such high- 
miiidedness as the disciples had displayed on that occasion — a turning away from such 
haughtiness of spirit as led to the question asked by them, " Who is the greatest in the 
kir gdom of heaven ? " Others may be disposed to take it in the sense of recovery 
from backsliding, of a return to the Lord after some wrong step, as a compound form 
of the same verb is employed (iirurrpe^as) in the words addressed to Peter, " When thou 
art converted, strengthen the brethren ; " or, as we read it in the Revised Version, " And 
do thou, when once thou hast turned again, stablish thy brethren." Others may prefer 
the wider and more technical sense of conversion. But whatever sense be attached to 
the one particular term, a change effected by Divine agency must be presupposed: 
otherwise the changes implied in the lower sense cannot be rightly accomplished, nor 
the characteristics of childhood fully attained. "Whosoever shall not receive the 
kinCTdom of God as a little child, shall in no wise enter therein," is the statement of 
St. 'Mark, and suggests the inquiry — What is it to receive the kingdom of God ? 
Now, to take the simplest and plainest view of this matter, to receive the kingdom 
of God is to receive the gospel of the kingdom ; and to receive the gospel of the 
kingdom is to receive him who is the Subject of that gospel, and the Sovereign of that 
kingdom— the Christian's King and Head ; and to receive him, again, is the turning-point 
in a man's spiritual history, the greatest and most important event of his whole life. 
This reception of the Saviour implies faith of the operation of God — faith, which is 
God's gift and the Spirit's work in the heart. Wherever faith exists, even as a grain of 
mustard seed, Christ is formed in the heart. It matters little what name is given to this 
cliange, whether we call it " the new birth," or " regeneration," or " conversion ; " to b« 
subjects of it is the great thing, for it is the principle of all right action, and the prolific 
Bouroe of ell Christian graces and of all truly virtuous conduct. 3. Statement of a 
iifference. We may notice a differewce which will help to a, clearer apprehensiim of 

BARK —II. ® 



M THB GOSPEL ACCORDUCG TO ST. MARK. [oa. x. 1—62. 

the change in question. Conversion is akin to regeneration ; it is most nearly similar, 
and cannot be separated from it, and yet it is not quite the same thing. Begeneration 
implants a new principle in the soul ; conversion is the practical putting forth of that 
principle, Begeneration imparts new life to the soul; conversion is the exercise of 
that life. Regeneration bestows new power ; conversion is the manifestation of that 
power. For sake of illustration, let us suppose a man dead and buried. Begeneration 
may he compared to life entering into the sepulchre, opening the eyes that death had 
sealed, giving back the healthy colour to the cheeks and causing the vital fluid once 
more to circulate through all the frame ; conversion may be represented by the same 
man, after being thus reanimated, exerting the power of life which he has just received,, 
rising up from among the dead, coming forth from the tomb, and entering on the 
various duties and activities of life. Conversion and regeneration are thus so closely 
linked together as cause and effect that they often stand for one another. 4. Human 
instrumentality. Here, too, the power of God and the work of man unite; Divine 
agency and human instrumentality combine. The hand of man may roll away the 
stone and remove the grave-clothes, as in the case of Lazarus ; but nothing short of the 
power of God can resuscitate the buried corpse, or speak the dead to life. So, also, it is 
when the dead in trespasses and sins are • quickened. By the instrument^ty of man, 
the stone that stops the mouth of the sepulchre may be taken away and the grave- 
clothes unbound ; but nothing less than " the working of God's mighty power which 
he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead," can make any one of us 
alive through Christ Jesus. We may preach and pray, and it is our duty to combine 
both, and our privilege to engage in either ; but the power that raises the dead to life 
is the power, and not only the power, but the mighty power of God. The prophet of 
old acknowledged this, for after he had prophesied to the dry bones in the valley of 
vision, he followed up his prophesying by prayer, saying, " Come from the four winds, 
O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live." The psalmist felt the same 
when he said, " Create in me a clean heart, God ; and renew a right spirit within me." 
The apostle was of the same mind when he wrote, " But God, being rich in mercy, for 
his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead through our trespasses, 
quickened us together with Christ (by grace have ye been saved)." 5. The meant 
employed, and the manner in which the change is effected. God treats us as reasonable 
beings ; he makes his appeal to the faculties with which he has endowed us. He 
addresses us as his intelligent creatures, and challenges lis to inquiry, saying, " Judge 
ye what I say." He speaks to us in his Word and by his ambassadors, and even 
entreats us to be reconciled to God. He bestows his Spirit, for without the agency of 
that Spirit all the rest would be but as the rolling away of the stone and the unbind- 
ing of the grave-clothes already spoken of. 6. The nature of the change. After the 
creation of the heavens and the earth, the first work of God was light. God said, " Let 
there be light." In the change in question, which, for convenience' sake, we may call 
conversion, the first work is also light; he enlightens our understanding in the 
knowledge of Christ. God's Word, indeed, is light, " a light to our feet ;" but "while we 
are unconverted there are scales on our eyes, and if we see at all, it is only " men like 
trees, walking." The Spirit takes away the scales ; and we see the suitability and 
sufficiency of the Saviour, the completeness of his work, the fulness of his offices, the 
freeness of his mercy, the riches of his grace, the length and breadth and depth'and 
height of his love ; we see also our sins in the light of his sufferings, and his sufferings 
endured for and expiating our sins. This is not all ; it is not enough to have light in the 
head. There is often natural light, intellectual light, the light of science, even" the liglit 
of theological speculation or doctrine or controversy ; but such lisht by itself never brought 
any soul to the Saviour. Of such hght we may say, it is the light of the moon shining 
on an iceberg away in a frozen sea ; it is the nocturnal light of twinkling stars, as they 
sparkle in the firmament, and shed their flickering radiance on some far-off mountain 
capped with snow. In this gracious change there is an additional element. With light 
in the head it combines love in the heart. Like light and heat from the same fire they 
go hand in hand. The heart follows the head, and they act and react upon each other. 
The will obeys the understanding, and the affections go along with both. Th« subject 
ef this blessed change can say with one of old, " Whereasi was blind, now I see • " 
but he goes fi+rther, md can pay wj»J» tb« «po«tJe, " ^'he 1ot» of Qod has been «b«d 



OH. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 99 

•bittad in our hearts through the Holy Ghost which was given onto ns." Th« 
regenerate soul can say, " I know whom I have believed ; " but it stops not there ; it 
adds, " Whom having not seen, I love." Conversion, if we may use the term in iti 
popular sense, is the love of Christ constraining us ; it is the Word of Christ instruct- 
ing us ; it is " the light of the knowledge ef the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ ; " it is the work of Christ renewing us ; it is the Spirit of Christ enlightening 
us; it is the life of Christ imparted to us — "because I live, ye shall live also;" it is 
the love of him " who first loved us, and gave himself for us." This love expels the 
enmity of the carnal mind, gives a new bent to the will and a new bias to the feelings ; 
it lays hold of the affections, and influences all the energies of our being, operating at 
once on the faculties of the mind and the members of the body. It is Gk)d making 
us willing, as well as welcome, to be his people in the day of his power. 

IIL The ohabaotbristics of childhood. 1. Infant salvation. When it Is said 
that "of such [that is, children] is the kingdom of God," it may mean children 
literally ; and so many understand it, and refer kingdom to the state of future blessed- 
ness, maintaining that, as the majority of mankind ■ die in infancy, and as they are 
redeerned, children will constitute the majority of the saved. But there is another 
interpretation, which understands children spiritually, that is, those who resemble 
children in character ; thus St. Paul says, " Brethren, be not children in understanding : 
howbeit in malice be ye children, but in understanding l)e men." While we are fully 
persuaded that all children dyiog in infancy are saved because of the superabundant 
grace of God in Christ Jesus, we are far from supposing that regeneration is not 
necessary in case of children as well as of others. Indeed, the Word of God proves it 
indispensable ; for thus says the psalmist, " I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did 
my mother conceive me ; " and again, " We go astray as soon as we be bom, speaking 
lies ; " and further, the Prophet Isaiah says, " All we like sheep have gone astray." It 
thus becomes our duty to seek, by all available means, to bring children to Christ the 
GKx>d Shepherd, who carries the lambs in his bosom, that he may bless them and make 
them members of his flock. There are, however, several characteristics of children which 
serve well to illustrate the character and conduct of God's spiritual children. 2. The first 
charactmstic is humility. When converted to God, we become like little children in 
humility. Pride is the ruin of our race ; we trace it back to Paradise. Satan introduced 
it there. It was the great inducement with our first parents that they should be " as 
gods, knowing good and evil." We mark its dark waters along the stream of time from 
then till now. It was a fruitful source of disaster to King David. In the pride of his 
heart he numbered the people, and the dreadfully calamitous choice was allowed him 
to elect between seven years' famine, three months' war, or three days' pestilence. 
Another instance occurs in the case of Naaman, commander-in-chief of the host of 
Syria. Leprous as he was, and consequently miserable as he must have been, he felt 
his pride wounded when the prophet directed him to wash seven times in Jordan ; he 
turned away in a rage, saying, " Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, 
better than all the waters of Israel?" Come we to New Testament times, we have 
another still more awful instance of pride and its punishment. Herod sat upon his 
kingly throne; he made an oration — a king's speech, and more eloquent, no doubt, than 
royal speeches generally are ; at all events, the people were in raptures with him and it, 
so that they shouted, " It is the voice of a god, and not of a man." He was arrayed in 
royal robes ; he was proud of his pomp, of his power, and of his popularity. But the 
•ngel of the Lord smote him ; " he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost." _ The 
same evil propensity of fallen humanity finds thousands and tens of thousands of living 
exemplifications in those whom the Scripture calls "proud boasters," "heady, high- 
minded," and classes with the vilest and the worst. On the contrary, the first evidence 
of conversion to God is humility. The child of a prince wUl, if permitted, amuse 
itself with the child of a peasant. As they sport together there is no distinction of 
riches or of rank ; they meet together on the same common level ; they stand on the 
same footing of equality. We are not universal levellers ; we would not do away wi Ih 
the distinctions of rank that exist, and perhaps must exist We find in the member- 
•hip of the human body some members discharging honourable functions, others 
functions less so. We find in the heavenly hierarchy variovis grades — thrones, and 
io^inioDB, and princips^lities, »nd poT^era. Put we w«uld willingly do away with, sn4 



100 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MaBK. [oh. x. 1— 5a 

Ohriatianity tends to do away with, that proud spirit that sets up castes and opposes 
class to class, preventing that cordial sympathy that should ever bind together all the 
many members in the great family of man. Why should we be proud ? What are 
we proud of? Is it of our bodies y They are " fearfully and wonderfully made," yet 
dust they are, and unto dust they must return. Is it of our souls ? God " breathed into 
man's nostrils the breath of life, and he became a living soul." Is it of what we are ? 
We are only creatures of a day, and our foundation is in the dust. Is it of what we 
have? We have nothing, be it worldly wealth, or intellectual endowment, or physical 
superiority, or spiritual grace, — nothing that we have not received. We are pensioners 
on the Divine bounty, daily recipients of the Divine favour, almoners on the liberality 
of God. Most of us have read the Rev. Legh Richmond's little book entitled ' Tha 
Dairyman's Daughter,' and the text which by the blessing of God became the means 
of converting that once poor, proud girl. That text was, " Be ye clothed with humility " 
(iyKoiifid^atrdi : literally, " wrap tight rouud you your humility," in allusion io Christ 
girding himself with a towel to wash his disciples' feet), and by its application to her 
heart she was led to feel her own emptiness and Christ's fulness. Next to the robe of 
Christ's righteousness, and inseparably connected with it, is this garment of humility 
which distinguishes every converted soul, which every child of God puts on, and which 
every Christian wears. Of all the many promises of Scripture, not one is made to the 
proud. " God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble ; " " The humble and 
the contrite heart the Lord will not despise." 3. A seco7id eharacteristic is teachahleness. 
Christ was " meek and lowly in heart." He invites us to learn of him. Most children 
are docile ; at all events, childhood and youth are the seasons for learning. Though 
there is no age however advanced at which we should not be learners, and no stage of 
progress at which we shall not have still much to learn — for here " we only see through 
a glass, darkly" — yet there is truth in the trite old proverb, " Learn young, learn welL" 
The Christian, by his very profession and by his practice, when truly converted to God, 
is a disciple; and what is that but a learner, a scholar in the school of Christ? There 
are three teachers in this school — the Word of God, the providence of God, and the 
Spirit of God. The entrance in of that Word giveth light ; it makes "wise imto salvation." 
Every time we hear it preached, or peruse it prayerfully and thoughtfully, the light is 
brightened and increased. It is our privilege, and should be our pleasure, to study that 
Word daily and diligently, dutifully and devoutly. If it were only a single text meditated 
on each day, it would result in spiritual blessing. We are to search this Word. There 
ii » treasure in it, and we are to dig for that treasure — a pearl of great price, and we are 
to seek for that pearl, and, if needs be, part with everything else rather than miss it. 
That treasure is Christ, " in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." 
That pearl is Christ — a pearl of exceeding price. There are shallows in this Word where 
a child may wade, and depths which no human line can fathom. "Search the 
Scriptures," said our Lord ; " for in them ye think ye have eternal life : and they are 
they which testify of me." The providence of God teaches us in many ways and 
furnishes many lessons. We need grace to mark those lessons and follow the leadings 
of that providence, and in this way tha most afflictive dispensations are productive of 
good, so that there is occasion to say, " It is good for me that I have been aflaicted." 
The Spirit of God is the great Teacher, he leads us into all truth, he takes of the 
things of Christ and shows them to us, he convinces us of sin, of righteousness, and of 
judgment. Let us pray for childlike docility of spirit ; let us come to the three teachers 
we have named, and hear what God the Lord will say to our souls. 4. A third 
eharacteristic it trustfulness. Children are proverbially confiding. When we pass 
from the years of childhood we become wary — too wary; cautious — often far too cautious, 
though never too circumspect. Let a parent make a promise to his child ; that child 
never questions his father's word, he never doubts his father's ability to perform his 
promise, he never suspects his father's willingness to make good what he has said. 
Would that we all acted thus towards our heavenly Father 1 Would that we all took 
him in this childlike manner and with this childlike trustfulness at his word ! Would 
that we.all sought the Spirit of adoption, by which we could look up and say, " Our 
Father in heaven," and inward and say, "Abba, Father," and outward and around saying, 
" All things work together for good to them that love God," — the beautiful things ol 
earth ^n4 ««» wd sky are mine, for my Father made them «11. la the ' Life of Sii 



m. X. 1—62.3 tflSi GOStEL ACco&Dma to ST. makk. ici 



Ilonry Hayelook,' one is amused with a remarkable example of childlike confidence on 
the part of his son which is recorded therein. Sir Henry had had occasion to Mill 
at a public office on business. He left his son at the door to wait for him outside. 
The lather, after despatching the business in hand, passed out of the office by another 
way, m total forgetfulness of his son and of the appointment made with him. The 
boy, however, had such perfect confidence in his father's promise and usual punctuality, 
that he waited, and waited, and continued waiting all the day long, till the shades of 
evening were gathering. By that time something had occurred to remind Sir Henry 
of his son, when, going immediately to the place, he found him on the spot where he 
had left him in the morning. God has given us his sure Word of prophecy and 
promise ; he bids us wait, and that prophecy will be fulfilled and that promise per- 
formed. An earthly parent may fail or forget ; God never forgets his promise, nor 
fails to perform it to his people. He is never slack concerning his promise ; at the tim« 
appointed it shall come, and not tarry. It is ours to wait and watch and work, " for 
the day of redemption draweth nigh." It is ours to exercise filial trust and childlike 
confidence in our heavenly Father, who " is not a man, that he should lie ; neither the 
son of man, that he should repent." 6. A fourth characteristic. Another characteristio 
is simplicity. We do not mean that a child of God must be a simpleton ; quite the 
opposite. We are to be " wise as serpents, and harmless as doves." Now, by Christiaii 
simplicity we understand guilelessness and harmlessness. We take it to denote single- 
ness of heart, of tongue, and of eye ; it becomes the Christian, it glorifies God and 
impresses man. "Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings God hath ordained strength." 
The children in the temple proclaimed, " Hosanna in the highest I " Once in a stage- 
coach, a« we have read, a little interesting girl five years old was sitting beside her 
mother. A gentleman was paying attention to the child. After a time, turning her 
full blue eyes upon him, with childlike lovingness and in her own simple accents, she 
said, " You love God ? " The gentleman passed the child's question off as best he could. 
Tke coach reached the place of destination, the journey ended. But still the words 
of that child haunted him. The question she asked was new to him; he had never 
thought of it before. He never rested till, by the grace of God, he was able to answer 
it by felt experience. Time rolled on. A few years after, as he passed through the 
streets of a town, he saw the mother of that little child at a vrtndow, in weeds of 
mourning. Pie called to inquire for his favourite, but she was gone ; God had taken 
her home to glory, and to be for ever with himself. 

IV. CoNSKQTJBNCES. 1. Contrast. Over the entrance to Plato's famous academy at 
Athens was written the sentence, " Let no one enter here who does not possess a 
knowledge of geometry." Over the gate of heaven is written, not the proud maxim of 
the philosopher, but this plain statement, " Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom 
of God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein." 2. What it implied in 
exclusion. Not to enter heaven, in other words, exclusion from heaven, implies the 
absence of holiness, of hope, and of happiness. It is never to see the King in his 
beauty, never to see the land that is afar off, never to enjoy peace, never to enter into 
rest, never to meet God in mercy, never to sit down with Abraham and Isaac and 
Jacob, and never to join the general assembly and Church of the Firstborn which are 
written in heaven. Still more, exclusion shuts out from wearing the crown and 
occupying the throne, from tenanting the mansion, and tuning the harp, and swelling 
the anthem of " Worthy is the Lamb that hath been slain to receive the power, and 
riches, and wisdom, and might, and honour, and glory, and blessing." Not to enter 
iuttven is to be excluded from the holy presence, from the blessed fellowship of 
patriarchs and prophets and apostles and martyrs and confessors ; to be shut out 
from the life and light and love of the upper sanctuary ; to be shut up' with the devil 
and the damned, with lost spirits, with devouring fire and everlasting burnings ; to be 
doomed to " weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth," and to dwell for ever in that 
prison-house of hell, " where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.*-^. J. O. 

Vers. 17 — 31, Parallel passages : Matt. xix. 16—30 ; Luke xriii. 18 — 30. — L The 
Hek young ruler't great refusal. I. His applioation. 1. Th« foation tf &it 
man. We have in this section a most interesting narrative. The subject of it 
^iks a young man, in the bright and beautiful prime of life, as St. Matthew t«U| 



lea Tto GOSt*EL ACCOHDING to ST. MARK. [oa. X- 1—52, 

ui ; a ruler of the synagogue, as St. Luke informs us ; an exceedingly rich man, as 
all three synoptista relate; for St. Luke tells us he was very rich, and St. Matthew 
and St. Kark that he had great possessions. Besides this, he was an exceedingly 
interesting person — frank, sincere, amiable; he thus possessed many winning and 
endearing qualities. Nor was this all ; he was outwardly moral, outwardly observant 
of God's Law, and so not far from the kingdom of heaven. 2. His mode of approach- 
ing the Saviour. His approach was all that could be desired. It was marked by 
thorough earnestness and sincerity. Our Lord was going forth into the way, or on 
his way — starting, it would seem, on his last journey from Per«ea beyond Jordan to 
Bethany, the town of Mary and her sister Martha and Lazarus. This young ruler, in 
breathless haste, lest he should miss his opportunity before the Saviour departed, came 
running up and fell on his knees before him. The manner, too, in which he put his 
question was highly respectful, and even reverential, as appears from the words with 
which he addressed him. By the title " Good Master " he acknowledged his authority 
as a teacher, and his kindness of heart, having just witnessed the graciousness and 
benevolence with which he had received the little cliildren and folded them in his arms. 
Our Lord appears to reprove him in a gentle way on the ground of this title, and 
especially to reject the term " good," thus applied to him ; he apparently refuses to 
accept it as a mere conventional expression, flippantly and thoughtlessly applied. But, on 
examining the subject more closely, it will be evident that our Lord wished to elevate 
the young ruler's notion about himself as the Messiah, and raise his thoughts to God. 
He wished to give this young man a hint that he was more than an ordinary teacher 
in Israel, that he was more than a mere teacher possessing great excellence of character 
and goodness of heart ; that he was a Teacher sent from God, and therefore invested 
with highest authority, and holding a Divine commission — ^yea, and himself Divine. 
To this end he requires the ruler to reflect on what ground he applied the term "good," 
reminding him that there was no one absolutely good save God, and implying the 
inconsistency of his position, and the unwarrantableness of his calling him " good" when 
he did not regard him as Divine. Our Lord intimates, obscurely indeed, that, while 
rejecting the term in the sense in which the ruler meant it, as a mere complimentary 
one paid to a rabbi of eminence, and regarding it as inapplicable from that standpoint, 
he can only accept it in conjunction with the One alone who is good, that is, Ciod. But, 
as the ruler did not apply it in that sense, our Lord takes occasion to lift up his 
thoughts to the only One absolutely good ; as though he said, " Why askest thou me 
concerning that which is good? One there is who is good ; " and, " Why callest thou 
me good ? " and. Why inquirest about the good from any mere human teacher whose 
goodness of head and heart, however great, is necessarily defective ? Why not go at 
once to the One who is alone truly and absolutely good, and the Fountain-head of all 
goodness, and whose will is the rule and standard of what is good ; while the revelation 
of his mind on the subject is made known in the commandments? 3. His motive in 
coming. With all this young man's advantages he felt his need of something better ; 
he had cravings for something higher. His wealth, with all the facilities it afforded, 
and all the profits it implied, and all the pleasures it procured, did not satisfy his 
desires or supply his spiritual needs. His longings for something better than earth or 
sense could furnish remained unappeased; there was still a void within which the 
world could not fill ; he felt irrepressible yearnings for immortality. He had heard the 
promise of a kingdom made to the little children who believed, or rather to all who 
possessed their childlike spirit. He had himself come recently into the inheritance ol 
much wealth and great possessions, and thus he is prompted to ask the question very 
natural under the circumstances, "What shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" 
He was alive to the worth of his soul ; he felt the paramount importance of eternal 
life. His question, therefore, was not prompted by mere curiosity, neither was it a cold 
or careless inquiry ; it was a downright earnest one ; it was a matter of life or death 
with him. 

IL His bblf-sufficient iNQiriBT. 1. Nature of the inquiry. The inquiry is that 
recorded by St. Matthew, " What lack I yet?" to which the answer of our Lord is tha» 
recorded by St. Mark in the words, " One thing thou lackest." We must first con- 
sider the question itself. This Was a second question ; the first was, " What shall I dc 
that I DUky inherit eternal life 7 " and contained the very essence of Pharisaism, whicli 



cm. X 1—82.] THE GOSPEL AOCWEDING TO ST. MARK, 101 



made religion consist in doing — scrupulously adhering to outward rnles of conduct; 
This youug man's error was that of the better part of his nation ; for " Israel, which fol- 
lowed after the Law of righteousness, did not attain to the Law of righteousness. Where- 
fore ?_ Because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the Law." 
2. His Pltarisaism. This young man's first inquiry shows that he expected to entitle 
himself to eternal life by doing many great things, or some special good thing, as the 
question in St. Matthew's Gospel is, " What g^ood thing shall 1 do, that I may inherit 
eternal life ? " To this our Lord replied, " It thou wilt enter into life, keep the com- 
mandments." By this reply he meant to convince him (1) that " by the deeds of the 
Law there shall no flesh be justified in his (God's) sight : for by the Law is the know- 
ledge of sin ; " and (2) to bring him to the conclusion that " the righteousness of God 
without the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the prophets ; even the 
righteousness of God which is by faith of Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that 
believe." 3. Eis swprisi: The young ruler was somewhat surprised at the common- 
place nature of the answer, and, lest he had misheard or misapprehended it, he proceeds 
to inquire further, " Which " or, more accurately, " What kind of commandments ? " 
He evidently expected that some new commandment would be announced by the great 
Teacher, or that some recondite rule of the oral Law would be set forth, or that certain 
minute ceremonial regulations would be made known to him. But no ; the plainest, 
simplest, broadest commandments of the Decalogue were repeated in his hearing. The 
thing appears at first sight so plain, the direction so very trite, and the answers so 
commonplace, that the ruler, half puzzled by this very plaiimess, and surprised at the 
simplicity of the instruction of One whom he regarded as a distinguished public teacher, 
if not something more, exclaims in amazement, — Of what kind? Which command- 
ments do you mean? Is it those ten uttered in an audible voice on Sinai, amid 
thuuderings and lightnings, and other circumstances of splendour and solemnity ? Is 
it those ten that were ielivered to our nation amid scenes of such unparalleled publicity 
as well as grandeur? Is it those ten words, as they are beautifully called in the 
original, which are now hoary with the antiquity of long years gone by, which claim 
the respect of the whole Hebrew commonwealth, and to which every respectable 
member of the community renders an outward obedience ? Is it those ten command- 
ments to which your direction refers— commandments with which compliance is 
enforced even by an earthly judge, and transgression of which is visited with penalties 
by the common law ? 4. Our Lord^s rtpetiUon of the commandments. In reply to 
this further inquiry of the young ruler, our Lord specifies the commandments of the 
second table in the following order, according to St. Mark : — the seventh, sixth, eighth, 
ninth, tenth, and fifth. The expression " Defraud not " is taken by some (1) as a 
repetition of the eighth ; (2) by others as a summary of the four commandments that 
preceded, or of the fifth that succeeded and that by way of anticipation ; or (3) it is a 
peculiar form of the tenth, which we regard as the most natural and correct opinion. 
These commandments he quoted from the second table as the most obvious; appending 
a general principle which embraced all these commandments, and summarily compre- 
hended the whole of the second table of the Law. That principle was love— love to 
brother man, and a love required to be equal in intensity and extent to the love of 
self, as it is added, " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." 5. Our Lord's object in 
this. He saw that this in many respects estimable young man depended on his works 
for eternal life, and he reminded him that he must in that case keep the command- 
ments, and keep them perfectly. The Saviour meant to show him that such had not 
been tiie case. He meant to show him that he was a sinner, and as such needed a 
Saviour ; he meant to show him that, as far as the Law is concerned, every mouth must 
be stopjKsd, and all the world become guilty before Grod. Even if a man firom a certain 
point — an early period in life — kept all tlie requirements of Grod's Law at all times and 
ir all ways, what would atone for previous sins or remove oiiginal guilt? 6. The Law 
a scf,K„>lmasler. He meant to show him that he had " sinned, and come short of the glory 
of God ; " that, as a matter of fact, He had been vei-y far from attainmg to universal, 
perfect, and constant obedience ; thai, in the absence of such obedience, all were c«ir 
duded under sin, and that there was no exception. In this manner usually the way ii 
prepared: the filthy raiss of self-righteousness are torn ofi"; men are led to abandon their 
own righteousness as a ground of paidoa and acceptance Before Qod, and to rest upon 



164 iM GOSttet ACCORblM TO St. MASK. tck. ± 1-65. 

a better rlgbteousness, even that " everlasting righteousness," which Daniel and others ol 
the prophets long years before had predicted as to be wrought out and brought in by 
Messiah. Such was probably the import of that instructive symbolic transaction, of 
which we read in the third chapter of Zeohariah, when the filthy garments were taken 
away from Joshua the high priest ; and when a fair mitre was set upon his head, and 
he was clothed with change of garments, as it is there written : " Behold, I have caused 
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of raiment." Such 
is the significance of the contrast between the righteousness of the Law and the righteous- 
ness of faith in the tenth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans : " For Moses describeth 
the righteousness which is of the Law, That the man which doeth those things shall live 
by them. ... If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt 
believe In thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. 
For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness ; and with the mouth confession 
is made unto salvation." 7. True obedience inward and spiritual. When the young 
man had heard our Lord's answer he looked upon the whole matter as a very simple 
thing, and possibly stood higher in his own estimation than he had done before, if that 
were possible. He seemed to say, If these be the commandments which you includ* 
in your direction, and if these be all, then have I obeyed them — every one of them— 
irom my youth up, nay, from childhood till the present hour; they have been the 
rule of my life. Is there anything still wanting ? Have you any new commandment 
to add? Is there anything needed to supplement those which I long since learnt from 
the Law, and to which I have duly conformed from the earliest dawn of reason ? And 
though you have overlooked the traditions of the elders, I have neither forgotten them 
nor neglected them, but observed them most punctiliously. What then remains? 
What lack I yet? Ah, how little this young man knew of his own heart! how 
little of the spirituality of God's Law ! how little of the exceeding broadness of the 
commandment I In the Law of God, as in the love of God, there are a length and 
breadth and depth and height to which this ruler was entirely a stranger. He had 
not, we are sure, been one of the audience when our Lord prenched his sermon on the 
mount ; or, if he had, he must have failed entirely to comprehend the explanation of 
the Law as contained in that sermon. At all events, he remained apparently ignorant 
that the Law in its requirements extends to the heart as well as to the life; to the 
principles as well as to the practice; to the feelings as well as to the facts; to the 
internal pansions as well as to the external acts ; to the inmost thoughts as well as 
the outward deeds. This young man had, we doubt not, maintained an unblemished 
character before the eyes of men ; he had been guiltless of such sins as are public and 
common in the world, and free from all notorious vices ; he had kept the Law in the 
letter and as prohibiting outward acts of sin ; for the Saviour does not call his assertion in 
question. Besides, had he not been a young man of blameless conduct as well as of 
promising talents, he could not have attained, and at an early age, his honourable posi- 
tion as one of the rulers of a local synagogue, or perhaps a member of the Sanhedrin, 
or great council of the nation. 8. 'fhe young man's deficiency/ in his own department 
of morals. " What lack I yet?" may be taken as a boast rather than a question for 
information or an inquiry about future duty. He lacked much, we are sure, even on 
th« low ground of morality ; for takinix the Law in its spiritual sense, and as Christ 
expounded it, he had no doubt offended at many times and in many ways; "for in 
many things we offend all." Instead of the self-righteous, nelf-suffioient assertion, 
" all these have I kept froii> my youth up," had he looked inward he might, nay, he 
would, have found reason to say, " All these have I broken ; " for we have it on the 
authority of God's own Word, that " every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is 
only evil continually." The first commandment which our Lord specified, according 
to the common order as given by St. Matthew, is, "Thou shalt do no murder." The 
young ruler judged himself guiltless of any breach of this commandment, because his 
hands had bien free from blood. He forgot that blood-guiltiness attaches to the heart 
as well as to the hand, to the tongue as well as to the arm that wields the deadly 
weajjon. The teeth, as we learn from the fifty-seventh psalm, may be murderous as 
"spears and arrows; " and the tongue may wound us mortally as "a sharp sword;" 
while " out of the heart," as our Lord himself has declared, " proceed murders." " AU 
these have I kept from my youth up." And hast thou never, youag m»n, been 



m. ±. i— 52.] tEk GOStllL ACCORDDTd TO ST. MAfek. 16* 

angry with thy brother without a cause — when no real offence was offered and no insult 
intended? Hast thou never indulged the angry feeling till it formed itself in the con- 
temptuous expression? Hast thou never said to thy brother, "Raca?" Hast thon never 
permitted thine anger to proceed still further, till it rented itself in terms of deepest 
guilt? Hast thou never said to thy brother, " Thou fool " ? If so — if thy heart be thus 
pure, thy tongue innocent, and thy hand without stain of thy brother's blood — then in 
regard to this commandment thou mayest say, " What lack I yet ? " But we may take 
one other example. " Thou shalt not commit adultery." This is another requirement 
of God's Law, and another branch of duty towards man. Here the young ruler again 
declares his innocence : " This also have I kept." Here again we must take him to task 
and catechize him. Is it, young man, the external act merely of which you plead 
not guilty, or do you include what God's Law includes, the impure thought and the 
wanton imagination ? Do you include the secret desire of the heart, the lascivious 
look of the eye, and the indelicate utterance of the lips ? Or have you never read of 
" eyes full of adultery," of evil concupiscence, and of filthy communication proceeding 
out of the mouth ? Have you never listened to or taken part in the lewd song, or the 
foul anecdote, or the equivocal innuendo, or the expression of double meaning? Have 
you ever regarded the vengeance of Heaven as due to every wanton affection, and every 
unchaste desire, and every roving glance, and every lustful look, and every lascivious 
gesture, and every impure word? Has your observance of this requirement always 
been thus severe, strict, and spiritual ? If so, then mayest thou say with regard to this 
commandment also, "What lack I yet?" 9. The Scripture standard of morality. 
Oh, how exceeding broad and deep, pure and spiritual, are the commandments of an 
jjifinitely pure and holy God 1 In his sight the bright and beautiful sky above us is 
not pure, and in his presence the angels themselves — those pure spirits whose nature 
is Wke fiery flame, and who minister the high behests of the Eternal — are not unim- 
peachable with folly. Morality of outward action is highly commendable, and may 
pass current in sight of men like ourselves; but who can boast of his obedience, inward 
as well as outward, to all God's commandments, in the sight of that God whom the 
prophet in vision saw sitting on a throne high and lifted up, before whom holy seraphic 
intelligences veiled their faces in deepest homage and holiest reverence, while the 
burden of those seraphim's song was a just acknowledgment of his infinite holiness, 
saying, " Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts : the whole earth is full of his glory " ? 
Who, in the sight of that God who "searcheth all hearts, and understandeth all the 
imaginations of the thoughts," can, like this young ruler, ask proudly, or even boast- 
fully, " What lack I yet ? " 

111. His imperfection peovbd. 1. The great defect. "One thing thou lackest" 
was our Lord's declaration. But that one thing was the most important, the most 
needful, and the most indispensable of all. He was outwardly moral, but a stranger to 
spiritual religion; he had a form of godliness, but wanted the power. The one thing 
he lacked was love, and love which manifests. itself in entire self-surrender to God and 
in self-denial for man. After our Lord had reminded him of the commandments and 
of the duties required by God's Law, he stated a general principle that included them 
all, saying, as St. Matthew records it, " Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself." In 
fact, the whole Law, including the commandments of both tabies, is fulfilled in that one 
word " love " — love to God and love to man ; for " love is the ful filling of the Law." And 
now he brings the principle just stated to a practical test, and puts the young ruler to 
the proof. " One thing thou lackest " — one thing, without which no obedience can be 
really beautiful before men or truly acceptable to God ; one thing, without which 
obedience is neither real nor reliable, neither permanent nor performed consistently and 
efficiently ; one thing, without which obedience is merely mechanical, and nothing 
more than a whitening of the outside of the sepulchre, while the inside is dead men's 
bones and all unoleanness. That one thing was the principle of love, which is the 
moving spring of all gospel obedience. This principle of love is the great impulse to 
all genuine morality ; it is the essential element in all holiness. By this principle our 
Lord tested the young ruler, and in this practical way, — You profess entire olaedience 
to God's Law ; now, the sum and substance of that law is love — love to GtoA. and love to 
man, and tMs love must be supreme. You must love the Lord your God with all your 
mind, and soul, and strength, and heart; and your fellow-man as yourself Qo^ 



109 TSt! GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [oa. x. 1-62. 

then, and act out that great principle by selling all that you have, and distributing it 
to relieve the necessities of your poorer brethren of mankind, and to maintain and 
promote tlie service of God. The test was found too severe for the young man's 
morality ; his love was more of outward observance than of spiritual obedience, more 
of profession than of practice, more of the lip than of the life. He was not prepared to 
subordinate all, to surrender all, to sacrifice all, and to suffer all, if necessary, in fulfilment 
of that Law, the whole of which is contained in that one word " love." This one 
thing he lacked ; weighed in the balance, he was found wanting. He needed another 
to fulfil the Law in his stead ; he required a better righteousness than his own. 

IV. Application op the subject. 1. In relation, to the irreligious. Men may 
have fame and fortune ; they may have intellectual endowments and worldly wealth ; 
they may have every earthly comfort and convenience ; they may have kind friends, 
happy homes, and pleasant family relations ; they may have all that heart can wish. 
But, if they want religion, then they lack the one thing that can make men truly pros- 
perous — blessed in time and happy through eternity. 2. With respect to iJie amiable, 
and persons possessing certain good quaiities. Persons may be amiable ; they may be 
frank and affable and obliging ; they may be generous and liberal, hospitable and kind- 
hearted ; they may be upright in their dealings, and honouiable in all the business 
of life ; they may have strong natural affection in their various relationships, as sons 
or husbands or parents ; — they may be all this, and have all these good natural quali- 
ties, without either possessing or professing religion. We may admire and even love 
them for their amiability and other natural excellences, for men differ widely by 
nature as well as by grace ; but, wanting religion, one thing they lack, and that one 
thing is the one thing needful. 3. In regard to professors of religion. Men may pro- 
fess themselves to be on the Lord's side; they may be hearers and readers and 
students of God's Word ; they may by study make themselves acquainted with its 
precious truths — its doctrines and duties, its precepts and promises, its entreaties and 
exhortations, its warnings and reproofs ; they may have respect for the Scriptures, for 
the sabbath, for the sanctuary, and its services; they may unite with God's people 
in prayer, in praise, in the sacraments, and in other exercises of religion ; — and after all 
this, and notwithstanding all this, their heart may not be right toward God ; one thing 
they lack, and, continuing to lack it, they must perish in the end. Oh, how dreadful 
to think of such having their lot at last with the openly irreligious, the profligate, and 
the profane I And how such will gloat over those professors of religion when they 
descend to the abode of the lost, and extiltingly say, " Are you also become as we ? Are 
you become like unto us?" You, who professed religion, who offered prayers, and sang 
praises, and piqued yourselves on your superiority to profligates like us ; you, who did 
so much and went so far, — are you become our comrades in misery, our companions in 
distress? Oh, we may imagine the fiendish glee with which false or fallen professork 
shall be jeered, when they sink down into partnership with the utterly abandoned in 
the place of destruction and the region of despair 1 4. With reference to ourselves, and 
to avoid self-deception. The young ruler was practising self-deception, without know- 
ing it. He did not know his deficiency till the Saviour brought him to the severe 
practical proof before us. Here is a salutary lesson and a solemn warning to beware of 
deception in our estimate of ourselves. We too, even we, may be resting on a morality 
that is hollow and defective; we may fancy ourselves religious, while our heart is not right 
toward God, and has no real love to man. We may mistake enthusiasm, or the excite- 
ment of the occasion, or the power of sympathy, especially in times of revival, for love 
to Christ and his cause. We may enrol our names among the followers of the Lamb, 
and profess our readiness to follow him whithersoever he leadeth, through evil report and 
good repoit ; we may woiship with a degree of devoutness in the sanctuary, partake of 
the sacraments, wear the so-called " livery of religion," and practise strict outward 
morality. All this is right and proper, all this we should do ; and yet, notwithstand- 
ing all this, we may not possess supreme love of the Saviour; and so this one thing we 
lack, and thus are destitute of the chief thing, the main thing, the one thing most 
essentially needful, and absolutely indispensable to our present and everlasting well- 
being. 6. How we are undeceived, Wemaybeignorantof our deficiency till the !Sa\iour 
calls us to self-renunciation in some form or other; till he summons us to surrender 
aome besetting sin or mortify some beloved lust — to cut off a right hand cr « right foot 



m. 1. 1-62.3 TAB GOSPEL ACOORMNa TO ST. MAEK. 101 

or pluck out a right eye ; to tate up our cross in some way and follow him. He may 
require us to contribute more liberally to the claims of his religion, to give more largely 
to his cause, to work more vigorously as well as pray more earnestly for the extension 
of his kingdom ; or, it may be, he demands a more unreserved consecration of our time, 
or talents, or influence, or example, or eloquence, or wealth, or whatever else we have 
to give and can give. Our refusal or reluctance to comply in any of the cases supposed, 
proves that one thing we lack, and the lack of it proves the entire absence or imperfec- 
tion of that love which is the basis of duty and the principle of religion. 6. Endence 
^ our possessing that love which works by faith. If we have true love to the Lord 
Jesus, our surrender to his service will be complete ; we shall give on all proper occa- 
sions and in due proportion to his cause ; we shall, in a word, do and dare, and even die, 
if needs be, for his sake. We shall put in practice that principle of self-sacriflcing love 
which our Lord requires, and which is ready to give all and do all and suffer all for 
him who loved us and gave himself for us. Wherever there is real affection, whether 
it be to friend or fellow-man or fatherland, that affection may be modified by national 
character or natural temperament, but it will be sure to manifest itself in some shape and 
develop itself in some way ; it will unfetter the feet, it will untie the hands and set them 
to work, it will give utterance to the tongue, and impart activity to the life. We find an 
illustration of this in that remarkable military enterprise, " The Retreat of the Ten 
Thousand Greeks" out of the heart of the Persian empire. They had crossed deep 
rivers and climbed high mountains ; they had overcome difficulties almost incredible, 
and encountered dangers of every kind ; they made good their retreat in the face and 
in spite of all the artifice and arms of Persia. At length they reached the summit of 
a hill called ThgchSs (now Tekeh), between Erzeroum and Trebisond ; and when, from 
the top of that high hill, those gallant Greeks, many of whom were islanders and all 
of them accustomed to the sea, descried in the distance the dark waters of the Euxine, 
tiey raised a loud and long-continued cheer. " The sea ! the sea ! " was the shout of 
every tongue. The sea reminded them of their native waters, and of their island 
homes ; and the tide of affection rose in their bosoms, high as the laughing tides that 
" lave those Edens of the Eastern wave." So, wherever true affection exists, it needs 
but the occasion to call it forth — ^something to move the memory, and it vents itself 
Bpontaneously with overflowing fulness. — J.J. G. 

Vers. 22— 31, Parallel passages : Matt. xix. 22— 30 ; Luke xviii. 23— 30.— 2. Sichei 
and their relation to the kingdom. Ebfleutions to which the incident gave eisb. 

1. Effect on the young ruler. He went away grieved. He is now brought to see that 
he cannot obey two masters ; he cannot serve God and mammon. " He was sad at that 
•aying." The word (TTuyydffas here used is peculiar. In one other place it is applied 
to the appearance of the sky, and translated lowering ; and so a cloud came over the 
young man's brow. Our Lord esteemed him (Irydinitey), for he undoubtedly mani- 
fested several endearing traits of character — he was sincere, ardent, and evidently 
aspiring to something heroical in religion. For the present, however, he went away. 

2. Question about his return. Whether this young man was Lazarus, as some have 
conjectured from a certain similarity of incidents, such as " One thing is needful," 
compared with " One thing thou lackest," is of course uncertain, as is also the pro- 
bability of his afterwards returning to the Saviour, "He was having (^v ^X"") great 
possessions," is a somewhat striking phrase, and denotes habitual as well as actual 
possession. His preference was given to worldly things for the present, and was called 
by Dante "the great refusal." One thing is certain, that those possessions soon 
reverted to others ; and whether it was force, or fraud, or casuality, or death that at last 
deprived him of them, they were taken away ; and if he continued to cling to them, 
and to prefer them to the heavenly inheritance, then he could reckon on no reversion 
in the skies — no portion of which it could be said, " it shall not be taken away from " 
him, 3. The rich man's difficidty. " It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of 
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God." The difficulty of his 
entrance into the kingdom of heaven is stated (X) proverbially. This proverb is quite in 
keeping with the Oriental style of exaggeration, or hyperbolical expression. Some hsva 
read (2) Kd/uXoy, a rope, instead of itdiiiiXov, a camel, but without adequate authority, 
Some, again, understand it to mean (3) the narrow aide-gate for foot-passengers beside tha 



m taa (K)St«EL AddOUDtM to S*. mark. [on. X. 1—64, 

large gates of Eastern cities. This, however, Is rather a modem conception to explain 
an ancient idea. The difficulty is connected with trusting in riches, and arises from the 
temptations to which riches expose their possessors. The love of riches is the root of 
the evil. A rich man may sit loose to the riches he possesses, while a poor man may 
set his heart upon the wealth to which he aspires. The astonishment of the apostles 
was occasioned partly by the extreme difficulties placed in the way of the rich by the 
temptations inseparably connected with riches; and partly by temptations of other 
kinds which they felt as placing difficulties in the way of salvation, specially, perhaps, 
among these the need of that inward subjective righteousness which is to be wrought out, 
and which, though it is not the title to, is the meetness for, the heavenly inheritance. 
The universal desire for wealth, and their own secret expectations of the rich rewards of 
an earthly kingdom, all of which were reprobated by the words of our Lord, increased the 
anticipated difficulty and intensified their amazement. 4. The claim pre/erred hy Peter 
on hehalf of himself and fellow-disciples. The refusal of the ruler to take up his cross 
and follow Christ suggests a comparison. Peter is the mouthpiece, as usual, and gives 
utterance to his own and the unspoken thoughts of his fellow-apostles. " Lo," he says, 
" we have left all, and have followed thee ; " he draws special attention to the fact by a 
" Lo," or " Behold." Others soon after did the same, and literally acted out the require- 
ment which our Lord proposed to the ruler as the practical test of that principle of 
self-denying, self-sacrificing love which is the spring of true obedience ; for in Acts iv. 
34, 35, we read, " As many as were possessed of lands or houses sold them, and brought 
the prices of the things that were sold, and laid thein down at the apostles' feet: and 
distribution was made unto every man according as he had need." Peter, however, 
supplements his statement of fact by the inquiry, " What shall we have therefore ? " 
as St. Matthew informs us. Peter reckons on a reward — he calculates on a quid pro 
quo ; and so far forth he shows that he has failed in the spirit of the requirement, 
though he kas fullilled it in the letter. An earthly kingdom with its attractive 
rewards was still looming before the eyes of these partially enlightened men. 5. The 
promised compensation. In the compensatory reward the equivalents for " father " and 
" wife " are omitted. The reason is not far to seek ; we have not many fathers in 
Christ. As the apostle writes to the Corinthians, " Though ye have ten thousand 
instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers;" but contrariwise we may have 
many spiritual mothers, as well as brothers and sisters. Thus Paul reckons among his 
spiritual mothers the mother of Eufus, when he says (Rom. xvi. 13), " his mother 
and mine." 1'he jeer of Julian, with respect to a multiplicity of wives, is referred to 
by Theophylact in the following terms : — " Shall he then also have a hundred wives? 
Yes. Though the cursed Julian mocked this." Theophylact then proceeds to explain 
it of the ministry of holy women supplying food and raiment, and relieving the dis- 
ciples of care about all such things. The compensation of a hundredfold for all 
we abandon or lose for Christ's sake must be understood figuratively and spiritually— 
figuratively as to the quantitative proportion, spiritually with regard to quality or 
kind. The apostles enjoyed the fulfilment of this promise to the utmost in the 
presence and companionship of their Lord and Master, his instructions, his guidance, 
and his grace. There is no one who will make a similar sacrifice for his namA!a sake, 
according to St. Matthew — that is, as read in the light of the other evangelists, for 
sake of Christ and his cause, or Christ and his kingdom, not by reason of a calculation 
of reward — that will not gain what is a hundred times more valuable than al' they 
sacrifice : Divine favour, pardon of sin, purity of heart, peace of conscience, spiritual 
consolations, friends in Jesus ; and all these not only in the present dispensation, but at 
the present season (xaip^) ; while in the coming dispensation we shall have eternal life ; 
that is to say, every Ijlessing we need in this world, and eternal blessedness in the 
world to come. One of the items here enumerated is generally understood as a limi- 
tation ; but utrh iiayn&v does not denote (1) after persecutions, which would require 
the accusative, nor (2) amidst persecutions, but (3) vnth persecutions, implying that 
persecutions have a place among the enumerated blessings, just as in the sermon ob the 
mount we read, " Blessed are they that have been persecuted for righteousneig' sake : 
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven." We should also compare with ihis promise of 
the Saviour the inventory of the Christian's possessions, as reckoned up by the apostl* 
ia 1 Oor, iii. 22, 23. Further, strictly temporal blessings ue not excluded, but Mther 



OH. X. 1-^2J THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIN» TO ST. MABK. 10£ 

directly or indirectly included. Godliness enables us in a certain sense to make th« 
best of both worlds, being profitable for all things, and "having the promise of the lil* 
that now is, as well as of that which is to come." The blessing of the Lord maketh 
rich ; for with his blessing and the enjoyment of his favour men cultivate those virtues 
and habitg ftiat tend to temporal as well as spiritual well-being, such as industry, thrift, 
temperance, health, purity, jirudent management, proper economy, and consequent 
credit, all of which bear directly on worldly wealth and present happiness. — J. J, G. 

Vers. 32—34. Parallel passages : Matt. xx. 17—19 ; Luke xviii. 31-34.-4 third 
prediction hy our Lord of his passion and resurrection. 1. Eepbatbd predictions ok 
THESE SUBJECTS. The disciplcs required line upon line on this subject ; they were so 
slow to grasp it and so loth to entertain it. It appeared to them inconceivable and 
incredible. When it was first directly aud definitely announced, Peter deprecated it in 
the strongest terms, and so far forgot himself that he presumed to rebuke his Master, 
which drew down on him in turn that severe and sharp reproof, " Get thee behind me, 
Satan," as though Satan had employed Peter as his emissary, and to do his work on that 
occasion by tempting our Lord to shrink from the sufferings he foretold. Instead of 
affording our Lord that support and sympathy, that strength ai;id encouragement which, 
in view of the approaching ordeal, his human nature craved, his servants whom he 
loved and who loved him so well, though not always wisely, fell in with Satan's own 
suggestion at the temptation to the Saviour, to seek the crown without the cross. 
Why not prove his Messiahship and assume his Kingship over the nations with 
out such suffering and sorrow, without the sharpness of death and shade of the 
sepulchre ? 

II. Prbvioub PKEPABATioiir. The previous training which the disciples had received 
from the Lord would, one might think, be sufficient to have disabused their minds of 
the prejudices of their race and nation to which they were so prone. Even after they 
had been convinced of his Messiahship, and after Peter's notable and noble confession of 
it, they needed to be repeatedly reminded of the necessity of his suffering and death to 
the completion of his work, and to be instructed once and again about the needfulness 
of his resurrection to demonstrate the divinity of his mission, and that he had power 
to lay down his life and power to take it again, as also that, delivered for our 
offences, he was to be raised for our justification. The notion of a temporal kingdom 
was so firmly fixed in their minds, and intertwined with all their Messianic hopes and 
expectations, that it was next to impossible to eradicate it. And yet, at an early 
period of his ministry, and almost immediately after his proclaiming the near approach 
of the kingdom of heaven, he expounded the principles, laws, and spiritual nature of 
that kingdom. Thus, in the sermon on the mount, he explained the object and eluci- 
dated the rules of that kingdom in the fifth chapter of St. Matthew ; he then inter- ' 
preted, according to the rules of the kingdom, those religious exercises in which the 
subjects of the kingdom engage, in the sixth chapter of the same Gospel ; while in the 
seventh he lays down the mutual duties of the members, with other duties of a more 
general but practical kind. In his seaside parables, again, as recorded in the thirteenth 
chapter of the same Gospel, he traces the gradual progress, steady development in spite 
of all obstacles, and ultimate success of that kingdom. When thus prepared for it, ha 
proclaimed to them once and again, and now the third time, in distinct, definite, and 
decided terms, his passion, death, and resurrection. 

III. An additional featueb in this prediction. In this third direct prediction 
a new element is introduced, the Gentiles are mentioned for the first time in connec- 
tion with our Lord's death. " The Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, 
and unto the scribes ; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver him to 
the Qentiles." And yet, strange, yea, passing strange, "they understood," as St. Luke 
tells us, " none of these things." It is probable that they understood his language as 
figurative, and expressive of the great difBculties to be overcome, and the formidable 
obstacles he would have to encounter in making his way to his Messianic throne. 
Hence it was that they were amazed at his alacrity, as he went before them and led 
the way as they were going up to the capital. This much, at the least, they must have 
known that he was soon to face his bitterest foes ; they must have had some gloomy 
foreboding of the risk he was *bout to run, and the perils to which be wi\s gomg w 



110 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. x. 1—54 

expose himself. Consequently they were amazed at the more than wonted energy with 
which he pressed forward to the place of danger and the scene of suffering ; and though, 
like a dauntless leader, and fearless but faithful general, he marched at their head, 
preceding them and leading them forward, they fell timorously behind, afraid to follow 
him in the perilous path he was pursuing. We may here recall to mind that the first 
direct prediction of his death was in the neighbourhood of Csesarea Philippi, soon after 
Peter's confession ; the second shortly after, as they were returning to Capernaum ; and 
now, on their way up to Jerusalem, he states the jiarticulars more fully and clearly than 
ever before. The " spitting " is here mentioned by both St. Mark and St. Luke, the 
condemnation of the Jewish Sanhedrim is referred to by St. Matthew and St. Mark ; 
the execution by the Gentiles is recorded by all three synoptists ; while the mode of 
death by crucifixion is mentioned by St. Matthew alone.— -J. J. G. 

Vers. 35 — 45. Parallel passage : Matt. ix. 20 — 28. — The ambition of the apostle$ : 
the ions of Zebedee. I. Pbobablb origin. Peter and James and John certainly 
enjoyed a sort of precedence over the other apostles ; they were primi inter pares at 
l^ast, and constituted an inner circle among the members of the apostolic ofBce. They 
^-^ere not only the fiist called to follow Christ, and to undertake special service in his 
cause; they had been privileged with his closest confidence; and they were admitted ai 
his sole attendants, as we have already seen, on three most remarkable occasions. It was 
soon after one of these occasions, that of the Transfiguration, that the dispute about pre- 
cedence occurred, on their journey to Capernaum. The natural inference seems to be that 
the prominence assigned to these three favourite apostles excited the jealousy of the rest, 
and occasioned the dispute referred to. And now again two of these aspiring men, 
having their heart still fixed on an earthly and secular kingdom, had their ambition 
fired by our Lord's mention of twelve thrones, as recorded by St. Matthew, and the 
apostles seated on them, in the regeneration, that second birthday of our world, in 
which the present sufferings and sorrows of earth's travail-throes shall at length issue. 
Accordingly, ashamed perhaps to present the petition themselves, they induce their 
mother Salome, according to St. Matthew's record, to present it for them, " desiring a 
certain thing of him ; " and according to the principle. Quod facit per alterumfacit per 
se. They thus try by a sort of trick, if we may so say, to make sure of our Lord's 
consent before specifying the nature of this unreasonable petition. 

II. The cup and the baptism. By " cup " is meant one's lot or destiny, be it 
good or bad, especially the latter. Thus, "Thou makest my cup run over," where 
the lot is plenty ; and the words, divested of the figure, are nearly equivalent to, Thou 
givest me a plentiful supply as ray lot. Again, it stands for vengeance allotted to the 
wicked, as is said of Jerusalem, " Thou hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of 
his fury ; thou hast drunken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out ; " 
and in Ps. Ixxv. 8, it is the cup of wrath, or the portion of Divine and deserved 
indignation apportioned to the wicked, for it is there written, " In the hand of the 
Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red ; it is full of mixture ; and he poureth out of 
the same : but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and 
drink them." Baptism, again, has three different meanings, or rather applications, in 
Scripture. There is baptism with water, a Christian sacrament ; there is baptism by 
the Holy Spirit, or regeneration, which is that change by which we become truly 
Christians ; and there is baptism in the sense of sufiering, which is its meaning here. 

III. A MISBENDEKXKG. " But to Sit OH my right hand, and on my left, is not mine 
to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared of my Father." Thii 
verse, as it stands in our version, seems to limit the power of the Saviour, and to be at 
variance with his own statement in Luke xxii. 29, where he says, " I appoint unto 
you a kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me ; that ye may eat and drink 
at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel." 
It also appears flatly to contradict that promise of our Lord recorded in Rev. 
iii. 21 , " To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with me in my throne." Various 
methods of rectification have been resorted to. The Latin Vulgate cuts the knot 
by inserting vobis, to you, and so rendering the clause in question, " It is not mine 
to give to you, but to them for whom it is prepared of my Father." But aa thii 
addition U not supported by ^ny m^nuBcript authority, it must be reject«d aa ^bitrar;f. 



OH. X. 1—52,"; THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Ill 

Still more unwarrantable is the explanation of some, wlio understand the answer of out 
Lord as having reference only to the time previous to his sufferings, as though it meant, 
" It is not mine to give till after I shall have suffered ; then all power will he vested 
in my hands." Now, the difficulty is in a great measure created by the words supplied 
in our version, and therefore marked in italics as above. The ellipsis thus indicated 
is either too little or too large. It must either be extended or eliminated altogether. 
We might enlarge the ellipsis, and take the clause to signil'y, " It is not mine to give 
(as a matter of favouritism), but it is mine to give (on tlie ground of fitness) to them 
for whom it is prepared of my Father." It is much better, however, to omit entirely 
the words supplied. This at once docs away with the difficulty, and removes the 
seeming contradiction, while the sense of the original thus becomes plain and clear. 
Accordingly, we would read the last part of the verse thus, " Is not mine to give, but 
[save] to them for whom it is prepared." The preparedness of the recipients, not the 
power of the Saviour, is the only limitation of the bestowment in question. This 
power, again, is exercised in accordance with the Divine purpose, while in Rom. Tiii. 
29, 30 we have a full declaration of such purpose : " Whom he did foreknow, he also 
did predestinate to be conformed to the ima«e of his Son. . . . Moreover whom he did 
predestinate, them he also called : and whom he called, them he also justified ; and 
whom he justified, them he also glorified." The view which we thus adopt corresponds 
with the rendi ring of the old Syriac, which translates the portion of the verse before 
us without supplying any words. It is confirmed by Luther's German translation. It 
has the sanction of several other important versions, both ancient and modern. The 
only objection to this, namely, that oAAck has thereby the sense of « /u^, is set aside by 
comparing Matt. xvii. 8 with Mark ix. 8, where, in recording the same fact, in nearly 
the same words, St. Matthew uses « M, while St. Mark expresses the same sense by 
&AA<E. Even in the chapter immediately foregoing (Matt, xix.), 4AA«k is employed in 
nearly the same signification at the eleventh verse : " All men cannot receive this 
saying, save (4\ao) they to whom it is given." Though not identical, they closely 
approximate, for " res eodem recidit sive oppositione sive exceptione." If an ellipsis he 
at all admissible in the verse we are considering, then the words suggested by Alford, 
" [a not mine to give, but it shall be given hy me," or those supplied by De Wette, 
" Sondern denen wird es verliehen," or even those supplied in the Revised Version," Is 
not mine to give: but it is for them for whom it hath been prepared," are undoubtedly 
preferable to those supplied in our common version, and express the sense much better. 
Still, even the words thus introduced to eke out the meaning of the original seem 
awkward and unnecessary. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 46 — 52. Parallel passages: Matt. xx. 29—34; Luke xviii. 35 — 43. — The 
cure of two blind men at Jericho. I. Blind BAETiMiEus. 1. Eis condition. He 
was blind; he was deprived of that most valuable sense of sight. He was a stranger 
to the beauties of nature. " The light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the 
eyes to see the sun;" but that sun, that light, those beauties, those bright colours 
of sky or earth or sea; those lovely forms that appear in the heaven above, the 
earth beneath, and the waters round the earth — all, all were to him a blank. We 
know nothing of this blind man's family or friends, but from the patronymic, "Son 
of TimJBUS," we may infer that his father or family had been of some note; but 
the former had gone the way of all the earth and the latter had fallen into aecay. 
That morning, however, whether by relative or friend or neighbourly hand, he was 
led forth to his accustomed seat by the wayside. He could hear the sound of the 
voices round him, but he could not see the persons who spoke ; he could feel them if 
they came in contact with him, but could not behold them. Of all that passed by that 
way he could only judge by the voice or sound. The expression of their countenance, 
their form or figure, their smiles or tears, their bright eyes or sad looks, their faces 
tweet or sullen, were to him unknown and by him unseen. Our Lord, having con- 
tinued his journey through Per»a, crossed the Jordan opposite Jericho, and arrived at 
that once famous city, upwards of five or six miles to the west of the river, and fifteen 
miles in a direct line eastward of Jerusalem. This ancient place, round which so many 
associations gather — such as its conquest by Joshua, its rebuilding by Hiel the Bethelita 
in the reiga^of Aiiftb, n9tvvit^tait4ing tiie curse; its mention 19 the h^stor/ of the 



Xia THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. MARK. [oh. x. 1—62 

prophets Blijab and Elisha, its close connection at an early period with our Lord's own 
anceBtry — was celebrated for its palms and balsams. Its fertilizing spring contributed 
to its wealth and importance. It was beautified by Herod the Great; subsequently 
daetrcyed, but rebuilt by Archelaus ; celebrated by the historian Josephus as a populous 
and prosperous place in his day. But its glory long ago passed away. It is now a 
miserable hamlet called Biha. At the time of our Lord's visit, however, it was 
a flourishina; town, and entitled to its ancient designation of the "city of palm trees," or 
" city of fragiance," as the name derived from the verb ruotch imports. Fragrant 
flowers and aromatic shrubs perfumed the air; the scenery around was fresh and lovely ; 
while every prospect was pleasing, and " man alone was vile." On the morning of the 
day that our Lord arrived at Jericho the gardens round the town bloomed in beauty, as 
usual, and charmed the eye of the beholder ; the fcatliery palm lifted high its head in 
air or waved in the morning breeze ; the Jordan valley stretched away into the distanca 
It was springtime, moreover, for multitudes were on their way to the great spring 
festival of the Passover at Jerusalem, and spring had clothed the landscape with 
vernal beauties. Over all the loveliness of earth was spread the clear blue of a 
Judiean sky, while down on all the glorious sun was shedding his bright beams, 
lighting up the whole with brilliancy and beauty. But what were all these beautiful 
sights and bright scenes to the blind Bartimseus? As far as he was concerned, they 
might as well have been dark and dismal, blank and black, like a moonless, starless 
night, with its darkness thick as in the land of Egypt, even " darkness that might be 
felt." 2. His circumstances. He was poor. Incapable of any worldly calling, he 
was a dependant on the charity of others; he was reduced to solicit alms of the 
passing traveller. Thus he was not only blind, but a beggar. Troubles love a 
train : one trouble seldom comes alone. The blindness of Bartimasus was aggravated 
by his poverty, and his poverty had no relief nor remedy but begging. His blind- 
ness had been the visitation of God ; his poverty and beggary were misfortunes 
consequent thereon. For both he was to be pitied, for neither to be blamed. There 
was no special sin in his blindness, and therefore none in his begging. What a 
complication of misery had fallen to this poor man's lot in life 1 One almost fancies 
he sees Bartimasus as he sat that day by the wayside, with face pale, his head bare, 
perhaps bald from age; while those placid features — as the features of the blind 
always are — and those sightless eyes might well move the hardest heart to pity. The 
blind man hears the footsteps of travellers going on their way ; he hears the earnest 
conTersation of passers-by, eagerly bent on business or pleasure. Many a time the 
proud priest has gone that way, but ever passed by on the other side ; or the haughty 
Levite has only cast a glance of curiosity at the Wind man ; sanctimonious Pharisees, 
with broad phylacteries, have looked with scorn on the poor mendicant. Many a time 
the cheerful voices of men and women have sounded in his ears, and many a time he 
has listened to the sound of childhood's fun and frolic. Day by day, as such sounds 
were repeated in his hearing and close at hand, all must have seemed to him lively, all 
cheerfnl, and all happy save himself, the poor blind beggar, doomed to melancholy 
darkness. This day, however, he hears the rush of many feet, the tread as of a 
numerous crowd, the shouts as of a mighty multitude. He wonders what the sound of 
those many footsteps means, what the swell of those voices can be. He listens till the 
crowd comes nearer, and he hears them speak in praise, a few, perhaps, in blame, of 
the Prophet of Nazareth. 3. The corresponding state of the unconverted. Many in 
the state of their soul resemble that poor blind beggar. The Scriptures speak of blind 
people that have eyes — " they have eyes, but see not ; " their understanding is dark- 
ened, being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them because 
of the blindness of their heart. Satan, the prince of darkness, blinds the minds of 
them that believe not. His followers are of the night and of darkness, and at last, if 
they follow him to the end, they shall be oast into outer darkness. By nature men 
are spiritually blind. They are face to face with great realities — God and heaven and 
eternity — but they do not see them. They are on the brink of a great precipice, they 
are close to great peril, but they do not see it. Like a blind man on the edge of a 
frightful abyss, and yet seemingly secure just because he is blind to the danger. They 
ar« sid« by side with great truths, but, not seeing them, they deny their existence, as if 
9, bli^d nxtn 46nie4 th« e;(i8ten99 of uiountains i^id rivers, the great sea ai)4 the bright 



OH. X, 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MABK. 113 

Bun, because he does not see them. There are great beauties just beside them — ^beauties 
of holiness, of grace, of glory, of Christ, and Grod ; but they are as blind to spiritual 
beauties as a blind man to all the multiform beauties of this lovely world — ^a world eo 
lovely notwithstanding the blight of sin. The spiritually blind see no comeliness in 
Christ that they should desire him, no glory in the gospel that they should embraca 
it, no preciousness in salvation that they should seek it, no beauty in holiness that they 
should practise it. Neither do they see any terror in the threatenings of God, nor 
much, if any, sinfulness in sin ; nothing to attract in the promises of the gospel, and 
nothing to terrify in the curses of a broken Law. Sinner, you are blind, though you 
know it not ! The sinner is poor as well as blind. He has no peace in this world, no 
prospect for the next ; he has no real satisfaction on earth, and no sure hope of heaven. 
He has no shelter from the storm of Divine wrath, and no refuge in the day of danger. 
He has neither part nor lot with the people of God, no interest in the covenant of 
promise, no title to the heavenly inheritance, and no meetness for it. He is without 
the only blood that can cleanse from sin, the only righteousness that can justify a 
sinner, the only Spirit that can sanctify the soul. In a word, he is without Christ, and 
without God, and without hope. This surely is poverty — spiritual poverty, the deepest 
and the worst. This is the sad state of all unregenerate persons. They are, in tha 
words of Scripture, " wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked." They 
are blind in soul as Bartimaeus in body, poor in spiritual things as he was in temporal. 
And yet to such the advice is addressed, "I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in 
the fire, that thou mayest be rich ; and white raiment, that thou mayest be clothed, and 
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear ; and anoint thine eyes with eyeaalve, 
that thou mayest see." 

IL The application of Babtim.«ij8 to Jesus. 1. Eta inquiry. The first step here 
was inquiry. Hearing the noise of the on-coming crowd and the voices of the multi- 
tude passing by, he asked what it meant, and the answer returned to his inquiry was 
" that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by." This was good news for the poor blind beggar. 
Bartimseus had no doubt heard of Jesus, of his works of wonder and miracles of mercy. 
Some report may, nay, must, have reached him about the lepers cleansed, the demoniacs 
cured, the sick restored to health, the deaf whose ears were opened, the dumb whose 
tongues were loosed, even the dead raised to life, and, what came more closely home to 
himself, the blind whose eyes were opened. Bartiniseus might, most probably did, hear 
all this; but how was he to reach the Prophet? Where could he find him? How 
could he, a poor, blind beggar, make such a long and weary way ? Unless Jesus came 
into the neighbourhood of Jericho, he could not expect to be blessed and benefited. 
Now, however, what he never expected has come to pass. Jesus is at his side — he is 
passing by ; and now Bartimasus feels that it is his opportunity, a most precious oppor- 
tunity, far too precious to be lost. When his condition had rendered it impossible f(w 
him to go to the Saviour, the Saviour has come to him. Instantly and energetically 
he avails himself of this blessed opportunity. Now or never, he thinks with himself. 
He does not lose a moment : he cannot alTord it, for he knows not but that the chance 
may be lost for ever. Bartinifeus bethinks himself of all this, reasoning thus : — He is 
come to me; I could not go to him ; aud it is do or die now. If I lose this opportunity 
I ma}' never have another. The tide will soon ebb; I must take it at the now. The 
steamer will soon start ; I must enter it or it will go without me. The bell is ringing 
and the train will soon be off; if I do not take my place at once I am left behind, 
and perhaps for ever. Somehow thus reasoned the poor, blind beggar — if we may 
be permitted to translate his words, or rather express his thoughts, in modem parlance. 
2. His earnest appeal. And so "he began to cry out, and say, Jesus, thou Son of 
David have mercy on me." l^revious occurrences had prepared for this : Christ was 
passing by that way ; Bartimseus was informed of his approach ; he felt his need, and 
the Friend of sinners was near. Thus the various stages were inquiry, information, 
felt necessity, and the Saviour's presence. His appeal was earnest as well as instant. 
He cried out, and it was a strong and loud cry. Many things might have prevented 
his appeal but they did not; many impediments lay in the way, but he did not allow 
them to keep him back. The crowd did not deter him, for he was in earnest, and cared 
not what the crowd either said or thought. The fact of so many strangers being round 
him did not stop him, for their presence was nothing to him, and he was too anxious 
habk — ^n. * 



lU THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. z. 1—54 

for relief to feel false shame. The circumstance of his poverty did not prevent him ; on 
the contrary, it prompted him all the more. True, he had no introduction to the 
Prophet from Galilee — no one to make known hia situation or explain his unhappy 
circumstances, and bespeak the Saviour's favour on his behalf. Still he hoped hiii 
earnest appeal would find an echo in the bosom of the illustrious Stranger. He b&A no 
merit, he knew, to recommend him, and no particular claim on that Stranger's clemency ; 
yet he was resolved to try whether his misfortune might not awaken his sympathy. 
3. A lesson for ourselves. Jesus passeth by ; he is near to us, and his presence is close 
at hand. In this sense he passeth by every time a sabbath dawns upon us, and every 
time we see the light of the sabbath sun. He passeth by, that is, is present, every 
time we enter the sanctuary and assemble ourselves with the people of God. Ho 
passeth by, and we are apprised of his presence, every time we are privileged to listen 
to a gospel sermon. He passeth by us every time we read his Word, or sing his praise, 
or call on God's name in prayer. He passeth by us every time we partake of the 
sacrament of the Supper, and he maketh himself known to us in the breaking of bread. 
Oh, how often on such occasions has " our heart burned within us as he talked to us by 
the way, and opened to us the Scriptures " 1 He passeth by us every time his Holy 
Spirit strives with us or exercises his gracious influences upon us. He passeth by and 
makes us feel his presence times and ways past specifying or reckoning. He assures us 
of this ; for has he not said, " Behold, I stand at the door, and knock : if any man hear my 
Toice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me"? 
Jesus has come near and close to each of us. He assumed our nature and became our 
Einsman. He saw us in our blood, cast out into the open field on the day in which 
we were born ; he pitied us and passed us by, and his time was a time of love. He has 
eome to us, or we should never have gone to him ; he has sought us, or we should never 
have sought him. He has passed us by and made his mercy known to us. He has 
made good his word, "I bring near my righteousness ; it shall not be far off, and my 
salvation shall not tarry." Nor is it a mere hasty and passing visit he pays us. He 
has stood at the door of our heart until his head has become wet with dew and his locks 
with the drops of the night. But he will not stand always. He passeth by ; and while 
we undei'stand this statement of his presence, and of that presence manifested to our 
souls, of his gracious presence in his ordinances, and of his Holy Spirit stirring in our 
hearts, yet we must not make the fatal mistake of supposing that this will last always. 
In the very nature of things it cannot continue. Life itself is uncertain, and time is 
short. Besides, the day of grace will not always tarry ; like the Saviour himself, it 
passeth by. Jesus never visited Jericho again, nor did he ever pass by that way again. 
So with ourselves. He has visited us often ; who can say when or which shall be his 
last visit ? Oh, then, for such earnestness and eagerness as Bartimseus showed, on the 
part of all that hear the gospel 1 Jesus has passed near us many a time, and yet some 
of us, up to the present moment, care for none of these things. We have never cried for 
help as we ought, or sued for mercy as we should ; we have never eagerly sought his 
grace, or earnestly supplicated forgiveness. We have been lukewarm, and neither cold 
nor hot. If so, let us beware lest, like the Laodiceans, we are spued out of his mouth. 
We may have been at ease in Zion, and like wine settled on the lees, forgetful of the 
woes pronounced on such. How little of the earnestness of this blind beggar do we 
show in the things of God I And yet, if like him we felt our need, we could not but 
be earnest and energetic. The hungry man will beg for bread ; the thirsty man will 
repair to the clear cool spring ; the starving babe, by the very instinct of its nature, will 
cry for nurture ; even the dumb animals have ways of making known their wants and 
of seeking a supply : and shall we be so indifferent to spiritual necessities and eternal 
interests ? 4. Characteristics of disdpleship. Bartimseus exhibited several character- 
istics of true discipleship^characteristics which all should seek to possess. He wa« 
prompt. There is need for promptness, for God's long-suffering has its limits. He may 
wait long, but will not wait always. He passeth by, vouchsafing his presence for a 
time, but withdrawing it when he sees fit so to do. He was humUe, for his plea was 
for mercy : " Have mercy on me." He was conscious of the entire absence of all merit. 
He came at once, and came as he was — in his blindness, in his poverty, and in his 
beggary. So should it be with ourselves. We must come according to the spirit of 
the simple lines'— 



tH. X. 1—52.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 115 

" Just a» I am — without one plea 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidd'st me come to theiat 
O Lamb of God, I come I 

" Just as I am — poor, wretched, blind 
Sight, riches, healing of the mind. 
Tea, all I need, in thee to find, 
O Lamb of Ood, I come I " 

Eia/aith was remarkable ; he was fully abreast of his times in theological knowledge ; 
he was fairly ahead of the crowd in his knowledge of the Saviour. They informed him 
that it was Jesus of Nazareth that was passing Jby. They represented him correctly, ai 
far as they went ; but their representation was sadly imperfect and shamefully incom- 
plete. They regarded him as a prophet, but a prophet of a despised place and of a 
de»pised province. His native town and native province were both of little, or rather of 
ill, repute. " Can any good thing," asked Nathanael, " come out of Nazareth ? " The 
Pharisees said scornfully to Nicodemus, " Search and look : for out of Galilee ariseth no 
prophet." Bartimteus knew better. Blind as he was, and so shut out from books 
as the source of knowledge ; poor as he was, and so deprived of the means of acquiring 
information, he had made himself in some way or by some means acquainted with 
the descent and dignity of Messiah. Hence he accosted him, not as Jesus of Nazareth, 
but addressed him, " Jesus, thou Son of David." In any case the Spirit of God had 
been his instructor. Thus, too, we must come to Jesus with a proper apprehension of 
his character and claims, of his mercy and his might, as well as of our own worthlesf- 
ness and helplessness. Feeling ourselves sinners, our individual inquiry must be, " What 
must I do to be saved ? " Accepting the answer furnished by God's Word, we mugt 
" believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and we shall be saved." Feeling ourselves lost, we are 
encouraged by the Saviour's own gracious assurance, that He " came to seek and save 
that which was lost." Feeling ourselves deep down in the pit of sin, in this low and 
lost condition, we are cheered by the declaration that his errand into our world was to 
save sinners, even the chief. However blind the eyes, Christ can open them ; however 
hard the heart, he can soften it ; however dark the stain of our sin, his blood can wash 
it out ; however desperate our case, his grace can meet it ; however sorrowful and for- 
lorn our spirits, he can soothe and comfort them. His perseverance was also remarkable. 
His ardour was not to be repressed, his earnestness was not to be checked. Having found 
the long-expected Deliverer, he was determined not to be parted from him ; having 
attained a conviction — a rapidly growing and speedily maturing conviction — that he 
was now within reach of One who could convert the soul as well as cure the body, he 
continued to cry to him, and ceased not till his cry was heard and answered. The 
crowd wished to impose silence on him, yet he persevered ; the multitude rebuked him, 
that he should hold his peace, yet he " cried the more," says St. Matthew ; " the more 
a great deal," says St. Mark ; " bo much the more," says St. Luke. They protested 
against his appeal, and many — not one, or two, or three, but many of them — charged 
him to hold his peace. His outcry appeared to them, no doubt, so loud, so boisterous, 
so rude, that they did their best to suppress it ; but he refused to desist. Some thought 
him too contemptible to deserve notice, or to delay the procession ; others, perhaps, 
felt or feigned concern for the Master, as having too many objects of solicitude on his 
spirit, and too many and too heavy burdens on his shoulders already ; but in spite of 
all these obstacles, and in face of all this opposition, Bartimaeus persisted, and in the 
end succeeded. Such was this poor beggar — this brave, blind man ! When sinners set 
about seeking God, they may expect similar obstruction, and rebukes equally heartless 
and cruel. Satan will be sure to rouse opposition from some quarter. The world will 
flatter them or force them to desist ; friends will speak words of pity or persuade them to 
abandon their self-imposed task ; formalists may shake the head and speak of fanaticism, 
enthusiasm, or unwisdom. But earnest souls, like Bartimasus, will not, must not, give 
up or give over. Once they have put their hand to the plough, they may not turn 
back ; onoe they have set their face Zionward, they must not turn away or turn aside. 
The language of the twenty-seventh Psalm will be on their lips, and acted out in their life, 
M the psalmist sayi, "Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall 



11« THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. x. 1— 6a 

not fear : though war should rise against me, in this will I be confident. One thing 
have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after. . . . Hear, Lord, when I cry with 
my voice : have mercy also upon me, and answer me." Thus waiting on the Lord, they 
shall be enabled to hold on their way ; waiting on the Lord, they shall be strengthened j 
waiting on the Lord, they shall experience that merciful support, of which mention is 
interjected six and twenty times in the psalm which records Israel's trials and triumphs 
— " for his mercy endureth for ever." 

III. The suocesb which ckownbd the application. 1. " Jesus stood stills So says 
St. Matthew, so says St. Mark, so says St. Luke ; all three evangelists agree in record- 
ing this fact. He was on his last journey to Jerusalem ; he was hurrying on to drink 
and drain the cup of bitterness, and be baptized with the baptism of blood ; he was 
hastening forward with eager steps to bear his people's sins in his own body on the tree, 
to satisfy Divine justice by the sacrifice of himself, to vindicate God's truth, express Goil'a 
love, and magnify God's Law, to maintain the glory of the Divine attributes, and secure 
the salvation of countless human souls. Never was there a journey so important, never 
was errand so deeply interesting, and never was there another embassy involving such 
weighty consequences and vast concernments. Heaven and earth and hell were all affected 
by that journey ; the glory of God was connected with it; and the redemption of man 
depended on it. And yet, notwithstanding all the urgencies of that journey, and all the 
ardour, even bordering on impatience, with which our Lord was speeding forward on that 
journey, the cry of distress arrested him ; the prayer of a blind beggar stopped him ! And 
so it is still, for the prayer of the penitent has a potency that Div me mercy never.resists, 
and will not repel. The waves of the sea stood still, and the waters of the river stood still, 
in the interests of God's people, and in order that they might pass over ; the sun and 
moon stood still at the cry of Joshua, and that the hosts of Israel might prolong their 
victory ; the shadow stood still, or rather went back, on the dial-plate of time at the 
prayers of good King Hezekiah, and to assure him of an addition of fifteen years to his 
limit of lile. But what are the waters of the sea, or the luminaries of the sky, or the 
element of time to him who furrowed the channel for the one and fixed the place of the 
other, and who himself tills all space with his presence and all time with his fulness ? 
And yet he stood still when that crisis, the greatest in all this world's history, was fast 
approaching — for Messiah to be cut off, sin to be made an end of, and everlasting righteous- 
ness brought in ; and all this in answer to Bartimaeus's earnest entreaties, and to restore 
sight to his blind eyes and impart life to his dead soul. 2. What he did cm standing still. 
We have three accounts of this also, but, while identical in the main, they exhibit the 
same thing under different aspects. " He called " is the statement of St. Matthew ; " he 
commanded him to be called " is the version of St. Mark ; " he commanded him to be 
brought " is the addition of St. Luke. In the first we have the sovereignty of God, who 
calls us by his grace — calls us out of darkness into marvellous light. In the second we 
have the ministry of man. " The Lord gave the Word," we read : " great was the oom- 
jiany of those that published it." In the third we have the agency of the Holy Spirit. 
God, of his sovereii;n grace and mere good pleasure, calls us — calls us, as St. Peter assures 
us, " unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesua ; " and so, as stated in other Scriptures, it is a 
"high calling," a " holy calling," anda"heavenly calling." To men, as his ambassadors, 
is committed the ministry of reconciliation ; they are employed to explain the Divine 
call, to enforce it and repeat it. The Holy Spirit's agency must accompany the minister's 
message, to bring it home in power and demonstration and assurance, convincing of sin, 
of righteousness, and of judgment. Thus we are made willing in the day of his power ; 
and thus at his own command we are brought unto him. The lessons of his Word, the 
dispensations of his providence, the ordinances of religion, the movements of his Holy 
Spirit on our hearts, are all employed in drawing us to Christ for the salvation of our 
souls. 3. A strange question. We almost see the blind man rise in haste at the word 
of command, which is now rejwated to him by the crowd, with the encouraging " Be of 
good comfort," and, in obediei.ce to the Saviour's call, rush forward, " casting aside his 
garment," in his eager, earnest haste. We almost hear the Saviour answer the unspoken 
thought of the blind man's heart, as he said unto him, " What wilt thou that I should 
do unto thee ? " There was little need for such an inquiry, ouo would think, on the 
part of our Lord. '1 here was not one in all that crowd that could not guess, and guess 
correctly, the answer ; the Saviour knew the thought that was uppermost In the blind 



ott.x. 1— 62.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDlNG TO ST. MARK. 117 

man's heart, for he knew what was in man. Why, then, does he ask the question ? Just 
In order to give him an opportunity of presenting his petition and making known his 
wants in his own words. (1) So in our own case we come to Jesus by his command 
and gracious invitation ; that comraaml is expressed in many forms, such as " Come 
unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden; " " Come, buy wine and milk without 
money and without price." His invitations are multiplied. (2) lu coming we mu»t 
lay aside every weight, and the sin tiiat would most easily beset us, just as Bartimasus 
cast aside his outer garment, to be free from every entanglement that might retard or 
alt02:ether prevent our reaching him. The young ruler, as we have seen, came to Jesus ; 
lie longed for Jesus, and Jesus esteemed him; he panted for life eternal, but could not bring 
himself to part with the things of this present life ; he did not cast aside his garment. 
(8) We are to come with prayer. Once the gracious desire is formed in our heart by the 
Spirit of grace, it will soon shape itself in )irayer, for the sjiirit of grace is also the spiri» 
of supplication. Though he knows our wants better than we ourselves, and before we 
ask him, and even our ignorarce in asking; yet he will have us express them in prayer, 
so that " Behold, he prayeth ! " indicates the first outgoing of spiritual life. God grants 
to our feeblest petitions what he will not give without them. Prayer fits us for receiving 
the blessing; it puts us into the proper position — that of humble dependence; it exalts 
the Giver without in any way degrading the receiver ; it brings us into conformity with 
God's own plan. Fixed, as the alternation of day and night, or as the succession of the 
seasons, or as the order of the universe itself, is God's purpose that we must ask in order 
to receive, seek in order to find, and knock in order that it may be opened. When our 
necessity is greatest, let us go to him by prayer, and he will supply it ; when the trial 
is sorest, let us go to him in prayer, and he will alleviate it or entirely remove it ; 
when the burden is heaviest, let us go to him in prayer, and he will lift it entirely off 
our shoulders or at least enalsle us to bear it. (4) Another reason for the question was 
to suggest the large liberality and great generosity of the Saviour ; there is a glorious 
fulness in the iuquiry, " What 'Wilt thou?" There is a gracious freeness in it at the 
same time. There is a royal ring in the question ; there is a kingly munificence. It 
reminds us of, though it surpasses, both in reality and richness, the question of King 
Ahasnerus to his queen, "What is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: and 
\vl at is thy request? even to the half of the kingdom it shall be ]K-rformed." So to 
I'/artimoeus the Saviour said, What wilt thou that I should do unto thee ? " and it shall 
be done ; you have only to make your choice ; you have only to mention what you want. 
I do not limit you ; if straitened, it is in and through yourself. So to the suppliant 
still Christ says, " What wilt thou that I should do unto thee?" — The wealth of worlds 
is mine; the power of omnipotence is mine; the treasures of wisdom and knowledge 
are mine ; ask, and you shall receive what you want, as much as you want, yea, all you 
want, provided it be really expedient for you, conducive to the Divine glory, and con- 
sistent with the welfare of your fellow-man. 4. Tlie blimi man's direct reply. Bartimaeus, 
we are sure from all the known circumstances of the case, wanted many things — better 
cliithing, more wholesome food, a more comfortable place of abode, more of the neces- 
saries of life in general ; some even of its simple comforts would not be likely to spoil 
this pnor mendicant, who had suffend so long from privation, pining in poverty and 
I'inched with want. Bartinia3us refers to none of these things, or such thinus as these ; 
he comes directly to the point ; he names at once the thing which he needs most; he 
mentions the one thing needful for the relief of his direst necessity. " Lord," he said, 
" that I might receive my sight." In like manner, whether we engage in public sup- 
Tilication or family worship, or private devotions, we should have before our mind our 
must urgent necessities, rightly discriminate them, really feel them, and with pointed 
earnesiness and plain directness of speech express them ; we should have some felt want, 
some real necessity, an actual petition to present or hearty thanksgiving to render. 5. 
The cure. It was immediate : " immediately he received bis sight." It was a wonderful 
change for this poor, blind man ; it was a new and blessed experience ; it was like a trans- 
ference into a new and fjcautifiil world ; in faci;, we cannot realize, and words fail to 
e-xpresR it. Equally new. and gracious, and wonderfnl, and blessed is_ the translation 
out of the' kingdom of darkness into the kingdom of hght, out of the kingdom of Satan 
into the kingdom of God, which takes place in regeneration, when the eyes of the under- 
gtandiu" are opened, and the light of the knowledge of the glory of God flashes in upon 



118 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. x. 1— 5a 

the soul. 6. The mrans employed. The gentle touch of Jesua' hand was the outward 
instrumentality. Lovingly, tenderly, he passed his hand over the sightless eyehalla, 
What a thrilling touch that wasl What condescension withal I How it helped th« 
sufferer to hope for the best, and to have faith in the Saviour's power 1 The inward 
means was faith : " Thy faith hath saved thee." Nor is it said, " Thy promptness hath 
saved thee," though his promptness was laudable ; nor " Thy humility," though that was 
most becoming; nor "Thy perseverance," though that was commendable; nor " Thy 
Scriptural knowledge in relation to the Messianic hopes of the nation," tliough that was 
of a superior kind ; but " Thy faith." Faith and salvation go hand in hand together ; God 
has joined them, let not man separate them ; God has wed them, and let not man divorce 
them. 7. now faith saves. It saves, not by any merit in itself, not by any virtue of 
its own ; it saves by bringing us into contact with Christ. It is the instrument that 
extracts yirtue from the grace of Christ ; it is the link of gold that unites with and 
binds us to Christ ; it is the arm that puts on the robe of Christ's righteousness, and 
that is the robe of salvation ; it is the hand stretched out to receive the gifts that grace 
bestows. " He that believeth shall be saved, he that believeth not shall be damned." 

rV. How Baktim^us proved his gratitude. 1. Se followed Christ. His faith, 
as usual, wrought by love; and love keeps near, and delights in, the presence of 
the beloved object. So with all who love the Lord ; they follow him. Soon as the 
eyes are enlightened to see his beauty and his excellence, we follow him; soon as 
the heart begins to burn within us by his teaching, we follow him ; if true disciples, 
we follow him ; if sheep of the Good Shepherd, we follow him. " My sheep hear my 
voice, and I know them, and they follow me." In Old Testament as well as in New 
Testament times, it was so with all who loved the Lord. Thus it is recorded to the 
honour, and redounded to the salvation, of Caleb and Joshua that they " wholly followed 
the Lord." The psalmist speaks his personal experience in the words, " My soul fol- 
loweth hard after thee." The children of God in both Testaments followed the Lord as 
monuments of his mercy, as trophies of his grace, as living witnesses of the power of his 
love, and as witness-bearers to his truth. Bartimjeus followed him " in the way." We 
read of the Israelites, in their journeyings, being on one occasion sorely " discouraged 
because of the way." It may be so with ourselves, yet we must follow the Savjoui 
whithersoever he leads ; whether it be up the hill of difficulty, or down the hill into the 
valley of humiliation ; whether it be a way of toil and trial, of danger and distress, 
or in green pastures and by still waters ; taking up our cross, we shall, by his gracious 
help, follow him; through evil report and good report we shall follow him. Even 
when his way, as often, is in the sea, and his path in the great waters, and his footsteps 
are not known, we will follow him. But how do we make sure that it is the way — the 
right way ? He has himself marked out the way in his Word, and said to us, " Tliis ia 
the way, walk ye in it ; " his providence has erected signposts along the way, so that a 
" wayfaring man, though a fool, need not err therein " or wander therefrom ; his Spirit 
guides us in the way and comforts us by the way. Thus instructed in his Word, led by 
his providence, and guided by his Spirit, we shall follow him in the way which, rough 
though it be at times, and painful, and even distressing, leads in the end to glory, 
honour, and immortality. 2. He glorified God. "Glorifying God," says St. Luke. So, 
too, shall we. We have always admired that opening statement in one of the West- 
minster standards, which says, " Man's chief end is to glorify God and enjoy him for 
ever ; " it contains at once the whole duty of man, and the chief blessedness of man. 
We glorify God by deep and heartfelt gratitude ; we glorify him when we praise his 
name and defend his cause ; we glorify him by the devotedness of our life and our conse- 
cration to his service. Thus by the homage of the heart, by the fruit of the lips, and 
by the sinlessness and faithfulness of the life, we glorify him. We have good cause to 
glorify God for his unspeakable gift — the Son of his love and our beloved Saviour. We 
glorify God for raising up " a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David ; " 
for the perfection of his person, the purity of his life, the suitability of his offices, the 
efficacy of his death, the prevalence of his intercession ; for " his agony and bloody 
sweat, for his cross and passion, for his precious death and burial, for his glorious 
resurrection and ascension, and for the coming of the Holy Ghost ; " for all he has dona 
for us, for all he is doing, and for all he has promised to do. 3. The happy influence 
tacerttd on others, " All the people," says St. Luke, " when they saw it, gave praise unto 



OH. xi. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK 119 

God." There is a holy contagiousness in this work. When one gets good for his owa 
soul, he cannot keep it to himself, he cannot hide it ; the gratitude is so deep, the joy 
is 80 great, that he must declare it aloud and to all around, just as the psalmist, saying — 

** All that fear God, come, hear ; Fll tell 
What he did foi my soul." 
Or again— 

" God will I bless all times ; his praise 
My mouth shall still express. 
• • • • • 

Extol the Lord with me, let na 
Exalt his name together." 

4. Conclusion. We would sum up our study of the case of this poor, blind beggar in 
the now somewhat trite, but still touching and tender verses of a poet lately departed — 

" Blind BartimsBus at the gates 
Of Jericho in darkness waits ; 
He hears the crowd ; — ^he hears a breath 
Say, ' It is Christ of Nazareth 1' 
And calls, in tones of agony, 
'IijtroC, ihi-^aiv fie I 

*• The thronging multitudes inoiease ; 
« Blind BartimsBus, hold thy peace I ' 
But still, above the noisy crowd, 
The beggar's cry is shrill and loud; 
Until they say, ' He oalleth thee 1 ' 
eipirei, eyiipai, (payei <re I 

" Then saith the Christ, as silent standi 
The crowd, ' What wilt thou at my handsf 
And he replies, ' Oh, give me light I 
Rabbi, restore the blind man's sight 1 ' 
And Jesus answers, "T7ra76" 
"H irlaris aov aeiriDiie (Tel 

" Ye that have eyes, yet cannot lee^ 
In darkness and in misery. 
Recall those mighty voices three, 
'IijffoS, iK47i<riv jU£ / 
®tip<rei, iynpai, vwayt I 
'H rittTis <ro9 aiuaxi trel" 

We may here add. In a very few words, the common solution of two seeming diacrepanciei 
of the evangelists' narrative : viz. our Lord cured two blind men together on this 
occasion ; but Bartimseus was better known, either previously, as already hinted, in 
reference to the patronymic, or subsequently as a " monument of the Lord's miracle ; 
while in reference to the place or time of cure, one of the two had made his application 
to our Lord as he approached or entered Jericho, yet was not cured at that time, but 
in company with the second, as our Lord left the city. — J. J. G. 

EXPOSITION. 

VT ' "^^^ distance from Jericho to Jerusalem 

(jHAFTJliK Al. (about seventeen miles) would involve a 



jfet. 1.— And when they drew nigh unto 
Jb^osalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at 
the mount of Olives. St. Matthew (xxi. 1) 
eays "When they drew nigh unto Jerusa- 
lem,' and came unto Bethphage." St. Mark 
mentions the three places together, because 
BethphageandBethany.beingneartogether, 
were also both of them close to Jerusalem. 



journey of about seven hours. The country 
between Jerusalem and Jericho is hilly, 
rugged, and desolate. It is from the height 
overhanging Bethany that the iinest view 
of Jerusalem is gained. It appears from 
St. John (xii. 1) that our Lord on the pre- 
ceding sabbath had sapped, and probably 
passed the night, at Bethany; and that on 



120 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oa. xi. 1—33. 



lie following day (answering to our Palm 
Sunday) he had come still nearer to Jeru- 
Bnlem, namely, to Betbphage; and from 
thenoe he sent two of his disciples for the 
ass and the colt. So his way to Jerusalem 
was from Bethany by Bethphage, the Mount 
of Olives, and the Valley of Jehoshaphat. 
The Valley of Jehoshaphat, through which 
flows the brook Kedron, lies close to Jeru- 
salem. Bethphage literally means "the 
house of green figs," as Bethany, lying a 
short distance west of it, means " the house 
of dates." The date palm growing in the 
neighbourhood would furnish the branches 
with which the multitude strewed the way 
on the occasion of our Lord's triumphal 
entry. He sendeth two of his diBciples. 
Who were they ? Bede thinks tliat they 
were Peter and Philip. Jansenius, with 
greater probability, thinks that they were 
Peter and John, because a little after this 
Christ sent these two to prepare for the 
Passover. But we know nothing certain 
on this point. 

Ver. 2. — Go your way into the village that 
is over against you. The village over 
Bgainst them would most likely be Beth- 
phage, towards which they were then ap- 
proaching. Straightway as ye enter into it, ye 
shall find a colt tied, whereon no man ever 
yet sat. St. Mark mentions only the colt ; 
St. Matthew mentions the ass and the colt. 
But St. Mark singles out the colt as that 
which our Lord specially needed ; the mother 
of the animal accompanying it as a sumptcr. 
Animals which had never before been used 
were alone admissible for sacred purposes. 
We read in Numbers (xix. 2) of " the 
heifer on which never came yoke." Our 
Lord here beholds things absent and out 
of sight, as though they were present. So 
that he revealed this to his disciples by the 
gift of prophecy which his divinity added 
to his numanity. Here, therefore, is a 
manifest proof of his divinity. It was by 
the same Divine power that he revealed to 
Nathanael what had taken place under the 
fig tree. 

Ver. 8. — ^And il any one say unto yon. Why 
do ye this t say ye, The Lord hath need of 
him ; and straightway he will send him back 
hither. The Greek, aocording to the best 
authorities here, is evBeas aMv kvotrTiWei 
TtiKiv wSe : literally, straightway he sendeth 
it baek hither again, Tlje verb here in the 
present may represent the verb in the 
future, "he will send it back." But the 
word " again " (Waik) is not quite eo easily 
explained. There is strong authority for 
the Insertion of this word, which necessarily 
changes the meaning of tlie sentence. With- 
-jnt the rd\iv, the sentence would actually 
mean that our Lcrd. by his Divine prescience, 
here tells his disciples that when the colt was 



demanded by them the owner would at once 
permit them to take it. But if the word 
iriMv be inserted, it can only mean that thi 9 
was a part of the message which our Lord 
directed his disciples to deliver as from 
himself, " The Lord hath need of him , and 
he, the Lord, will forthwith send him back 
again." The passage is so interpreted by 
Origen, who twice introduces the adverb 
in liis commentary on St. Matthew. The 
evidence of the oldest uncials is strongly in 
favour of this insertion. Our Lord was 
unwilling that the disciples shoi^ld take 
away the colt if the owner objected. He 
might have taken the animals away in his 
own supreme right, but he chose to accom- 
plish his will by his providence, powerfully 
and yet gently ; and, if the reading here be 
allowed, he further influenced them by the 
promise that their property should be re- 
turned to them. It was the will and purpose 
of Christ, who for these three years had gone 
about on foot, and travelled over the whole 
of Palestine in this way, to show himself 
at length the King of Judah, that is, tlje 
Messiah and Heir of David ; and so he 
resolves to enter Jerusalem, the metropolis, 
the city of the great King, with royal dignity. 
But he willnot besurrounded with tlie " pomp 
and circumstance " of an earthly monarch. 
Ho rides on an ass's colt,^ that he might 
show his kingdom to be of another kind, 
that is, spiritual and heavenly. And so he 
assumes a humble equipage, riding upon a 
colt, his only housings being the clothes of 
his disciples. And yet there was dignity 
as well as humility in his equipage. The 
ass of the East was, and is, a superior animal 
to that known amongst us. The judges and 
princes of Israel rode on " white asses," and 
tlieir sons on asses' colts. So our Lord rode 
upon an ass's colt ; and there were no gleam- 
ing swords in his procession, or other signs 
of strife and bloodshed. But there were palra 
branches and garments spread all along his 
path — the evidences of devotion to him. So 
he came in gentleness, not that he might be 
feared on account of his power, but that 
he might be loved on account of his good- 
ness. 

Ver. 4. — By the door without, in a place 
where two ways met {4irl to5 &fi<p6Sov): 
literally, in the open street. 

Ver. 8, — Others out down branches off the 
trees, etc. According to the best authorities, 
the words should be rendered, and othert 
branches (or, leaves for strewing), wMch thef 
had out from the fields (_&\\oi Si aToifiiSas 
K6y^avT€s iK ruv aypiev). The branches were 
cut in the fields; and the smaller, leafy 
portions of them, suitable for their purpose, 
were carried out. 

Ver. 9. — The word Hosanna literally 
means " Oh, save t " It may have beea 



OH. 3a. 1-33.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



121 



originally the cry of captives or rebels for 
mercy ; and thus have passed into a general 
acclamation, expressive of joy and deliver- 
ance. 

Ver. 10. — This verse should be read 
thus : Blessed be the kingdom that oometh, 
the kingdom of onr father David — that is, 
the kingdom of Messiah, now coming, and 
about to be established — Hosanna in the 
highest;— that is, Hosanna in the highest 
realms of glory and blessedness, where sal- 
vation is perfected. 

Ver. 11. — This visit to the temple is not 
mentioned by St. Mattiaew. It is an im- 
portant addition to his narrative. The 
moment of our Lord's triumphant entry into 
Jerusalem was not the moment for the dis- 
play of his indignation against the pro- 
faners of the temple. He was then sur- 
rounded by an enthusiastic and admiring 
multitude ; so he contented himself on this 
occasion with looking round about upon all 
things (vepi^Ki^dfiepos irdi/ra). His keen 
and searching eye saw at a glance all that 
was going on, and penetrated everything. 
But without any comment or action at that 
time, he went out unto Bethany (it was now 
eventide) with the twelve. No doubt the 
disciples, and especially Peter, saw what 
was involved in this visit of inspection, 
which prepared them for what took place on 
the morrow. 

Ver. 12. — And on the morrow, when they 
were oome out from Bethany, he hungered. 
This was, therefore, the day after Palm 
Sunday (as we call it)— on the Monday, 
the 11th day of the month Nisan, which, 
according to our computation, would be 
March 21. He hungered. This showed 
hiiS humanity, which he was ever wont to 
do when he was about to display his Divine 
power. The fact that he hungered would 
lead us to the conclusion that he had not 
been spending the night in the house of 
Martha and Mary. It is far more likely 
that he had been in the open air during the 
previous night, fasting and praying. 

Ver. 13.— And seeing a fig tree afar off 
having leaves, he came, if haply he might 
find anything thereon. St. Mattliew 
(xxi. 19) says he saw " one fig tree " {ixlav 
(niKTji'), and therefore more conspicuous. 
Fig trees were no doubt plentiful in the 
neighbourhood of Bethpliage, "the house 
of figs." Dean Stanley (' Sinai and Pales- 
tine,' p. 418) says that " Muunt Olivet is still 
sprinkled with fig trees." This fig tree had 
leaves, but no fruit; for it was not the 
season of figs (i yap Kcupbs ovk ?iv aiKUv). 
Other trees would all be bare at this early 
season, but the fig trees would be put- 
ting forth their broad green leaves. It is 
possible that thia tret', standing by itself as 
U would seem, was more forward than the 



other fig trees around. It was seen " from 
afar," and therefore it must have had the 
full benefit of the sun. Our Lord says 
(St. Luke xxi. 29), " Beliold the fig tree, 
and all the trees : when they now shoot 
forth, ye see it, and know of your own selves 
that the summer is now nigh." He puts tlie 
fig tree first, as being of its own nature tlie 
most forward to pnt forth its buds. But 
then it is peculiar to the fig tree that its 
fruit begins to appear before its leaves. It 
was, therefore, a natural supposition that on 
this tree, with its leaves fully developed, 
there might be found at least some ripened 
fruit. Our Lord, therefore, approaches the 
tree in his hunger, with the expectation of 
finding fruit. But as he draws near to it, 
and realizes the fact that the tree, though 
full of leaf, is absolutely fruitless, he for- 
gets his natural hunger in the thought of 
the spiritual figure which this tree began 
to present to his mind. The accident of his 
hunger as a man, brought him into contact 
with a great parable of spiritual things, 
presented to him as God ; and as he a]k 
proBched this fig tree full of leaf, bat d^y- 
titute of fruit, tliere stood before him the 
striking but awful image of the Jewish 
nation, having indeed the leaves of a gj-eat 
profession, but yielding no fruit. The 
leaves of this fig tree deceived the passer- 
by, who, from seeing them, would naturally 
expect the fruit. And so the fig tree wa« 
cursed, not for being barren, but for oeing 
false. When our Lord, being hungry, 
sought figs on the fig tree, he signified that 
he hungered after something which he did 
not find. The Jews were this unprofitable 
fig tree, full of the leaves of profession, 
but fruitless. Our Lord never did any- 
thing without reason ; and, therefore, when 
he seemed to do anything without reason, 
he was setting forth in a figure some great 
reality. Nothing but his Divine yearning 
after the Jewish people, his spiritual hun(i;er 
for their salvation, can explain this typical 
action with regard to the fig tree, and indeed 
the whole mystery of his life and death. 

Ver. 14. — No man eat fruit from thee 
henceforward for ever (eis riy aicufa). These 
words, in their application to the Jewish 
nation, have a merciful limitation — a limi- 
tation whioli lies in the original words 
rendered "for ever," which literally mean 
for the age. " No man eat fruit of thea 
henceforward, for the age ; " until the 
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled. A day 
will doubtless come when Israel, which now 
says, "I am a dry tree," shall accept the 
words of its true Lord, " From me ii thy 
fruit found," and shall be clnthed with the 
richest fruits of all trees. (See Trench on 
tliC Miracles). St. Matthew (xxi 19) tell« 
us that " immediately the fig tree withered 



122 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. xi. 1—33. 



away." " Straightway a Bhivering fear and 
trembling piisBed through its leaves, as 
though it was at once struck to the heart by 
the malediction of its Creator." Our Lord's 
digoiples heard his words ; but they appear 
not to have noticed the immediate effect of 
them upon the tree. It was not until the 
next day that they observed what had 
happened. This miracle would show his 
disciples how soon he could have withered 
his enemies, who were about to crucify him; 
but he waited with long-suffering for their 
salvation, by repentance and faith in him. 

Ver. 15. — And they come to Jerusalem : 
and he entered into the temple. Not the 
holy place, nor the holy of holies (into 
which the high priest might alone enter), 
but into the temple court ; for into that the 
people went to pray, and to witness the sacri- 
fices which were being offered before the 
holy place ; for this court was, so to spesik, 
the temple of the people. Our Lord was not 
a Levitical priest, because he was not sprung 
of Levi and Aaron. Therefore he could 
not enter the holy place, but only the outer 
court of the temple. And began to cast out 
(^^KPiWeiv) — it was a forcible expulsion — 
them that sold and them that bought in the 
temple. There were two occasions on which 
our Lord thus purged the temple— one at the 
beginning of his public ministry, and the 
other at the end of it, four days before his 
death. There was a regular market in the 
outer court, the court of the Gentiles, be- 
longing to the family of the high priest. 
The booths of this market are mentioned in 
the rabbinical writings as the booths of the 
son of Hanan, or Annas. But this market 
is never mentioned in the Old Testament. 
It seems to have sprung up after the Cap- 
tivity. Our Lord adopted these strong 
measures (1) because the temple courts were 
not the proper places for merchandise, and 
(2) because these transactions were often 
dishonest, on account of the avarice and 
covetousness of the priests. The priests, 
either themselves or by their families, sold 
oxen and sheep and doves to those who had 
need to offer them in the temple. These 
animals were, of course, needed for sacrifices; 
and there was good reason why they should 
be ready at hand for those who came up to 
worship. But the sin of the priests lay in 
permitting this buying and selling to go on 
within the sacied precincts, and in tradin°; 
dishonestly. There were other things needed 
for the sacrifices, such as wine, and salt, and 
oil. Then there were also the money- 
changers (/coMuySuTT^j, from K6Wvfios, a 
small coin) — those who exchanged large 
coins for smaller, or foreign money for the 
half-shokel. Every Israelite, whether rich 
or poor, was required to give the half-shekel, 
neither less uor more. So when money had 



to be exchanged, an allowance or premium 
was required by the money-changer. Doves 
or pigeons were required on various occar 
siouB for offerings, chiefly by the poor, who 
could not afford more costly offerings. 
From these also the priests had their gain. 
The seats of them that sold the doves. These 
birds were often sold by women, who were 
provided with seats. 

Ver. 16. — And he wonld not suffer that 
any man should carry a vessel through the 
temple. It was a great temptation to make 
the temple, at least the great court of the 
Gentiles, a thoronghfaie. It was so exten- 
sive that a long and tedious circuit would 
be avoided, in going from one part of the 
city to another, by passing through it. To 
those, for example, who were passing from 
the sheep market, Bethesda, into the upper 
part of the city, the shortest cut was through 
this court and by Solomon's Porch. The 
distance would be greatly increased if they 
went round it. So the priests permitted 
servants and labourers, laden with any- 
thing, to take this shorter way through the 
great court of the ti-mple. But our Lord 
hindered them, forbidding them with the 
voice of one that had authority, and re- 
straining them with his hand, and com- 
pelling them to go back. He would have 
the whole of his Father's House regarded ai 
nacred. 

Ver. 17. — My house shall be called a house 
of prayer for aU the nations (TrSo-i toTs 
(Bpeatv). St. Mark, writing for Gentiles, 
assures them tliat the God of the Jews ia 
the God of all the nations ; and that the 
court of the Gentiles, which was then so 
profaned, was a constituent part of his house 
of prayer. St. Jerome notes Christ's action 
in driving out the profaners of the temple 
as a great proof of his Divine power, that 
he alone should have been able to cast out 
so great a multitude. He says, "A fiery 
splendour flashed from his eyes, and the 
majesty of Deity shone in his countenance." 
The words, " My house shall be called the 
house of prayer," are a quotation from 
Isa. Ivi. 7; and it is a remarkable coin- 
cidence that in ver. 11 of that chapter the 
rulers of the people are described as looking 
" every one for his gain from his quarterl?" 
A den of thieves (tririi^oioc hnaray); this 
should be rendered, a ien of rohhers. The 
Greek word for "thief" is KXeirrns, not 
\i\ari)s. The two terms are carefully dis- 
tinguished in St. John (x. 1), "the same is 
a thief (kX^itttis) and a robber (^tjitti^s)." 
/These priests, wholly intent upon gain, by 
Tarious fraudulent acts plundered strangers 
and the poor, who came to purchase offer- 
ings for the worship of God. Observe that 
the temple is called the house of God, not 
because he dwells in it in any oorporeaj 



OH. xt 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 



123 



senge, for " he dwelleth not in temples made 
with hands," but because fhe temple is the 
place set apart for the worship of God, in 
which he specially gives ear to the prayers 
of his people, and in which he specially 
promises his spiritual presencey' Hence we 
learn what reverence is due to the houses 
of God ; so that, as the master of a house 
resents any insult offered to his house as an 
insult to himself, so Christ reckons any 
wilful dishonour done to his house as a 
wrong and insult to him. 

Ver. 18. — And the chief priests and the 
scribes — this is the right order of the 
words — heard it (ijicova-ay), and sought 
(ef^Tou*) — began to teek, or were teeking 
(imperfect) — how they might destroy tiim 
(airoAe'ffouo-iy). They were seeking how they 
might, not only put him to death, but 
" utterly destroy him," stamp out his name 
and influence as a great spiritual energy in 
the world. This action of his raised them 
to the highest pitch of fury and indignation. 
Their authority and their interests were 
attacked. But the people still acknow- 
ledged his power; and the scribes and 
Pharisees feared the people. 

Ter. 13. — And when even was come; 
literally, and whenever (Srav) evening came ; 
tliat is, every evening. During these last 
■Jays before his crucifixion, he remained 
in Jerusalem during the day, and went back 
to Bethany at night. St. Matthew says 
(xxi. 17), speaking of one of these days, 
" And he left them, and went forth out of 
the city to Bethany, and lodged there." So 
true it was that "he came unto his own, 
and his own received him not." No one in 
that city, which he loved so well, offered to 
receive him. The end was drawing near. 
I)Ut the intercourse vrith Martha and Mary 
must have been soothing to him; and 
Bethany was less tlian two miles from 
Jerusalem. 

Vers. 20, 21. — And as they passed by in the 
morning, they saw the fig tree withered away 
from the roots. They had returned the 
evening before, probably after sunset, to 
Bethany ; and so, in the twilight, had not 
noticed the withered tree. St. Matthew 
gathers the whole account of the fig tree 
into one notice. St. Mark disposes of the 
facts in their chronological order. It was 
on the Monday morning, the day after the 
triiunphant entry, and when they were on 
their way to Jerusalem, that our Lord 
cursed the fig tree. Tlience he passed on 
at once into Jerusalem, and drove out the 
profaners of the temple, and taught the 
people. In the evening he returned to 
Bethany; and then on the next morning, 
as they were on their way into the city, 
they saw what had happened to the fig tree. 
And then Peter calling to iNnembranoe 



saith onto him, Babbi, behold, the flg trea 
which than oursedst is withered away (i^f 
acToi), the same Greek word as in the pre- 
ceding verse. Some have thought that the 
fig tree was the tree forbidden to Adam and 
Eve in the garden of Eden. (See Cornelius 
k Lapide on Gen. ii. 9). 

Vers. 22, 23.— Have faith in God ; literally, 
have the faith of Ood — full, perfect, effec- 
tual faith in him; faith like a grain of 
mustard seed. Ton may be staggered and 
perplexed at what you will see shortly ; but 
" have faith in God." The Jews may seem 
for a time to flourish like that green fig tree ; 
but they will "soon be out down as the 
grass, and be withered as the green herb." 
What seems diiGcult to you is easy with 
God. Trust in the Divine omnipotence. 
The things which are impossible with men 
are possible with him. Our Lord then use* 
a metaphor frequently employed to indicate 
the accomplishment of things so difficult as 
to be apparently impossible. He employs a 
bold and vivid hyperbole; and, pointing 
probably to the Mount of Olives overhanging 
them, and on the shoulders of which they 
were then standing, he says, "With this 
faith you might say to this mountain. Be 
thou taken up and oast into the sea, and it 
shall come to pass." 

Ver. 24. — All things whatsoever ye pray 
and ask for, believe that ye have receivml 
them; and ye shall have them. But yon 
must "ask in faith, nothing wavering." 

Ver. 25. — And wheresoever ye stand pray- 
ing (ffT^(tJ)T6 irpoo'eux'^M^'"")- I'l'S ordinary 
attitude of Eastern nations in prayer is 
here indicated, namely, "standing," with 
the head, doubtless, bowed in reverence. 
The promise of this text is that requests 
offered in prayer by a faithful heart will 
be granted — granted as God knows best. 
The connection of these verses with the 
former is close. One great hindrance to 
the faith without which there can be no 
spiritual power, is the presence of angry 
and uncharitable feelings. These must all 
be put away if we would hope for a favour- 
able answer from God. 

Ver. 26. — There appears to be sufBcient 
evidence to justify the Revisers in their 
omission of this verse ; although its omission 
or retention does not affect- the general 
exegesis of the passage. 

Vers. 27, 28. — By what authority doeit 
thou these things t We learn from ver. 18 
that the chief priests and scribes bad 
already been seeking how they might 
destroy him, and they wanted to establish 
some definite charge, whether of blasphemy 
or of sedition, against him. They now ap- 
proach him as he walked in the temple, and 
demand by what authority he was doing 
these things, such as casting out the pro- 



124 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [tm. xi. 1-83 



faners of the temple, teaching and instruct- 
ing the people, accepting their Hosannas, 
eto. And who gave thee this authority to do 
these things I According to the best read- 
ing, tliia sentence should run, or (^ instead 
of kkI) who gave thee, etc., instead of " and 
who gave thee," eto. So that the questions 
are directed to two things— was his autho- 
rity inlierent? or, was it derived? 

Ver. 29. — I will ask of you one question 
(iirepatr-fjcQ) iifjias 'iva X6yov), The verb 
justifies the translation, one question, for 
" one word." The question which our Lord 
put to them wne one on which hung the 
solution of that proposed by the scribes. It 
is as though he said, " You do not believe me 
when I say that I have received power from 
God. Believe then John the Baptist, who 
bare witness of me that I was sent from God 
to do these things." 

Ver. 30. — The baptism of John, was it 
from hsaven, or from men 1 By the " bap- 
tism of John " our Lord means his testimony 
concerning himself, his doctrine, and all his 
preaching. It is a synecdoche — the part put 
for the whole. The argument \s incontro- 
vertible. It is this : " You ask from whence 
I derive my authority — from God or from 
men ? I in my turn ask you from whom did 
John the Baptist derive his authority to 
baptize and to teach ? from heaven or from 
men? If he had it from God, as all will 
confess, then I too have the same frum 
God ; for John testified of mc, saying that 
he was but a servant, the friend of tlie 
Bridegroom ; but that I was the Messiah, 
the Son of God : and this too when you sent 
messengers to liini for his special purpose, 
that you niglit know from him wliether lie 
was the Mcssias " (See Joliu i. 20; x. 41.) 
Answer me. This is characteristic of tjt. 



Mark's style, and of our Lord's dignified 
earnestness. 

Vers. 31, 32.-^They reasoned with them- 
selves, like men anxious and perplexed. II 
we shall say, From heaven ; he will say, Why 
then did ye not believe him? For he told 
you I was the promised Messias, and bade 
you prepare yourselves by repentance to 
receive my grace and salvation. But should 
we say. From men — they feared the people : 
for all verily held Jolm to be a prophet. 
This is a broken sentence, but very expres- 
sive. The evangelist leaves his reader to 
supply what they meant. They deemed it 
prudent not to finislj the sentence; and 
probably cut it short with some significant 
gesture. They did not like to confess that 
they feared the people; althougli this was 
the true reason why they hesitated to say 
that John's baptism was of men. They 
knew that all the people held John to be a 
prophet. They were thus thrown on one or 
other horn of a dileiuma. 

Ver. 33. — We know not. They had seen 
the life of John. They had heard his holy 
and Divine teaching. They were witnesses 
to his death for the truth : and yet they lie. 
They might have said, " We tliink it impru- 
dent or inexpedient to say ; " but for this they 
had not sufiicient moral courage. Neither tell 
I you by what authority I do these things. 
You will not answer my question ; neither 
will I therefore answer yours ; because your 
answer to mine is the answer to your own. 
" He thus shows," says St. Jerome, " that 
they knew,but would not answer; and that he 
knew, but did not speak, because they were 
silent as to what they knew." Our Lord 
did thus but mete out to them the measura 
which they meted to him. 



H01Tir,ETIC8. 

Veri. 1 — 11, — The triumphal entry. Christ was a King, but'liis royalty vias mis- 
unders nod during his ministry upon earth. The devil had offered him the kingdoms 
of this world, and he had refused them. The people would have taken him by forte 
and have made him a king, but he had hidden himself from them. Yet it was right and 
meet that he should in some way assume a kingly state and accept royal honours. 
The triumphal entry interests us, because it w»3 the acknowledgment and reception 
of Jesus with the joyful homage due to him as King of Israel and King of men. 

I. Tub occasion op this homage. Our Lord Jesus knew well what was to be tho 
issue of this his last visit to the metropolis. He foresaw, and he had foretold in the 
liearino; of his disciples, that he was about to he put to a violent death. Notwith- 
standing his clear perception of this his approaching sacrifice, he had come cheer- 
fully to the city where he was to share the fate of the prophets. It is absurd to draw 
from this narrative the inference that Jesus was now looking for popular and national 
acceptance ; he was not so misled. But it is remarkable that he should choose to 
receive the homage of the multitude almost upon the eve of his betrayal and condem- 
nation. In his apprehension, the Priesthood and the Kingship of the Messiah were 
most cloHely connected. And to our minds there is no discordance between the sorrows 



»H. XL 1—33 1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 125 

Jesng was about to endure and the honours he now consented to accept. The occasion 
was well chosen, and brings before us our Lord's independence of all human itandaids 
and preconceptions. Ouis was a King whose royalty suffered no tarnishing of its 
splendoar when he rode in majesty, although he rode to death. 

II. The scene or this homage. 1. It was the scene of his ministry. In and near 
Jerusalem many of Christ's mighty works had been wrought, many of his discourseg 
had lieen delivered, many of his disciples had been made. It was becoming that 
for once, in this scene of his labours, his claims should be publicly recognized and 
his honour publicly displayed. 2. It was to be the scene of his martyrdom and sacri- 
fice. It has often been noted, as a witness to human fickleness, that the same roads 
and public places should within a few days resound witK the incongruous shouts, 
" Hosanna ! ' and " Crucify him ! " How true was the language of Pilate-— they cru- 
cified their King I On the one hand, it could not be that a prophet should perish out 
of Jerusalem ; on the other hand, it was fitting that the city of David should openly 
welcome and acknowledge David's Son and David's Lord, and the establishment of the 
predicted kingdom. 

Ill The offerers of this houaqe. There were, amongst those who welcomed 
Jesus, his own attendants and disciples, the villagers from Ltetbany, the citizens of 
Jerusalem, and the Galilean pilgrims who had come up to the feast. The multitude 
was a very varied and representative crowd, including Israelites of many classes, and 
doubtless differing from one another in the measure of their knowledge of Jesus and 
their appreciation of bis character and his claims. As is often the case when Christ 
is extolled and praised, some were drawn into the general enthusiasm and rejoicing by 
the force of example and under the inspiration of feeling. The general welcome was 
an anticipation of the honour which shall be rendered to Jesus, when "every tongue 
shall acknowledge him to be Lord, to the glory of God the Father." 

IV. Bt what actions this homage was expressed. The simple circumstances of 
this entry, so natural and almost childlike, are all significant of our Saviour's dignity 
and majesty. In the bringing of the ass's colt for him to ride, there was a fulfilment 
of an ancient prediction ; and the act itself, according to the usage of the East, was 
becoming to royalty. In the spreading of their garments upon the foal's back, .the 
strewing the road with their clothes and with the branches of trees, there was a pic- 
turesque, if very simple, expression of their admiring reverence and loyalty. 

v. The language in which this homage was uttered. The unpreme^tated 
shouts and exclamations with which Jesus was greeted were an expression of fervid, 
popular sentiment. Yet they were also to some extent a confession of Jesus' Messiah- 
ship and an acknowledgment of his royalty. 1. Notice the character in which they 
hailed him : he came " in the Name of the Lord ; " he brought in " the kingdom of David." 
Drawn from Hebrew prophecy, these appellations could not be used without a very special 
significance. 2. Notice the joyous language in which they hailed him. They called 
him " Blessed 1 " they greeted him with the cry, " Hosanna in the highest ! " It was 
enthusiastic and lofty language; but meaner terms would have been inappropriate, 
unworthy, and unjust. 

Vers. 12—14, 19 — ^25. — The fruit of the fruitless fig tree. This action of our Lord 
Jesus is one of the very few he is recorded to have performed to which exception has 
been taken. It has been objected that the "cursing" of the fig tree was a vindictive 
act and unlike and unworthy of the gracious and beneficent Redeemer. In answer 
to this objection, a distinction must be drawn between a vindictive and a judicial pro-' 
ceeding ; the latter having no element of personal irritation or ill feeling. It must 
not be forgotten that the Lord Jesus was and is the Judge, and this symbolical action 
was a picture of his judicial function in exercise. It has also been objected that the 
doom pronounced and carried into effect was unjust, inasmuch as the season for figs 
had not yet come, and Jesus looked fur what, in the nature of things, it was not 
reasonable to expect. In answer to this, it must be remembered that trees have no 
consciousness, and no capacity for sentitnt suffering; and that, in the analogous case 
of the barren professor of religion, no sentence of condemnation is pronounced except 
as the consequence of moral culpability. This passage has two distinct movemeuti, 
each oontaining its own spiritual lesson impressively conveyed. 



126 THE GOSPEL AOOOEDINO TO BT. MARK. [oh. xi. 1—34. 

L Hebe is a bthbol of " jcdsment dt the bouse or GtoD." 1. The fruitless fig 
tree la an emblem of the immoral or useless professor of Christianity. Leaves are 
beautiful in themselves, are indicative of life and vital vigour, and seem to promise 
fruit ; yet, in the case of such trees as that here spoken of, it is the fruit which is 
the end for which the tree is allowed to occupy ground, to absorb nourishment, to 
engage the toil of the husbandman or gardener. So in the moral domain. The 
foliage corresponds to outward position, to visible standing, and audible confession. 
These are excellent and admirable where they are not deceptive. But where there is 
" nothing but leaves " to meet the eye of the husbandman, where there is the " name 
to live " without the life, where there is the language of belief and of devotion with 
no corresponding principles and conduct, — all this is disappointing to the Divine Hus- 
bandman and Yine-dresser. 2. The withering of the fig tree is symbolical of the 
moral doom and destruction of the unfruitful professor of religion. The tree may live, 
although it bear no fruit. But the fruitless Christian carries his own condemnation 
within him. The Lord who came to earth to save, lives in heaven to reign, and £nally 
will return to judge. It would not be just to foimd an argument upon what is but an 
illustration. Nevertheless, there is very much express teaching from our Lord's lips as 
to the doom of the hypocrite. The fruitless scribes and Pharisees incurred his anger 
and his condemnation ; and there is no reason to suppose that those more privileged, 
and equally false and spiritually worthless, can escape their doom. To be fruitless 
is to " wither away." For the barren there is no place in the vineyard of God. 

n. Hebb is instbuction as to the foweb of faith aiid fbateb. It is a lesson we 
should scarcely have expected to find attached to this miracle. The amazement of 
Peter and the other disciples was excited by this exercise of power on the part of 
the Master. Li reply to their expressions of wonder, Jesus, who was ever ready to 
give to the conversation a practical and profitable turn, discoursed upon the power of 
faith and prayer. 1. Faith gives efScacy to effort. It removes mountains. But 
Euch is not the work of the doubter or of the vacillating. All moral miracles and 
spiritual triumphs are due to the faith which is placed, not in human skill or power, 
but in God himself. 2. Faith gives efficacy to 'prayer. There are those who are 
mighty in prayer. This is because they believe in Gkid, to whom " all things are 
possible." Hesitating, half-hearted prayer is dishonouring to God. We are directed 
to believe that we have received, at the very moment when we offer our entreaties ; 
which is certainly only possible to strong faith. Yet what encouragement is there so 
to pray 1 3. The works which may in this manner be accomplished, the blessings 
which may thus be obtained, are described in remarkable language. Trees may be 
withered, mountains may be removed, all things may be had, by those who have faith. 
Ko wonder that the poet says of faith, it— 

" Laughs at impossibilities, 
And cries, 'It shall be donel'* 

4. Yet there is a condition of a moral kind laid down by Christ. A sincere and for- 
giving disposition is indispensable. If we appeal to a gracious and benignant Father, 
if we ask of him needed forgiveness, we must approach him with a mind unstained 
by wrath, by malice, by any lack of charity. 

Vers. 16—18. — 2%e AoZy houie. 'It is significant that our Lord should have per- 
formed the authoritative and symbolical act of cleansing the temple twice — at the 
' commencement, and again at the close, of his ministry. We learn that no real 
reformation had taken place in the religious habits of the chief priests and the people 
who frequented the holy place; they continued to practise the abuses which had been 
alr^y so justly and so sternly rebuked. And we learn also that Jesus, although hated 
and despised by the rulers, had abated none of his claims to authority and jurisdiction/ 

L The occasion of Cheist's authobitativb intebferenoe. 1. This was tiie 
aintse of the temple. The holy house had been erected for the manifestation of the 
Divine glory, the celebration of Divine worship, the realization of Divine communion. 
No other material structure has ever possessed the sanctity which attached to this. 
There were grades of sanctity, culminating in the holy of holies ; yet all the precincts 
and courts were consecrated to the God of IsraeL To turn snoh a building to any 



CB. XL 1—83.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 127 

Beoular pnrpose was an unjustifiable abuse. 2. The profanation of the temple. 
Three stages of profanation were referred to : vessels used for common purposes wer« 
carried through the courts ; money was exchanged — foreign money, with the images, 
the superscription, the symbols, which denoted heathenism, for the shekels of the 
sanctuary ; and doves and other victims, used for sacrifice and offerings, were openly 
bought and sold. Turning the sacred precincts to purposes of gain was a heinoufl 
offence against the majesty of the Lord of the temple. 3. But even this was not 
the worst, for there is implied the violation of the temple. The traffic which took 
place was distinguished by injustice and fraud : " Ye have made it a den of robbers." 
The family of the high priest are known to have made this merchandise a source of 
unlawful gain. In the exchange of money there was unfairness, in the sale of animals 
there was extortion. It was bad enough that in the Lord's house there should be 
trading, it was far worse that there should be rapacity and fraud. 

II. The manneb of Chbist's authoritative xnterfebenob. 1. This wa» 
independent. Jesus took counsel of no one, but acted of his own accord, as One who 
had no superior to whom to refer. He acted in his own Name and in that of his 
Father. 2. It was ptfi'emptory. We feel that it was but seldom that the meek and 
lowly Jesus acted as on this occasion. There was an unsparing severity in his action 
and in his language, when rescuing the holy house from the profane intruders. He 
did well to be angry. 3. It was impressive. The priests, who profited by the robbery, 
were enraged ; the scribes, who resented the exercise of authority by the Nazarene, 
were incensed ; and the people, who witnessed this remarkable act, were astonished. 

III. The justification by Christ of his authobitativb interfbeenob. Our 
Lord not only acted ; he taught and explained the meaning of his action. We cannot 
suppose that he was animated by any superstitious feelings in so acting, and the recoid 
shows us what were his motives. 1. He regarded the temple as the house of hit 
Father, Ood. 2. It was in his view the house of prayer, and was to be reserved for 
communion between human spirits and him who is the Father of spirits. 3. And it 
was intended for the service of all nations, which gave it a peculiar dignity and sacred- 
ness in his eyes. These considerations show why a Teacher, wliose whole teaching 
was peculiarly spiritual, should display a zeal for the sanctity of a local and material 
representation of a Divine presence. 

IV. The results of Christ's authoritative intebferenck. 1. Its immediate 
effect was to provoke the dread, the malice, and the plots of the scribes and priests. 
The incident occurred but a few days before our Lord's crucifixion, and it appears to 
have led to that awful event. In their own interests, the religious leaders of the Jews 
felt themselves constrained to crush the power of One whose conduct and teaching 
were so inconsistent with their own. Thus one of the highest exercises of our Lord's 
righteous authority was the occasion of his most cruel humiliation and shameful 
death. 2. Its more remote effect has been to enhance the conception entertained of 
Christ's character and official dignity and power. Humanity is God's true temple, too 
long defiled by the occupation of the spiritual foe, and desecrated to the service of sin. 
Christ is the Divine Purifier, who dispossesses the enemy, and restores the sanctuary to 
its destined ends, the indwelling, the woiship, and the glory of the Eternal 1 

Vers. 27 — 33. — Authority vindicated. The conflict between the Divine Prophet and 
the leaders of the Jewish people was now at its height. Jesus knew that his hour 
was at hand, and no longer either concealed himself, or restrained his tongue from 
words of merited indignation, rebuke, and almost defiance. Thus the enmity of his 
foes was provoked, and his condemnation was assured. 

I. Christ's authority was publicly asserted and exercised. In three respects 
this was now made most plain. 1. The teaching of Jesus at this time was character- 
ized by the assumption of a superiority of knowledge and insight which must have 
been galling to the pride of his questioners, and which they may have deemed 
altogether arrogant. 2. His public entry into Jerusalem in a kind of kingly state 
must have aroused their hostility ; for, without courting their favour or support, he 
took to himself the homage due to the King of Isiael. 3. His cleansing of the temple 
was an authoritative act, which was felt all the more acutely by his enemies as an 
attack upon themselves, because their own practices were rebuked and their owa 



128 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINQ TO ST, MARK, [oh.xi.1— Sa 

credit was threatenod, not to say that the base gains of some of them were imperilled. 
In these respects Christ claimed and exercised a special and vast authority. 

II. Ohbist'b authority was publiclt <10B8tionbd and impugned. It is etident 
that it was a formal deputation which surrounded him in the temple, and sought to 
overawe and silence him by the question which they put : " By what authority doest 
thou these things ? and who gave it thee ? " There was on their part the assumption 
of their own judicial right to inquire, to silence, to condemn. They had acted in a 
very similar manner with respect to John the Baptist. To us this deputation, and iti 
inquisitorial proceedins;s, are interesting, because they ooncluKively establish the fact 
that the Lord Jesus did claim to act as none other acted, and thus aroused the hostility 
of his unsympathiziug and unspiritual foes. 

III. Chkist'b authority was publicly vindioatbd by himself. The way in 
which he did this is remarkable. 1. Why did not Jesus directly account for his actions 
to the priests, scribes, and elders ? Because he had done no wrong ; in the acts he had 
publicly performed there was nothing for which they dared expressly to impugn him. 
Beoaitse they themselves had corruptly suffered and justified one of the evils which hs 
had redressed. To this their conscience testified. Because, being unable to defend their 
own position, they could not be allowed to attack his. Because, above all, being what 
he was, he was not accountable, either to them or to others, for his actions. 2. Why 
did Jesus vindicate himself by retorting upon bis assailants? by reducing them to 
helpless silence ? Because he thus made evident the agreement between John's 
ministry and his own. It was well known that John had confessed Jesus to be the 
One who should come, the Messiah. Jesus appealed to John's witness, at the same 
time claiming to have greater witness than that of John. Because he thus exhibited 
the utter incompetency of his enemies to judge his claims. They were not prepared 
publicly either to avow or to disavow sympathy with, confidence in, the ministry of 
the great forerunner. How, then, could any stress be laid upon their judgment with 
respect to him to whom John had witnessed ? 3. What was the effect of this method 
of dealing with his assailants? It is evident that the leaders of the Jews were 
discredited and put to shame. It is equally evident that the minds of the people weM 
influenced in Christ's favour. But, above all, the true, proper, underived, and incom- 
parable authority of Christ shines forth in unrivalled brightness and beauty. The 
surf beats upon the rock, but it falls off, powerless and defeated; whilst the rock stands 
out in its rugged and impressive grandeur, its stability appearing all the more mani- 
festly immovable because of the feebleness and vanity of the repeated uid furious 
assaults of the tempestuous sea. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1 — 11. — 77ie triumphal eniry into Jerusalem. " To Jerusalem, to Bethphage 
and Bethany," the order of mention being determined by reckoning from the place 
whither the movement was being made. They began, therefore, with Bethany. It 
was familiar ground, fragrant with tender associations with both the human and the 
iJivine. 

L Preparations. The triumph was foreseen by Christ, and he made arrangements 
for its being celebrated with becoming order and dignity. 1. The unforeseen and 
imexpected was foreseen and- prepared for by Christ. If Divine advents are delayed, or 
Divine celebrations fail of their loftiest end, it is not because of failure or unreadiness 
in him. He was willing to have made this triumph a real, permanent, and universal 
one. He is ever in advance of the event, whether it be a triumph or ?. crucifixion. 
Above all, he was ready in himself. 2. It was to his own disciples he looked for the 
supply of what was reqmredfor his triumph. He appealed to their recognition of his 
authority — " the Lord." The claim was allowed by the stranger who owned the colt, 
It was freely given when asked. Christians are to make ready for their Lord's 
triumph. They have all that he needs, if it be but freely rendered. He will throne 
himself amidst their gilts if they have him enthroned in their hearts. Nothing but 
what is freely rendered is acceptable to him or desired by him. It should be enough 
for a disciple to know what the Lord will have him do and of what the Lord ha* need. 



OH. XL 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. 129 

n. The triubcph. It was a simple procession, gradually increasing in volume «nd 
excitement as it approaclied the city. 1. The nuivement was natural and spontantout. 
No signs of getting it up. The enthusiasm it expressed already existed. Direction 
and order were imparted, but the motive was self-developed. 2. It was of a predomi- 
nantly spiritual character. The attraction did not lie in the accessories, but in the 
central Figure. Never had the native glory of the Messiah been so manifest. Tka 
Jews, had they only known, were on the verge of an apocalypse, which only depended 
upon their spiritual preparedness. " Meeknesa is nobler and mightier than force, good- 
ness than grandeur " (Godwin). 3. It teas a manifest fulfilment of prophecy. The 
people were conscious of it as they shouted. Their woras are a quotation from Pa. cxriii. 
"(1) 'Hosanna!' The word was a Hebrew imperative, ' Save us, we beseech thee,' 
and had come into liturgical use from Ps. cxviii. That psalm belonged specially to 
the Feast of Tabernacles, and as such was naturally associated with the palm 
branches ; the verses from it now chanted by the people are said to have been those 
with which the inhabitants of Jerusalem were wont to welcome the pilgrims who 
came up to keep the feast. The addition of ' Hosanna to the Son of David' made it 
a direct recognition of the claims of Jesus to be the Christ ; that of ' Hosanna in the 
highest ' (oomp. Luke ii. 14) claimed heaven as in accord with earth in this recogni- 
tion. (2) 'Blessed be ['the King,' in St. Luke] he that cometh in the Name of 
the Lord.' These words, too, received a special, personal application. The welcome 
was now given, not to the crowd of pilgrims, but to the King. (3) As in St. Luke, one 
of the cries was an echo of the angels' hymn at the Nativity, ' Peace on earth, and 
glory in the highest ' (Luke ii. 14). (4) As in St. Mark, ' Blessed be the kingdom of 
our father David.' We have to think of these shouts as filling the air as he rides 
slowly on in silence. He will not check them at the bidding of the Pharisees (Luke 
xiz. 39), but his own spirit is filled with quite other thoughts than theirs " (Plump- 
tre). Tet, because of the unpreparedness of the people, the fulfilment was only pro- 
visional, not ultimate ; typical, not actual. Jn its spiritual idea, its universal iniluenca 
("all the city was moved"), its spontaneous acclaim, it spoke of that which is to 
come; in its outwardness, its question, "Who is this?" and answer, "This is Jesu^ 
the Prophet of Nazareth of Galilee," its readiness to pass from praise to execration, 
it showed how distant the people were from the true realization. 

IIL CuLHiNATiNO BOVEBEIONTT. 1. Seen in the destination to which he came. "He 
entered the temple." He is Priest as well as King. " Yet have I set my King upon my 
holy hill of Zion" (Ps. ii. 6). It is from the holy place that his rule extends ; and 
there it begins, and is most intensely and specially exercised. He is Key to aU the 
mysteries there ; Centre of all the symbols and rites. This suggests that his reign is 
primarily and essentially a spiritual one. As King of saints he reigns in the earth. 
2. Expressed and exercised in a " look." " He looked round about upon all things." 
" Not simply as one might gaze who had never been there before : an arbitrary and 
wanton idea ; but as one who had a right to inspect the condition of the place, and 
who was determined to assert and exercise that right " (Morison). So is he Lord of 
that temple not made with hands — the body in which he dwelt, and the spirit in 
which he offered the eternal sacrifice ; and so will he take account of the secrets of 
human nature in the great day, for is he not " the Son of man " ? — M. 

Ver. 8.—" The Lord hath need of him.'' How singular the conjunction! Need of a 
coltl In what sense was such a creature necessary for the Lord of all? In what 
sense is anything created necessary to the Creator ? As showing forth his glory, and 
fulfilling his purposes. 

I. The lowliest things hate some hioh purpose, or oapacitt or oLOBiFrnra OoD. 

II. Ih some amouMSTANCES the lowi/Iest things mat exolitbivblt ob moke 

KTTINOI.T EXPRESS A CERTAIN PHASE OP THE DiVINE GLOBT. What clsC COuld SO Set 

forth the meekness, the lowliness, of the Son of man ? or the privilege and freedom of 
the young Church, of which he was the only burden and law ? In that colt the brute 
world had its most honoured representative. So in human poverty, simplicity, weak- 
ness, and ignorance, the glory of God may be shown forth the more conspicuously. 

III. Let us look tor asx> give efpeot to the globt or Christ, Ls. op Qtam, at 

iXIi THINGS. 

MASK — XL X 



130 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. to. 1—33. 

rV. A FOBTIOEI LET TIB OFrBR OTTB OWN SELVES, SO GLORIOUSLY ENDOWED, IS PBB- 
•ONAL 00N8E0BATI0N AND EFFORT FOB THE OLOBT OF GOD. If he had need fOT a 

colt, we cannot say he has no need for us. — M. 

Ver. 11. — JesuB twrveying the temple. L A bmn of authoeitt. Supreme, abso- 
lute, spiritual. 

IL An biebcisb of jttdgment. Inward, unerring, and from the highest stand- 
point. 

III. Ah EXPRESSION OF GRIEF AND DISAPPOINTMENT. There is nothing upon which 
the look can rest with approval and satisfaction. It goes round, but returns not. It 
goes through and beyond. The temple in its condition was symbolical of the people. 

IV. A TOKEN OF FORBEARING MBRCT. Only a look, for the present. He has it not 
in his heart to inflict the final stroke at once. He will wait. A day of grace is stiU 
Wt. Is this our case — as a Church ? as individuals ? — M. 

Vers. 12 — 14, 20 — 25. — TJie destruction of the fig tree. I. The sufficient 
REASON FOR THE AOT. 1. Not an outcome of petulance or disappointment. The idea 
of Christ being " in a temper " is preposterous ! The difficulty as to the phrases, " if 
haply he might find anything thereon," and " he found nothing but leaves ; for it was 
not the season of figs," is for the most part factitious and artificial. Our Lord was not 
mistaken — ^first expectant and then disappointed. " He came to the tree, not for the 
sake of eating, but for the sake of performing an adumbrative action (sed aliquid 
praeflgurandi causa) " (Zuingli). " His hunger, too, was the occasion that gave shape 
to his adumbrative action, when he went to the leafy tree to see if there was fruit 
on it " (Morison). 2. But neither was it an action symlolizing the penalty of spiritual 
larrenness. Its proximity in spirit and time to the cleansing of the temple inclines 
the mind to a parabolic meaning in that direction ; so also Peter's strong word 
" cursedst," which seems at first to convey an impression of moral displeasure. As a 
merely natural incident, it is hard to reduce the disproportion it exhibits between the 
apparently judicial sentence and its occasion. On the other hand, it is harder still to 
explain Christ's total silence as to the reference to spiritual barrenness and its penalty, 
if such a reference had ever been intended. The circumstance that a day intervened 
between the sentence of Christ and Peter's noting the result, would seem to demand 
th«t the Master should have " pointed the moral " in some more manifest way. Again, 
what he did teach concerning the occurrence, so far as it has been preserved, suggests 
that the action was "adumbrative" in a simpler and more direct sense, of that, 
namely, of which he spoke — the power of Ood commanded through faith. " The sig- 
nificance of this event is different from that of the parable given by St. Luke (xiii. 6), 
to show the doom of impenitence. In that, the fig tree was planted in a vineyard ; 
everything was done for its culture that could be done ; and not till after years of 
barrenness was it cut down. Here the fig tree was growing by the road ; it belonged 
to no one, and nothing had been done for its improvement ; and it was destroyed when 
its .uselessness was made manifest. It was fruitless, because the fruit season had not 
come, and no old fruit remained on the branches. It was, therefore, not a fit emblem 
of the impenitent Jews. But the destruction of a senseless and worthless thing made 
known the power of Christ, as sufiScient to destroy, though used only to restore " (God- 
win, ' Matthew '). As illustrative of Divine power it was splendidly significant. To 
wither was within the power of any one, but to wither by a word was a supernatural 
act only possible to one in closest fellowship with God. 

II. Christ's own application of the incident. " Have faith in God." 1. Greater 
results than it are attained hy his servants \f they will hut believe. (1) In doing. The 
words " shall say unto this mountain," etc., are figurative. A magnificent promise ! Not 
only such an act as the withering of the fig tree, but one comparable to the uprooting 
of the Mount of Olives on which it grew (against which, by the way, there could surely 
he no "judicial resentment" even in the most metaphorical sense). It is spoken of 
moral and spiritual difBculties met with in fulfilling the great commission, or in 
individual spiritual growth. (2) In receiving. Here the whole doctrine of prayer 
came up again for review. The answer was not to be merely looked forward to as 
coming, or even imminent, but was to be realized as already fulfilling itself in present 



BH. XI. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. 181 

experience. A Becret of intense and successful devotion. 8. The ground of aU tuck 
power is moral and spiritual oneness with God. The general conditions of prayer being 
answered, viz. agreeableness to the Divine will, advantage of the kingdom of Gk>d, etc., 
are all supposed. But, in addition, the boon of forgiveness is chiefly referred to aa 
of greatest moment ; and, in connection with it, the necessity of a forgiving disposition 
in the petitioner, as a condition of his being answered. This is one of the highest 
phases of spiritual or moral power, and is only possible through partaking of the Divin* 
Spirit, in other words, through oneness with God. — M. 

Vers. 15 — 19. — Jesus cleansing the temple, A second occasion ; the first occurring at 
the beginning of his ministry (John ii. 13 — 17). A fulfilment of Mai. iiL 1, 2. 

I. There is a tendency in the most sacred institutions to decay and abubb. 
Most of the abominations swept away by Christ had their origin in immemorial custom, 
and the demands of the worshippers themselves. TrafBc came to assume a religious 
character, and gain was excused on account of ceremonial exigencies and conveniences. 
This tendency recurs and culminates. How suggestivs the contrast— "a house of 
prayer," " a den of thieves " 1 

U. This is due to losing bight of the obioinal sfikit and fubfosr. The essence 
of the old worship was simple, personal devotion, of which rites and sacrifices were 
only of use as the expression. Through the intrusion of the business spirit, the latter 
CAme to be re<:arded as important for their own sake. 

in. Jrsus Christ is the chief Author and Eestobeb of pubk wobship. This act 
of Christ is in peifect accord with his whole character and life. It but expresses 
his spirit and influence. Every reform or advance of the Church b due to his 
agency, 

IV. He bffectb this through his Spibit, and the revelation he makes of the 

CHABACTEB OF GoD AND THE SIGNIFICANCE OF SACRED THINGS. The original purpOSe 

of the temple is restated, and he emphasizes the spiritual side of worship. It is to 
pray, to commune with onr Father, we go up into the temple. Everything which 
interferes with or corrupts that simple motive, is an abuse and an evil. The gospel, 
in recalling men to a sense of righteousness and the love of God, creates the prayer- 
spirit. And the Holy Ghost sustains the communion thus established. From time to 
time the Spirit takes of the things of QroA and reveals them afresh, making fresh 
advents to the heart, and kindling the flame of zeal and love. 

V. EeFOEMING zeal, in PROPORTION TO ITS SPIKITUALITT AND ENLIGHTENMENT, WILL 
PROVOKE HATRED AND OPPOSITION IN THOSE WHOSE INTERESTS ARE THREATENED ; BUT 
THERE WILL EVER BE OTHERS BY WHOM IT WILL BE WELCOMED. Those wllO are 

interested in the status quo will resent interference with it. Priestly importance and 
the spirit of selfishness are potent antagonists to true worship. But the " multitude " 
has within it ever some who yearn after better things. The human longing after tho 
Divine is enshrined in the common heart of man. — M. 

Ver. 17. — The Chwreh — ideal and actuail. I. The Chubch in its ideal. As viewed 
under this aspect it has ; 1. A, two/old character. (Isa. Ivi. 7.) (1) A house of prayer. 
This recognition of a spiritual end to be secured by the institution of the temple is 
most remarkable, as having taken place in an era of ceremonialism. It is not a priestly 
but a prophetic point of view, in which details are lost sight of in the inward and 
eternal. The temple was to be " called a house of prayer " as indicative not of a 
special but rather of an exclusive purpose; any other being a transgression and an 
offence. It was to be set apart for the most sacred occupations of the soul — intercourse 
and communion with God. An emphasis was thereby given to the Divine side of life. 
Men were to seek the presence of God that they might receive his grace and truth. 
A space was marked off from the business and secularities of life, so that, undisturbed 
from without, and aided by all the circumstances of devotion, the higher nature might 
be called forth and educated. Instead of worldly cares and competitions distractingthe 
worshippers, they were to be engrossed for a while with their Father's business. How 
important is this witness of the Church to the claims of the unseen and eternal 1 It is 
the sphere within which the highest exercise of human faculties may take place, and 
the noblest life may be laid hold oL There may be no immediate demand for what U 



132 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. xi. 1—33, 

proTld«a, yet does it minister to the deepest aad most lasting human needs. (2) Th« 
■piritual home of mankiud. The defect of Judaism was that it was too national and 
exclasive: all that was to cease. From the eaillest times the universality of th« 
Divine grace was declared hy the prophets. Even from within a principle of expansion 
began to discover itself. The presence of the " stranger " within the camp led to the 
recognition of the " proselytes of the gate," and by-and-by to the institution of the 
" court of the Gentiles " in the temple itself. The fundamental doctrine of Jehovah 
itself implied such an intention as ultimate if not immediate, for before him there was 
no respect of persons, and he was the Father of all. The promises, too, were all 
couched in terms that precluded a merely local or temporary enjoyment of theii 
blessings. Even as taught in the Old Testament the doctrine of election is declared to 
be a temporary provision for the benefit of others besides the elect. The chief end of 
the temple, or the Church which it represented, could not be secured save by the 
conversion of" the world to the knowledge of Jehovah, and the spiritual coming of 
mankind to Zion. It is therefore the great mission of Christianity, as the spiritual 
successor of Judaism, to give effect to this. The Church is a witness to the oneness 
of the race in its origin and destiny, and the great foster-mother of mankind. Through 
her charity, and not by mechanical necessities or material interests, is the unity of 
the world to be realized. 2. T%ia two/old intention of the Church is certain to be 
fulfilled. As we have seen, it is (1) the Divine purpose : everything God wills will be ; 
and (2) the genius of Christianity. If Judaism declared a universal brotherhood, 
Christianity is that brotherhood. It teaches us to say, " Our Father," and realizes itself 
in the communion of saints. The Church is not an end in itself but is for the world. 
Christianity is nothing if it is not evangelistic and aggressive. 

II. The Chuech in its corruption. In the mean time what God intended has been 
frustrated by tbe worldliness of men. The consequence has been : 1. A complete contra- 
diction to its original purpose. Even in Jeremiah's day the epithet, " a den of thieves," 
could be applied to it (Jer. TiL 11) ; so soon does spiritual decay run to its term ! 
That which was meant to be a universal good became a universal curse. The abuse 
of sacred things is ever the most mischievous of all abuses. Instead of Divine charity, 
human selfishness : the wrangling and violence of robbers where the peace of God was 
to be looked for. The contrast is utter, but the transition is easy and natural. The 
very extension of Judaism, outstripping as it did the expansion of affection in its 
members, sufficed to ensure its corruption. Worshippers came from distant places to 
offer sacrifice, and being unable to bring animals with them for the purpose, they 
■ought for them on the spot. Gradually, therefore, the courts of the temple were 
Invaded by cattle-dealers and their herds. Another inconvenience was felt in the 
difficulty of exchanging foreign money for the sacred coin which could alone be 
accepted in the treasury. Here the money-changer stepped in. The whole process 
was gradual and easily explained ; but the result was none the less an evil, which 
required to be sternly corrected. Kor can Christians plead innocence of this sin. 
"The histoi-y of Christian Churches," says Plumptre, " has not been altogether without 
parallels that may help us to understand how such a desecration came to be permitted. 
Those who remember the state of the great cathedral of London, as painted in the 
literature of Elizabeth and James, when mules and horses, laden with market produce, 
were led through St. Paul's as a matter of every-day occurrence, and bargains were 
■truck ther-e, and burglaries planned, and servants hired, and profligate assignations 
made and kept, will feel that even Christian and Protestant England has hardly the 
right to cast a stone at the priests and people of Jerusalem." It is a great deal, 
however, when it is recognized that this is not the purpose for which the sanctuary has 
been hallowed, and the lesson of the past is surely that of a constant watchfulness against 
insidious abuses, and above all of the need of a deeper and more continuous consecra- 
tion of the worshippers themselves. 2. Divine anger and r^ection. The wrath of the 
Lord of the temple was typical for all time. Aa the temple, so the Church or th* 
■onl which defiles itself will be visited by penal consequences. Sacred names and 
ceremonies will not consecrate vile ends. There is nothing more abhorrent to God than 
the travesty of nligion, the seeking of gain imder the miuk of godliness. — M. 

T919. 27— 33. — Ohrisf* authority challenged and de/enifed. This was • necessar;^ 



w. M. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOSDItTG TO ST. MARK. 1« 

consequence of his action in the cleansing of the temple. By «o doing he claimed to 
be the Judge of things religious and sacred, and to direct the conscience of man. 

I. The cltuate qubbtion bbtvebn Chbist and the belioious btbteus aid 
KBTITUTIONB OF MEN IB ONE OF AUTHORITY. Only direct Divine sanction, or a higher 
iruth vindicating itself at the bar of reason and conscience, or in the field of experience, 
can justify the attitude of Christ and his religion towards the religions and superstitioni 
•f men. Arbitrary assumption will soon betray itself, and the spiritual nature of man 
must be satisfied. This question of authority is sure to be raised sooner or later by 
the upholders of the systems and beliefs Christianity impugns. And Christians are 
counselled to " give a reason of the hope that is in " them. 

II. To ALL OBNOIKB INQUIBEES CHBISTIANITT PBBSBNTS A BUITIOIBNCT OF BVIDBNOE. 

1. The life and works of Christ are his justification. They prove him "sent from 
God." The evidence upon which our belief ia these is based is as strong, at least, as 
for any other historic matter. 2. The experience of the operation of Christian doctrine 
and practice in the ages subsequent to the Cross. 3. The immediate witness of the 
conscience and the heart. With the first and the third of these the temple authoritie* 
were already conversant. 

III. Htpooritioal and illegitimate inquieibb into the authoritt of Christ ob 
BIS servants mat be resisted and exposed. 1. Christ knew the motives of hit 
inquisitors. 2. He placed them in a false position in order to expose these to themselves 
and others. 3. All Divine revelations have similar evidence, and stand or fall together. 
Had they believed John, they would have believed Jesus. As they believed neither, it 
must have been because they hated the truth. It was for the interests of true religion 
that this fact should be made evident. He proceeded to prove the traditional 
unrighteousness of the Jewish people and their leaders in a series of " parables " or 
similitudes, which were at the same time so many appeals to conscience. (It would be 
well for the preacher to remark upon the unbroken consecution of cb. xL and zii. in tbe 
ipoken discourse of Christ.)— M. 

Vers. 1—3. — Jesus the King. On the occasion described In these verses Jesus 
assumed kingly authority. Loved as a Friend, revered as a Teacher, and followed as a 
Worker of miracles, he now declared Ids kingliness, and demanded obedience and 
homage. Therein he taught us, his subjects, some lessons. 

I. As A Emo, Jesus bbquibes absolute obbdienoe. To the two disciples this 
command must have appeared strange. After finding the animal denoted, they were 
not to ask for it, but to take it; and if their action was questioned they were 
merely to say, " The Lord hath need of him." If it belonged to a foe, some might 
arrest or assail them for robbery. It was not the first occasion, however, on which they 
simply obeyed, Christ had a right to their absolute obedience, and their faith was 
tested by this demand upon it. Unquestioning obedience to truth and to duty is far 
too rare. We want to see the reasons for a command, the probable issues of it, and 
when we see neither too often we withhold obedience. Peril from this is now more 
frequent, because authority as such is weakened on all sides. Children in the home, 
which is the true sphere for the cultivation of obedience, are too often allowed to question 
when they ought to be told to obey. If we are sure of duty as followers of Jesus 
Christ, we must be regardless of consequences. He anticipates our difficulties, as he 
foresaw the question of the owner of the colt. He asks us to take one step, and to 
ti^e it boldly, although we do not see what the next will be, nor whither it may lead 
VM, If we go on to the Bed Sea, it will afford us a path of safety and cut off our foes 
from following us. If an angel rouses us from sleep, and we arise and follow him, the 
great iron gate we cannot stir will open to us of its own accord. 

IL Ab A Kino, Jesus claims the ubb of all that hb bequirbb. We forget that 
we are not the absolute owners of anything. All we have is held in trust; but our 
seeming possession tests our disposition, and helps to develop character. If we wish 
to prove the honesty of a servant, and let his skill in management grow, we do not 
give him a amall sum each day, and check and watch him till the evening, and then 
expect a strict account. No ; we put a large sum at his disposal, and " after a long time ' 
reckon with him, with the result, that if he has been faithful he has increased hia 
«mital and his fitness. Bo G^ puts at our disposal wealth, talents, etc., in tha hops 



ta TttE GOSPEL ACCOftDlJra To ST. MAEK. [m. 3a 1-33 



that for our own Bake we will use all loyally for him, Christ Jesns, during hit 
ministry, was as one " having nothing, and yet possessing all things." No colt was 
his, but one was there, and when its owner heard " Thu Lord hath need of him," it was 
ready for the Lord's use. The message sent to that man, when it comes home to out 
hearts, should silence sU objections to the making of effort or sacrifice. If we have to 
give up some luxury so as to help the poor, if we have to sacrifice leisure that is 
hardly earned to teach the ignorant, if we have to part with one who is dear to us, our 
anger and defiance will be quieted when we say to ourselves, " The Lord hath need of 
them." The owner was perhaps a secret disciple. The Lord knew him, although the 
apostles did not. Now, after loving Jesus quietly, the opportunity for showing his love 
was suddenly proffered, and he gladly gave what he could. Christ asks of us, as he 
asked of him, what is possible and reasonable ; and instead of waiting to do something 
great, let us do what we can, and that which is mean in itself will be hallowed and 
glorified when used by our Lord. 

III. As A King, Jesus exeboises a spiritual rule. Until now his kingliness had 
been concealed except from the nearest and dearest disciples. On this occasion it was 
declared. Yet the s[iiritual nature of that kingliness was so evident in his dress, in the 
animal he bestrode, and in his attendants, that when a few days afterwards he was 
charged with calling himself a King, no reference was made to this incident before 
llerod or Pilate. Such is the nature of his kingdom stilL His sovereignty is not 
advanced by material force or by worldly cunning. To him, as a spiritual Ruler, gifts 
do not take the place of earnest prayer ; nor is attendance on the means of grace a 
substitute for fellowship of soul with Grod. His kingdom was inaugurated by death; it 
was founded on a grave ; it was built up by the Spirit, " that the excellency of the 
power may be of God, and not of us." Hence he approached Jerusalem, not on the 
war-horse of the conqueror, but on an ass, on which rode messengers of peace ; as if he 
were determined that he would not come in judgment till to the last love had been 
tried. Thus he comes to us, in quiet suggestions, in holy desires, in tears, and prayers : 
but hereafter he will come in power and great glory, fulfilling the vision St, Jolu 
saw of One upon the white horse, going forth conquering, and to conquer. — A. R. 

Vera. 8—10. — Palm Sunday. We sometimes wonder that the greatest Teacher, the 
divinest Master the world ever saw, was so little recognized during his ministry. Our 
surprise would be lessened if we fairly put ourselves in the position of his contem- 
poraries. Suppose news came to our metropolis that in a distant hamlet, among working 
people, a child had been born, and that rumours of portents accompanying his birth found 
&vonr in that country-side. Suppose that, as years rolled on, it was reported that this 
child, now a man, had done some marvellous works ; and that, after several visits to the 
city, he came into it accompanied by his followers, chiefly peasants, neither learned nor 
wealthy. The probabilities are that although some might know him to be a great 
teacher, a man of unquestioned holiness and of astonishing pretensions, the hum of 
business would not be hushed for a moment, and few would turn aside to see his festal 
procession. 

' L The weloohe given to Jesus. 1. His welcome would have &een more epeedy and 
general had he come differently. All through his ministry we find evidence of that. 
There was eagerness for a Messiah of a certain type. A promise to restore the theocracy, 
and overthrow the Boman tyranny, would have been hailed with a unanimous shout of 
delight. But our Lord would not be content, and never is, with a worldly homage, such 
4S a Christian nation, for example, offers when it calls itself by his Name, and violates bit 
principles. Unless he rules human hearts, he has no joy and the ruled no bliss. Even 
an earthly king desires real loyalty; but he cannot read men's thoughts nor see how 
In heart his flatterers despise him. If he could, how thankfully would he turn from 
the adulation of courtiers to the unsophisticated love of his children ! So our Lord 
turned from priests and, Phai;isees to the humble peasants of Galilee and the loving 
children in Jerusalem. In order to avoid false homage, Christ came, and still comes, 
quietly. He comes not with peals of thunder and visions of angels, nor even as a 
national leader appealing to popular passion and armed force ; but, in quiet thou<;hts 
and in happy Christian hom«s, he reveals himself to those seeking the truth, or 
burdened with sin. 2, £*•*> ntoh a vodwrne at thi» given <m Palm Sunday too* vnusual. 



tH. xt. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO S*f. MAfiK. 181 

His motto seemed to be, " He shall not strive, nor cry, nor cause his voice to be heard 
in the streets." Popular applause was suppressed, and even natural enthusiasm wai 
cooled. If people would take him by force to make him a king, he departed and 
did hide himself from them. If the disciples saw a glimpse of his glory on the Mount 
of Transfiguration, he said, " See that ye tell no man." His miracles were quietly 
wrought, generally with but 'few witnesses, and those blessed were often told not to 
publish it. But on this first day of the last week he wished to have an unwonted 
procession. In the crowds who had come together for the Passover all the elements of 
it were ready, if he only gave a sign of his willingness to receive it. And this he did. 
He arranged for it. He sent to the village for the young colt, and when it was brought 
he sat upon it, and allowed a simple procession to be formed, which increased in numbers 
and enthusiasm as they drew nearer to Jerusalem. 3. This exceptional scene was wisely 
ordered. (1) The memory of it would help the disciples in the dark days which ended 
that eventful week ; for they would reflect that it was not want of power, but 
want of will, which did not allow him to rouse the people in his defence. "Th« 
Good Shepherd giveth his life for the sheep." (2) Besides, it would give an oppor- 
tunity to the people to see him as the King he claimed to be, and it was possible that 
some who had resisted other influences might yield to this, and pay him homage now. 
He had come as a babe to Jerusalem, and few had loved him ; he had come as a child, 
only to be wondered at when he sat among the doctors ; he had come to the feasts, and 
scarcely any had recognized him. He had come " unto his own, and his own received him 
not." Once more, in a new way, he would draw near. He would try one more avenue 
to the closed heart before uttering the pathetic lament, " O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how 
often would I have gathered thy children . , . and ye would not ! " (3) Further, there 
was something prophetic and typical in this procession. The triumphal entry was a 
symbol of the resurrection on that day week, and of his later ascension to heaven 
amidst the hosannas of the angels. It was a prophecy also of his kingly progress 
through history, and of his second coming in glory, when all in heaven and all on earth 
will cry, " Blessed is he that cometh in the Name of the Lord ! " 

II. The crowd surrounding Jbsus. In some of those there we may »ee, perhaps, 
representatives of ourselves. 1. Enthusiasts were there. They had seen his miracles, 
and with loud hosannas spread their garments in his way. He foresaw with sad- 
ness the change that would come over them. They appplauded on Olivet, but they 
were absent from Calvary. Beware of spasmodic enthusiasm, and ask for grace to stand 
by Christ's cause in times of trouble as well as in times of triumph. 2. Foes were there. 
They kept quiet while the crowd of his followers surrounded them; but soon they 
would raise the cry, " Crucify him ! crucify him I " It is possible to " crucify the Son of 
God afresh, and put him to an open shame." 3. Disciples were there. The blind who 
had been restored, demoniacs who had been delivered, learners who had sat reverently 
at his feet. In the procession which still is following the Lord, may we find our 
place 1— A. K. 

Ver. 15. — "And Jesus went into the temple." "Jesus went into the temple." The 
act was charRCteristic and suggestive. 

I. It exemplified the distinction between his work and that of John. From 
the beginning to the end of his ministry the Baptist, so far as we know, was a stranger 
to the temple courts. John was in the wilderness, and the people from Jerusalem and 
Judsea " went out " to hear him. Christ was never apart from his people. He was not 
a "voice crying in the wilderness," but the Good Shepherd, who, instead of expecting 
his strayed sheep to seek him, came after them, to seek and to save that which was lost. 
In accordance with this, Jesus entered into the temple, or taught in the synagogues, or 
went into the homes of the people, to teach the ignorant and to bless the needy. 
Here is a distinguishing mark of the great Redeemer as contrasted with the great 
reformer ; and it is also distinctive of their work. A reformer points the way of 
rio^hteousness to those willing to walk in it. A Redeemer, by the power of his love and 
life, touches and turns the hearts of the children of men. John said in effect, " Do what 
you can in the way of moral reform." Christ in effect said, " I have come to do for you 
what you cannot do for yourselves." These ministiies are still maintained. Morality 
is uplifted to her lofty pedestal ; but, conscious of her beauty and of his failure*, the 



!9« THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MASK. [wi. m. 1— 8* 

■inner ean only s«y, " It is high, I cannot attain nnto it." Christ Jesus come* cUnnk 
amongst us from the lofty heavens, as One meek and lowly, and says, " Behold, I stand 
•t the door, and knock : if any man will open the door, I will come in to him." 

II. It illustbatbd oitb Lord's relation to thb old dispensation. He was often 
accused of setting himself against the Law. This act was one of many proofs he gave 
of the truth of his words," I came not to destroy, but to fulfil." He knew, aa others 
did not, that the work of the temple was almost done, and that it would shortly perish 
in the flames ; he knew that, though it had such marvellous material stahility, it was 
one of " the things that could he shaken," and would he removed, so that " the things 
which could not be shaken might remain." But so long as the temple remained as the 
house of God he honoured it, and encouraged his disciples to do so. He kept its 
feasts ; he taught and healed its worshippers ; he led his followers to join in its praises 
an/^ prayers and he showed the people, by this act of cleansing, that they were guilty 
U they desecrated God's appointed house of prayer. 

III. It inculcated fob all ages lessons of fobbeabahoe and fatienok. As 
followers of Christ we should learn to put up with, and to use to the utmost, what we 
know is imperfect and transient. If we see an organization which aims at what we 
approve, but which in our judgment is imperfect, and resolve to withhold our sympathy 
and support till it perfectly accords with our views, we are not following our Lord in 
this. If we recognize the faults of our fellow-Christians, and are so vexed at their folly 
that we determine to have no more fellowship or co-operation with them, we are not 
following our Lord in this. If we have attempted to reform society or to rescue a 
•inner, and have apparently failed, so that we give up all further efiijrt in despair, wa 
are not following our Lord. For once before, at the beginning of his ministry, he had 
cleansed this temple and driven forth the buyers and sellers, but the evil had reas- 
serted itself, BO that it was defiled as much aa formerly. Still patiently and hope- 
fully he cleansed it again, and made the place ring with his words of truth, and 
beautified it by his works of mercy. 

IV. It uttebed a significant eebukb to all that was false and etil. He went 
to the temple to worship, although in the crowds he saw there so few that were spiritu- 
ally in sympathy with him. But he would not allow any mistake to be made about his 
association with evil. He was not like those who are so silent about wrong-doing or 
false teaching that all around suppose that they sympathize with it. Such silence is 
guilty. If Christ saw evil he looked upon it with pain and shame, and therefore once 
niore before he left the temple, which was the scene of it, he made a bold protest and 
uttered a final rebuke. He associated with the good, but he cast out the evil. — A, B. 

Vers. 15 — 17. — Christ cleansing the temple. The acts of our Lord were not merely 
intended to accomplish an immediate result. Had they been, they were sadly ineffectual. 
If, for example, he had simply set before himself the design of clearing the temple of 
intruders, he could have secured that end more permanently than he did. But he recog- 
nized that the noblest thing is not to cut oif a public abuse, but to dry up the spring 
whence it flows, which often lies deep in the human heart. Bemedial measures are better 
than repressive legislation. When our Lord for a second time cleansed the temple, his 
main object was not to put down the abuse immediately by force, but to rebuke the sin, 
and BO to lead the people to think about it, confess, and forsake it. He wished to 
establish the principle that the temple of God should be free from worldliness, a prin- 
ciple which is capable of world-wide application. As the material temple rises t}efore 
our Tision through the mists of past years, we hail it as an image of the invisible temple 
in which the Eternal God is praised and served by his peopla. Two truths appear 
prominently in this incident. 

I. The temple of God is often dbsecbated. In considering the sins of other 
people and of other times, we are : 1. Apt to forget how naturally arid imperceptibly they 
ohtaintd place and power. The Jews easily lapsed into this desecration. The Mosaic 
eode ordained sacrifices of oxen, goats, and sheep in great numbers. In process of time 
the habits of the nation chanp;ed, so that it was no longer possible, aa it had been in the 
pastoral period, to take a victim from a flock or herd close at hand. Jerusalem was now 
a large and crowded city. Space was costly, and a large area seemed to be necessary 
vhare worihipperi eould obtain victims. In the vast tample area a )»!%• ajpaoa wm 



or. XI. 1—33.] THE OOSPBL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. MT 

available. It was close by the sacrificial altar, and not set apart for the actual worship 
«f the chosen people. If it were used for stalls and pens, a good rental would be 
Mcured which would pay for the repair and decoration of the building, and so the gloiy 
of the sanctuary would be maintained and devout worshippers accommodated. So the 
abuse grew up, amid the protests of the few and the silence of the many, and all were 
tolerating an evil which they could not openly defend. Evils have generally sprung 
up in the Church insidiously. If they had come in their hideous maturity they would 
have been repelled with horror, but they were welcomed when they came like the tiny 
child a legendary saint took on his shoulders, to find him grow so heavy as to crush 
him with his weight. Examples of this may be found in ecclesiastical history : e.g. 
papal pretensions, simony, erastianism ; all of which in their germ seemed to have about 
them something reasonable and right. 2. The root of the special evil here denounced 
wo» covetousness. Probably that was the besetting sin of the nation in our Lord's 
day. Publicans sold themselves to the tyrants of their country, because wealth was 
more to them than patriotism. Priests and Sadducees let out sites to the temple 
traders, because they would make gain of godliness, and cared more for the temple 
income than for spiritual worship. This spirit pervaded the entire nation. There was 
no sign of the splendid generosity of David, and no need, as in Moses' days, to restrain 
the people from giving. The sin appeared among the apostles. We see it in all its 
hideousness in Judas Iscariot, who betrayed his Lord for thirty pieces of silver, and then 
flung the money at the feet of the priests as they sat in the temple of God. The love 
of money Is declared to be " the root of all evil," and the statement is in harmony with 
the words of our Lord about the difficulty a rich man would find in entering hi3 king- 
dom. Show how generally such teaching is forgotten among different classes of our 
population. See the effects of this in the floating of unsound speculations in which 
the fortunes of the unwary are wrecked ; in the unfairness of men to each other in th« 
common relations of life ; in the unjust wars of aggression which the nation has some- 
times waged. The Christian Church is called upon to set an example of the opposite 
of all this, in her princely generosity and in her Christ-like self-sncrifice. 3. JTiere an 
other ways betides covetovsness hy which desecration may enter Ood'i temple. There is 
unbelief, which silences the voice of prayer in professed believers ; worldliness, which 
puts material organization in the place of spiritual power ; pride, which prevents hearty 
fellowship amongst God's people ; expediency, which usurps the throne of truth ; and 
self-indulgence, which expels self-devotion. So the temple is defiled ; for " know ye 
not that ye are the temple of God ? " Jesus Christ felt burning indignation when he 
saw the sanctuary of bis Father transformed into a place of worldly trafSc, and ha feels 
it atill as he beholds a Christian community desecrated by the power of sin. 

II. The desechated temflb mxgds Christ as its Pubifieb. We too soon get 
accustomed to evils, and tolerate them, until One mightier than ourselves alone rxa 
expel them. What priests and Levites failed to do, Jesus did, and none resisted him. 

1. Sis coming was an act of sublime eondes(;ension. It would have been far pleasant«r 
to him to go into the fields, where the sower cast his seed ; or to sul over the lake, in 
which fishermen plied their nets ; or to walk over the hillsides, on which the flowers 
whispered of his Father's love. He knew what the temple was, yet he did not forsake 
it ; but came ac^ain and again, in spite of the unreality and sin that prevailed in it. Aa 
willingly he will enter the heart or the Church, which is unworthy of his presence. 

2. ^ti coming was not such as might have been expected. The Jews had often read the 
words, " The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple," etc., but as they 
were looking heavenward the prophecy was fulfilled by the coming of this young 
Galilean Peasant. As they waited in vain for a startling advent, so some now wait for 
a special manifestation of his presence, and ignore the fact that he is already with 
them In the holy thoughts which they refuse to welcome. " Behold, there standeth 
one among you, whom ye know not." It is the realized presence of the living Christ 
which will purge the heart or the Church of evil thought and habit, and transform it 
into the temple of the Most High. May he, who is the source of spiritual power and 
heavenly purity, come amongst us and abide with us for ever 1— A, a. 

ftn. 1 — 10.— TTie royal entry into the royal city. Simple indeed are the preparation* 
for tk« futiy of Zimi'a King into his own city. " Go your way into the village that 



138 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MA.RK. [oh. ti. 1— '^S 



is over against you : and straightway as ye enter into it, ye shall find a colt tied, 
whereon no man ever yet sat ; loose him, and bring him." The long-waiting prophecy 
ia now to be fulfilled — 

" Rejoice greatly, daughter of Zion ; 

Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem : 

Behold, thy King oometh unto tliee : 

He is just, and having salvation ; 

Lowly, and riding upon an ass, 

And upon a colt the foal of an ass." 

And the daughter of Zion diii rejoice greatly. What a scene of gladness I What a 
shout of triumph I They bring the colt covered with their garments, while the way 
is prepared by the soft branches of palms scattered and loose robes cast upon the 
ground. And the lowly, mighty King enters, and the cries rend the still air. 

" Hosanna ; 
Blessed is he that cometh 
In the Name of the Lord : 
Blessed is the kingdom that cometh. 
The kingdom of our father David: 
Hosanna in the highest." 

There are times when truth bursts through all that hides it, and declares itself as the 
Bun through a rent cloud. So is it here. Without restraint the children of Israel 
proclaim their King as did Pilate when he wrote, " The King of the Jews." True, Pilate 
did not believe, nor did the shouting crowd at the gates of the city for long together. 
1'he same walls soon heard the cry, "Crucify him! crucify himl" But for the time 
the truth prevails. It is uppermost. As in the Transfiguration, the hidden glory ia 
revealed. Perhaps »noonsciously, these voices bear witness to the truth. It is a scene 
to carry in the eye, to be enf -aven on the heart. Let us learn — 

I. That tbub royalty keeds not the symbols of authobitt. It is not con- 
stituted or upheld by them ; it is not destroyed by their absence. Christianity is 
independent of external support. 

II. That immutable tktjth will sooner or later assert itself. Tea, though 
it may be rejected, it will leave its testimony for following ages of faith and unbelief 
to ponder according to their respective needs. 

III. That the real and permanent Ruler is he who cometh in the Name of 
THE Lord. Other kings and other kingdoms will rise in a temporary prevalence of 
power, and fall into dark oblivion and disgrace. But the true will quietly assume its 
rightful place, whether men accept or reject. Jesus is a King. " To this end have I 
been boin." Jesus is " King of the Jews," though their priests cry aloud, " We have 
no king but Csesar." Jesus is the King of kings. But the kingdom is " not of this 
world," nor will it pass away as the kingdoms of this world. It abideth for ever. And 
happy is the man who is a true and faithful subject under this heavenly reign. — Q. 

Vers. 11 — 25. — The barren Jig tree. How changed is the scene 1 The great King 
entered into the royal city, and the great High Priest into the holy temple. Then — O 
significant words 1 — " he looked round about upon all things." Alas, what scenes 
caught those calm eyes I In the eventide he left Jerusalem, accompanied only by the 
twelve. On the morrow, returning again to Jerusalem from Bethany, where ho had 
spent the night, " he hungered." A mere touch of the pen discloses a link of connection 
between him and every one who in hunger seeks and has not his daily bread. But a 
" % tree having leaves " from " afar " attracts his keen sight, and " he came, if haply ho 
might find anything thereon," as the leaves which usually appear after the fruit promised. 
Alas, his hope is mocked 1 " He found nothing but leaves." Then he, who giveth nature 
its greenness, who maketh the fig tree to blossom, and hangeth the fruit on the vine and 
>he olive, uttered his "curse" in prohibiting it to minister any more to the wants of 
man. The morrow finds it " withered away." There were watching disciples for whose 
use this and the other trees grew in the great garden, and this must be used for their 
highest good. By it he will impress upon their hearts a solemn truth. It is t 



OB. XL 1—33.1 TSE GOSPEL ACCORmNa TO ST. MARK. 139 

paraHe enacted. But the parable goes iinexpounded, while a great lesson on faith in 
God is given. By common consent, this withered tree conveys a deep teaching on 
immature professions. Following so immediately after the jubilant cry of yestenlay, 
it seems to speak in condemnation of that all too hasty and untrustworthy demon- 
stration, those shouts of welcome to the King of Jerusalem which would be so Boon 
exchanged for the cry of repudiation, " We have no king but Caesar." The strength of 
the tree is exhausted in the immature foliage. This seems to point to tlie immature 
haste of profession made by them who cried " Hosanna ! " and who would show how vain 
the hopes would be that relied upon that cry, for in a few days it would be exchanged 
for " Crucify him I " It was the one visible curse of him who in reality curses everything 
that is false and pretentious. Significantly it is related, "and his disciples heard it." 
The morrow declares that the Lord's word is a word of power, as the drooping leaves 
and dried-up branches and trunk, even " from the roots," declare. Peter's exclamation 
draws forth from the Master a profound reply, which seems designed to lead the 
thoughts of the disciples away from all that is false, unreal, and untrue, on which they 
may not place their hope, to him who is worthy of their faith, and who never dis- 
appoints them that trust in him. Henceforth this fig tree stands before us as — 

I. A SYMBOL OF INSINCERITY, Or of that uncultured strength which is presumption. 

II. A SIGN OP THE DELUSION AND DISAPPOINTMENT WHICH MUST FOLLOW FBOM TRUST 

IH EMPTY, UNNATURAL BOASTS AND PROMISES. Many are dependent upon, or at least 
influenced by, the professions of others. There are weak souls that lean upon stronger 
ones for support, who are comforted and strengthened by their fidelity, or led astray 
by their dejection. 

III. Therefore this must be a solemn warning and admonition to ail to trust 
IN THE trustworthy. And in this case, perhaps, not to commit themselves to the 
friil, unworthy cry of an excited multitude, but to have calm faith in God, who can 
sweep away the false and delusive, the weak and fruitless fig tree, and with equal ease the 
firmly rooted mountain from its place. The " mountain " may have found its antitype 
in the firmly fixed power that waged its opposition to the world's Eeileemer, and would 
soon hang him on a tree. That which could not satisfy the hunger, and that which 
could crush and overwhelm the King, were equally amenable, as is every mountain and 
every deceitful thing to the mighty power of God, invoked by a faith held in a true 
spirit. — G. 

Vers. 15—18. — The cleansing of the temple. Jesus came to " bear witness unto 
the truth." One truth was the sanctity of that " house of prayer " which was opened 
for "all the nations." But have the rightful guardians of that house preserved for 
it this ucredness, that the feet of the wearied and the heart of the sorrowful of all 
nations might be allured within its hallowed walls, where in humble penitence and 
prayer, and with strong cries to the God of heaven and earth, they might find rest and 
peace and shelter? Nay, verily. Cruel covetousness has let out the sacred enclosure 
for gainful purposes. The love of money, the root of this evil, has led men to sell 
God's house to purposes of merchandise; and, if worse could be, to trickery and 
thieving. Ah, they robbed God of his lightful honour ; and they robbed the poor, and 
the sorrowful, and the homeless, and the heart-sick, and tbs sin-sick, of the one place of 
refuge where they might find peace and healing and rest 1 They turned the "house of 
prayer " into " a den of robbers." In the place where men might seek heavenly bless- 
ing, they filched earthly pelf. Sin is great in proportion te its nearness to the restraints 
of righteousness. How great, then, was this I Their cry was, " This is the place for 
money-changers and barterers, for pilferers and thieves." So great a lie must be 
contradicted by " the Truth ; " even if he lose his life in doing it. The true fire burns 
in his breast : he cannot be silent. The zeal of the Lord consumes him. He takes 
advantage of the popular enthusiasm which now for a time runs in his favour. The 
astonished multitude " hung upon him, listening." And though he needs not their 
help, yet he disappoints not their hope. He put forth his own regal authority, and 
with his word and holy hands " cast out " the traders, " overthrew " the tables oi 
"the money-changers," and refused to allow men to desecrate tht holy pavement by 
carrying burdens over it. Nor would he " suffer that any man should carry a vesse' 
tbrougb the teia]ple." It might be asked— How could he do this single-handed t 



Uf) THE GOSPEL ACCOEDmG TO ST. MARK. [oh. xl 1—33. 

Apart from that Divine power which now and again he restrained not, "the chief 
priests and the scribes feared him," and the multitude stood " astonished at his teaching." 
Gowardics and guilt are always staggered at religious enthusiasm. In this incident we 
may learn — 

I. CHBIBT'b DEFEKCE of the 8A0BEDNES8 OF FLAOKB DEDICATED TO PITBPOIEB OF 

WORSHIP. It is his high testimony to the efficacy of prayer, that the very place where 
it is offered is holy ground. If all places are holy in his view, all are not to be used 
indiscriminately. There is an appropriate place for each work. And sacred places 
are devoted to sacred acts. This is here declared to be according to Christ's will, 

II. Cheist's dbclaeation that the intbusion op babthlt apfaibs into thb 

HOUSE OF THE LORD IS A WICKED AND UNWARRANTABLE DESECRATION. HoW StrOUgly 

this speaks against intruding worldly thoughts into acts of Divine worship, and 
worldly motives into holy service I He who " set a bound for the waters that they may 
not pass over," has forbidden the trespass upon the threshold of his house of anything 
that is " of the earth, earthy." 

ni. With a view to the encouragement of prayer among all the nations, the eoubk 
OP THE Lord is oonsboratbd for them to this purpose. It caunot, however, be 
that only one house should be opened. It is, therefore, the; house in every nation that 
is so opened is consecrated and sacred whither the tribes of men may go up to offer 
warship and service, to present the sacrifice of song, to seek help and rest and mercy. 

IV. But through all the teaching tliere runs a deeper truth : the cleansed and 

CONSECRATED TEMPLE OP THE HEART WHERE THE LoED IS TRULY WORSHIPPED MUST 

BE PRESERVED FREE FROM CORRUPT DESECRATION. The hidden place, the quiet 
solitudes of the soul where prayer is to be truly made, may not be polluted by trickery 
and deceit. And the very consecration of it as a temple where God may be approached 
declares that it need not be a place of burdens ; for he will speak the word of faith and 
peace, will ease and comfort the troubled, will give rest to the weary, and solace and 
salvation to the tempted and tried. Happy the man whose heart is a pure temple of 
Godl-G. 

Venu 1—11. — TTie symbolic triumph. L The assumption of authobitt bt Chbibt. 
fle issues his mandate, as having a pre-emption or right to be served before all others. 
The act was the more impressive because standing out in rare contrast to the ordinary 
tenor of Christ's conduct. 

n. Thb mild pomp of his entry. He is acknowledged with loyal shouts as King 
and Lord. Hosanna is "Save nowl" The words of acclamation are cited from a 
" Hallelujah " psalm (cxviii. 25, 26), which both celebrates and foretells deliverance. 
His kingdom prevails by truth, meekness, and love. May " his unsuffering kingdom " 
come I 

III. THK acceptance of THE POSITION ABSIONED HIM IN PROPHECY. He hi the 

predicted King and Saviour, the Bepresentative of God upon earth. Thus in this ■ 
cheerful, humble scene of instructive, popular gladness, and rejoicing, we have an 
emblem of the progress of Christianity through the world. — J. 

Vers. 12—19. — Ooire liou$e vindicated. The temple was designed ab a reliqioub 
CENTRE FOB THE NATIONS. It coutains the idea of the Divine house, and therefore of 
the home for all men. 

II. The absooiationb should be such as become the place. " Peace and purity 
should be maintained in the service of God." The Ghurcli should be like the home. 
The associates of trafiSc and the passions it excites should be shut out. 

■ Let vain and busy thoughts have there no part ; 

Bring not thy plough, thy plots, thy pleasures thithei. 
Christ purged his temple; so must tliou thy heart. 

All worldly thonghts are but thieves met together 
To cozen thee. Look to thy actions well ; 
For chniohes either are our heaven or hell." (George Herbert.) 

m. In the ulioioub oAixaia men enjoy great adtantages. and are sxposn 



CH. xi 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. Iti 



TO GBBAT TEMPTATIONS. Beligion intensifies all it touchea. " We become better oi 
worse in dealing with sacred things" (Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 20 — 26. — The withered tree. I. Debtbuotioh mat bebvk the fcbfobes of 
UFB. Here the fig tree is destroyed for the sake of a lesson to the spirit. Much lowei 
life is destroyed from day to day that the higher may be preserved. 

IL The incident illustrates the bbservb of Christ's miraouloot power. 
He could destroy ; that was evident. But he came not to destroy, but to save. And 
while he lavished his power upon the sick and suffering, to heal, cheer, and delirer, he 
economized the dread power of destruction. Compare what is said on this subject in 
• Ecce Homo I ' 

III. Faith the one secret of power. Our Lord here employs, as often, • bold 
figure of speech. To the undivided thought and will nothing is ideally impossible. 
Actually our power is limited, as is our thought. But we are born for the ideal, and to 
overcome our limitations. Prayer is essentially part of faith ; it is the exercise of the 
will, the entire going-forth of the man in that direction in which he is called endlessly 
to exert himself. 

IV. LovB IS an essential condition of TRtTB FAITH. Faith works by love. 
How mistaken is it to limit faith to intellectual assent ! Devils believe, but love not, 
and are weak. Faith and love are other words for the might of God in the soul. " Oh, 
my brothers, God exists 1 Believing love will relieve us of a load of care 1 " — will lift 
mountains' weight from the spirit, and make our ideals a present reality. But the 
unloving, unfoi'giving soul remains fettered in itself, unreleased, unfree, and weak. — J. 

Vers. 27 — 33. — Critics criticized. I. The spirit of fault-findin(j never lacks 
FOOD. The action is wrong ; or, if it is right, it is done from a wrong motive, or done 
b) the wrong person. " 111 will never said well." 

II. It asks for reasons, but refuses to give them. It will call others to 
account, and refuse to give account of itself. The arbitrary temper is directly opposed 
to the " sweet reasonableness of Christ." 

III. The untrue man thinks only of policy in his answers. The true man 
thinks of the fact, and tries to get at it and state it. The other, of how much he can 
afford to tell ; how much 'twere well to keep back. " Truth should be the first question 
with men, not consequences." 

IV. There is a use in silent contempt. Christ, so ready to discuss with candid 
inquirers and give instruction, here holds his peace. Sometimes the rule is, " Answer 
a fool according to his folly ; " sometimes, " Answer him not according to his folly." 
Truth and the good of souls must be our guide. " Incompetency may be exposed and 
assumption resisted for the sake of truth." — J. 

Vers. 1 — 11. Parallel passages : Matt. xxi. 1 — 11 ; 14—17 ; Luke xix. 29 — 44 ; John 
xii. 12 — 19.— Our Lord^a public entry into Jerusalem. I. Journey from Jebioho. 
Jerusalem is at an elevation of three thousand six hundred feet above Jericho in the 
Jordan valley. The distance between the two cities is upwards of fifteen miles. 
Travel-stained and weary with this uphill journey, gradually ascending all the way, our 
Lord stayed over sabbath with the family of Bethany, where he got rested and refreshed. 
Bethany, which St. John calls " the town of Mary and her sister Martha," is fifteen fur- 
longs, or nearly two miles, from Jerusalem, and gets its name from the fruit of the palm 
trees that once flourished there, signifying " house of dates." It is now called Ml- 
Azm-iyeh, from the name of Lazarus, and in memory of the miracle wrought in raising 
him from the dead. Next day, being the 10th of Nisan, or 1st of AprU — the day on which 
the Paschal lamb was set apart — was the day chosen by him, who is our true Paschal 
Lamb, for his public entry into Jerusalem, there to bo sacrificed for us. Of the caravan 
of pilgrims that accompanied our Lord and his disciples in the journey from Jericho, 
some had proceeded onward direct to the holy city ; others had pitched their tents in the 
rfooded vale of Bethany ; and others, again, on the western slopes of Olivet, opposite to 
and in full view of the city. Those who had advanced to Jerusalem had, it is probable, 
bfui.yht word thither of the approach of the Prophet of Nazareth. 

D° PupLio PROCESSION. The life and ministry of our Lord were fast drawing ta « 



142 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xi. 1—33. 

close. The time of his departure was at hand. There is no longer need of enjoining 
secrecy with regard to his miracles, or of concealment in respect of his ofiBce, lest publia 
excitement might ensue, or lest his work might be interfered with or interrupted by the 
opposition of enemies, before the seed of truth, which he had sown by his discourses and 
parables, should get time to take root in the public mind. Publicity rather than 
secrecy is now needed. The great Passover Lamb is to be sacrificed, and so the Priest 
is oD his way to the place of sacrifice ; the Prophet is going up to the house of God to 
renew the work of reformation, to rectify abuses, to restore, or at least exhibit, the 
purity befitting the service of the sanctuary, and to teach daily, as he did, in the temple. 
Above all, the King is going up to his capital ; the daughter of Ziou is to receive her 
King with rejoicing. Hitherto he had indeed gone about continually, doing good, yet 
with little or no outward show ; save by the crowds that followed for healing or hearing, 
and on some rare occasions and with some signal exceptions, he had been little recognised, 
being rather "despised and rejected of men." Kow the time has come for him to announce 
his kingdom and claim the honour of a King. The public avowal of his dignity, the 
ofBcial declaration of his Messiahship, and the formal proclamation of his kingdom, now 
behoved to be made. He was now going to assert his right to reign. Now, for the first 
and only time, he assumes somewhat of royal state in entering his metropolis. Nor yet 
was there anything very great or very garish in this exhibition of royalty ; the whole 
was carried out in lowly guise. Christ was indeed a King, but King of the realm of 
truth ; and his entrance into Jerusalem was a royal procession — % right royal one, 
though in a spiritual sense. He was King, but not such a King as the multitude, and 
even his disciples, expected. He was not a King coming with chariots and horses, with 
battlf5-bow or weapons of war, as earthly rulers and worldly conquerors; but "just, 
and bringing salvation." He was the spiritual King of an unworldly, but imiversal and 
unending kingdom. 

in. Omniscience apparent in his obdebs. In the directions which our Lord gives 
his disciples, probably Peter and John, to go to the village over against them — ^perhaps 
Bethphage, which means "house of figs" — ^there are several particulars so precise, 
minute, and striking, that they imply superhuman knowledge. How else could he tell 
them beforehand (1) that immediately on entering the village they would find an ass 
and her colt ; (2) that they were not loose, but tied, and so ready to be employed by 
their owner ; (3) that that colt had never been tamed, or broken in, and that no man had 
ever sat on its back ; (4) the exact position in which the colt would be found — not in 
the courtyard, but outside ; at the door, yet not in the public street, but on a road that 
ran round (afifSSoti) the rear of the house or village ; (5) that in case of any demur on 
the part of persons standing by, they should inform them for whose use it was required ; 
and (6) that the ready consent of the owner would be obtained — "and straightway he 
will send them " ? Another reading of this latter clause has the future, and adds wd?uy, 
so that the sense is, " He [Christ] will send it back again." 

rV. The humble yet hbabtt pageant. All was done as had been directed. The 
colt was brought and led quietly along, its mother by its side, accompanying it. 
Then the disciples cast their dbhas, or outer garments, on them, and set Jesus upon them 
— iriym o4t«» being either on the garments, or on one of the animals. The former view 
is that of Theophylact, who refeis the pronoun to the garments, saying, " Not the two 
beasts of burden, but the garments ; " so also Euthymius, Beza, and many others. 
Many explain the pronoun of the beasts of burden, but understand it variously — some 
supposing our Lord to have mounted them alternately ; others supplying rtyis, as Krebs 
and Kuinoel ; and others, again, having recourse to an enallage of number ; while some 
copyists have ventured to substitute ofrroB or ofrrflf. The intention of the disciples 
was to do their Master royal honour in the true Eastern style of improvising, and just 
as in Old Testament times, a throne had been extemporised for Jehu, as we read in 
2 Kings ix. 13, " Then they hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under 
him [Jehu] on the top of the stairs, and blew with trumpets, saying, Jehu is king," 
Scarcely had the disciples prepared the housing and got their Master mounted on the 
colt thus caparisoned, when the very great multitude, or rather the most part of the 
multitude, not to be outdone in devotion and loyalty, strewed some their garments, 
while others cut down branches off the trees or out of tiie fields {&ypSv,te&A by Tisohen- 
dorf and Tregelles), and spread them in the way. Thus the streaming m«ltitud« from 



OH. XI. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 148 

GJalilee, from Bethany — some before, some behind the central figure of the Saviour — 
tapestried the line of march with their garments, or strewed it with fronds (amPiSaa, a 
rare word, as if ot6i;8(JSoj, from aTii^a, to tread ; and thus, that which is trodden on, a 
litter of leaves or bed of small leafy branches, then the material of such, viz. young 
branches). It may perhaps be worthy of note, that in the former case the aorist 
(iarpuxrav) is used to denote the throwing down of their garments as a thing done readily 
and at once ; while the cutting of the branches and the spreading of them in the way, 
as requiring more time, are expressed in the imperfect ; that is, they kept cutting them 
and continued strewing them as they proceeded. Many similar tokens of honour and 
respect are on record, and practised even to the present day. Thus, when Mordecai 
issued from the palace of Ahasuerus, the streets (Targum on Esther) were strewn with 
myrtle ; like honour was shown to Xerxes by his army before crossing the Hellespont ; 
ao also, as we are informed by Kobinson, in his ' Biblical Researches,' the Bethlehemites 
threw their garments under the feet of the English consul's horses at Damascus, when 
they had come to implore his aid. In the ' Agamemnon ' of -ffischylus, too, we read 
that the doomed monarch, when entering the palace on his return to Mycense, was, in 
imitation of the barbaric pomp of Eastern kings, tempted to walk on costly carpets. 

V. A PBAOBFUL THOUGH TRIUMPHAL PEOCBSSioN. The lowlincss of the animal was in 
keeping with the character of the procession. It was humble, yet right royal. The ass 
in the East is stately, sprightly, sleek, and shiny ; it is highly esteemed, and employed 
alike for work and ridiug. Persons of rank used it commonly for the latter purpose. 
Thus we read of Balaam, of Caleb's daughter, and of Abigail riding on asses. Moses' 
wife rode on an ass, as she went down with her husband from Midian into Egypt. At 
a still earlier period it was the same animal that Abraham rode on that eventful day, 
when, rising early in the morning, he saddled his ass and went to offer his son Isaac in 
sacrifice. It was, moreover, the animal on which the judges of Israel rode, as we learn 
from such passages as the following : — " Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit 
in judgment;" so also Jair the Gileadite, who judged Israel two and twenty years, 
" had," as we read, " thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they had thirty 
cities." We have evidence of the same in Jacob's blessing of his sons, when he says of 
Issachar that he is " a strong ass, couching down between two burdens." Animals 
unyoked or unused were employed for sacred purposes; thus, in Num. xix. 2, it is 
written, " Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without 
spot, wherein is no blemish, and upon which never came yoke ; " again, in 1 Sam. vL 7, 
"Now therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there hath 
come no yoke." Thus it was every way suited to the procession, sacred and solemn, 
peaceful and royal, that advanced on this occasion towards Jerusalem. The horse, on 
the other hand, would have been unbecoming in such a procession, since the horse was 
the emblem of war from an early to a late period in Hebrew history ; thus, in Bxod. xv. 
we read, " Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously : the horse and his 
rider hath he. thrown into the sea;" and also in Jer. viii. 6, "Every one turned to 
his course, as the horse rusheth into the battle." 

VL The peooession from the city. Another crowd of persons, passing out of the 
city gates, crossed the Kedrori, and advanced in one long continuous line up the opposite 
side of Olivet till it met the procession that accompanied our Lord. The persons that 
composed this crowd had been attracted by the miracle of the raising of Lazarus, and 
they bore their willing testimony to that stupendous fact, as St. John informs us 
(xii. 17), where we read in, that, instead of ire, when, " The people therefore that was 
with him bare record that he called Lazarus out of his grave, and raised him from the 
dead." The people fiom the city bore in their hands palm branches, the emblems of 
victory. In the ancient games the crowns were various — olive, laurel, pine, or parsley ; 
but in every game the victor bore in his hand the palm branch of victory. Accordingly, 
with these palm branches in their hands, they welcomed him as victorious over death 
and the Conqueror of the king of terrors. Soon the crowd from Jerusalem and the mul- 
titude from Bethany met and mingled ; and now all united formed one grand triumphal 
procession, the like of which had never climbed or crossed that hill before. 

VII. The ENTHUSIASM. The enthusiasm had reached its height. Hitherto the 
acknowlcdirmont of the Saviour's kingly power was confined to actions — those of himself 
and his disciples ; now the multitudinous voices of the united crowd made the welkia 



H4 THE GOSPEL AOCORDINa TO ST. MABK. [oh. xi. 1—33, 

ring with sliouts of triumph. The proclamation, no longer limited to actioD, now found 
utterance in words — words in which the meu of Bethany and the people from Jerusalem 
all took part, Baying, " Hosanna to the Son of David 1 " as we have it in the Gospel by St. 
Matthew. This term "Hosannal" was originally a supplication, signifying " Save now!" 
and thus some understand it here, " Grant salvation to the Son of David ! " as the 
Hebrew verb from which it comes is sometimes followed by a dative. It would in this 
way be nearly equivalent to " God save the king 1 " It may, however, be better under- 
stood as a joyful acclamation of welcome to the Saviour-King long promised, but now 
present, like the lo triumphe of the Romans or the p«an of the Greeks. " Blessed is 
he that Cometh in the Name of the Lord 1 " Here we have one of the designations of 
Messiah, who was spoken of as the Coming One; ages had passed, but still his arrival 
was a matter of expectation ; centuries had rolled away, but his advent was still future. 
And now that he has come, it is in the name, invested with the authority and bearing 
the commission, of the great Jehovah. He came as the Vicegerent of God on earth, and 
as the Mediator for man with heaven. On the occasion here referred to, the crowd 
accorded him a most cordial welcome and received him with truly regal honours. So 
enthusiastic were they in the reception of their Messiah, that they did not confine 
themselves, in expressing their gratulation, to the well-known words of the familiar 
psalm ; carried away with the outburst of general joy, they expressed in their own 
spontaneous utterances their fond anticipation of his Messianic reign, saying, " Blessed 
is the kingdom, that cometh, the kingdom of our father David ! " for David was the 
great theocratic king, and eminently typical of Messiah's kingly power. " Hosanna in the 
higheit 1 " that is, the highest places or the highest strains. So difficult did they find it 
to express their exuberant joy, and to vent their feelings of jubilation, that they appealed 
to Heaven itself to give its sanction, and called as it were on the heavenly hosts to join 
them and take part in their exultation, heaven and earth being presumed of one accord 
and in perfect unison on the subject. Another explanation makes the words mean " in 
the highest degree," in order to convey still greater intensity of leeling ; while a third 
regards it as an address to the Most High, equivalent to " O thou that dwellest in the 
heavens, save, we pray ; for all salvation owns thee as its Source I " 

VIII. FoLFiLMBNT OF Old TESTAMENT SoBlPTtJBE. The fulfilment of Zechariah's 
prophecy is here noticed by St. Matthew. " Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy 
King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass," 
is the prediction in Zech. ix. 9 ; or the exact rendering of the last clause may rather 
be, " and sitting upon an ass (chamar), even a colt (air), son of she-asses {athonoih)," 
the ve being exegetical. The evangelist, in quoting the prophet's words, informs ui 
that the purpose of what now transpired was their fulfilment. The meaning of ifva here, 
as in other similar passages, is either telic, or final, " in order that ; " or edatic, that 
is, eventual or consecutive, " so that." If the word be taken in the former sense, it 
marks the Divine purpose, and with God purpose and result are coincident; if in tlie 
latter sense, it is a consequence, or the evangelist's reflection on the circumstance uf 
what had been foretold being duly fulfilled. That ha had acquired in later Greek a 
weakened or modified meaning, so as to stand midway between purpose and resalt, ur 
even to denote the latter, is pretty generally admitted. 

IX. Pbaotioal bemabes. 1. A cause of oircumspeoiion. This is one practical effect 
of Christ's omniscience. He had perfect knowledge of the state of matters iu and 
roimd the village whither he sent his two disciples on the errand we here read of. He 
told them beforehand where the animal he wanted would be found and how it would 
be found — the how and where; the inquiry that would be made of them and the 
answer they were to return, and the readiness with which the desired permission would 
be granted them. It is a natural and indeed necessary inference that he is equally 
acquainted with ourselyes — our persons, situations, and ciroumstauces. He knows 
perfectly the great things and the little things of our histories ; our condition and 
omduct in matters the most minute, as well as in those we deem of most importance. 
From all this we learn the necessity of circumspection. The old Roman wished his 
houM so constructed that all that transpired inside might be seen outside — that to the 
eye of every passer-by the interior of his dwelling and all that was done in it might be 
visible. The Saviour's eye penetrates not our houses merely, but our hearts. All we 
think, as well as all we say and all we do. is everv moment uncovered to his inspection 



L U. 1—83.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIKG TO ST. MARK. 146 

ind open to hia cognizance. How circumspect, then, we should be I Who would not 
shrink from having exposed to the view of neighbour or friend or kinsman every 
thought that lies deep down in the recesses of his heart? Who would care to have 
every word he utters in the secret chambei; made known to his fellow-man ? And who 
would feel quite at ease if he knew that the eyes of some great man or nobleman or 
prince rested on all his actions throughout an entire day ? How careful we are to have 
things presented in the best possible light, when we expect the presence of soma 
person of consequence or superior rank for the space of a few hours I Oh, then, how 
we should feel chastened and subdued by the thought that One greater thau even the 
greatest of the kings of the earth knows all we do, hears all we say, and is cognizant 
of all we think ; and that, not for a few hours of a single day, but every hour of every 
day 1 Surely this reflection, if duly realized, would be a powerful help to make u« 
circumspect in thought and word and work, guarding our hearts, " for out of them are 
the issues of life," " keeping the door of our lips that we offend not with our tongue," 
and using circumspection in all our wcrks and ways. 2. A source of consolation. 
The presence of a friend is often most encouraging. The consciousness that a friendly 
eye is upon us in time of difficulty, or emergency, or at some critical juncture, is a 
source of strength, inspiring with courage and stimulating to energy. In sorrow or 
suffering, also, a sympathetic eye goes a long way to give relief, or, where that is out of 
the question, to sustain us in our sufferings. But to know that from behind the silent 
blue of the arching heaven a friendly eye is ever on us, a friendly heart ever beats in 
sympathy with us, a friendly hand is ever stretched forth to wipe away the tear of 
sorrow, is a source of comfort unfailing as unspeakable. The little things that vex us, 
the heavy griefs that crush us, our afflictions, whether physical, or mental and more 
inward, are known alike to that Friend who never changes, and who never fails nor 
forsakes us. 3, A ground of confidence. The fulfilment of God's Word in the past and 
at the present is one of the surest grounds of confidence in time to come. St. Matthew, 
writing in the first instance for Hebrew Christians who had the prophecies in their 
hand, and were thus in a position to compare prediction with performance, and having, 
besides, a special propensity in that direction, is careful to note the fulfilment of 
prophecy, and to draw the attention of his countrymen to the fact. The prediction 
referred to in this passage had preceded its fulfilment by five centuries and a half; but 
it did not fail. God's words are " pure words : as silver tried in a furnace of earth, 
purified seven times ; " not one of them shall ever fail or be falsified. 

"How firm a foundation, ye saints of the Lord, 
Is laid for your faith in his excellent Word I " 

4. Human inconstancy. A heathen moralizes on the fickleness of popular fevoor ; it 
is changeable as the breeze. The psalmist no doubt had experience of it, when he 
hastily concluded and hurriedly said that all men are liars; but though his generalization 
was, as subsequent experience taught him, too sweeping, yet he had had sufficient 
ground for his statement just then. Hence we have the salutary caution in another psalm, 
" Trust not in princes, nor man's son." Paul upbraids the Galatians with their change- 
ableness, when he says, " I bear you record, that, if possible, ye would have plucked out 
your own ejes, and have given them to me. Am I therefore become your enemy, 
liecause I tell you the truth?" A great and good man, now with God, having had a 
bitter experience on one occasion of the variableness of human favour, wrote down in 
his diary the cool but cutting words, "Is it strange that men and the moon should 
change?" Yet never were the fickleness and consequent worthlessness of human 
popularity so strikingly exemplified as in the case of the crowd that shouted long and 
lustily, " Hosanna I Hosanna in the highest I " but just four days after, and before the 
week was out, cried long and loudly, " Crucify him ! crucify him I " What a lesson is 
thus taught the follower of Jesus 1 What a warning to set little store by human 
favour and popular applause 1 

X. Thb teahs Jesus shed oveb Jerusalem. 1. The sight of the city. Of the 
three roads that led over the Mount of Olives — one between the two northern crests, a 
second right over the summit, — the third, or southern, then as now the main road, and 
the one most frequented from Bethany, was that by which the procession was approach- 
ing the city. At a spot where it winds round the southern ridge of the hill, the dty, 

MASK— n I. 



146 THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. n. 1-33. 



by » turn of the road, is at once brought full in view. At the descent from thli 
shoulder of Olivet, " when he was come near, he beheld the city," looking across tha 
Valley of Jehoshaphat. Its temple, its buildings, its dwellings, rising full before him, 
were all seen in the clear air of a Judaean sky ; at the same time, its guilty inhabitants 
and their future fate were equally open to his eyes. 2. Jems weeps. He paused and 
pondered. The sight of that splendid capital, the knowledge of its crimes, the remem- 
brance of God's mercies, the thought that it might have been spared if, like Nineveh, 
it had known the day of its visitation and the things that belonged to its peace, — all 
these considerations awoke the sorrow and called forth the sympathy of the Saviour. 
" Jesus wept over it," as St. Luke informs us. He dropped a tear in silence (^ISdupvaei/) 
at the grave of Lazarus, a departed friend ; but in view of the doomed city of Jerusalem 
he shed a flood of tears, weeping aloud (^K\m<rev). But while his tears testified his 
love and showed his tenderness, his lips pronounced the city's fearful doom. 3. His 
affecting apostrophe. " If thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the 
things which belong unto thy peace I " Jerusalem had its day, and in vain was that 
day protracted. " If thou hadst known, even thou," ill-fated city; even thou, with all 
thy guilt ; even thou, who hast so long abused the forbearance of a long-suflering God : 
even thou, who hast been so often reproved, and yet ever hardened thyself against 
.ceproof ; even thou, who hast had so many warnings firom the prophets of God and 
apostolic men ; even thou, whose children I would have gathered as a hen gathereth her 
chickens under her wings ; if thou, even thou, after so many days of mercy and of privi- 
lege have been misspent, after so many days of grace have been lost and for ever; if thou, 
even thou, hadst known, at least in this thy day, in this thy last day of privilege and of 
promise, in this thy last day of heavenly ministration, in this day of merciful visitation 
still thine, though the eleventh hour of thy existence and the eve of thy destruction I 
Never was apostrophe to place or person so tender, and never was aposiopesis so 
terrible ; for the sentence is suddenly broken off and left unfinished ; the clause which 
Bhould state the consequence is omitted. After this omission the Saviour pauses, and 
then adds, " But now they are hid from thine eyes." The sentence might be taken as 
the expression of a wish : " Oh that thou hadst known the things that belong to thy 
peace!" and the sense would have remained the same and the sentiment equally 
solemn. 4. Application to ourselves. Our Lord's address on this occasion is slm 
practical as it is pathetic. Personally applied, what an appeal it makes to each one 
of us 1 Jerusalem had its day, patriarchs and prophets had their day, evangelists and 
apostles had their day, ancient Jews and early Christians had their day, the apostolic 
and other Church Fathers had their day, the schoolmen and the reformers had their 
day, our forefathers and the men of preceding generations had their day ; but " our 
fathers, where are they ? and the prophets, do they live for ever ? " Now, the present is 
our day. God says to each of us — This, the present, is thy day I Let conscience re-echo 
the solemn truth, for the past is gone, and gone for ever ; the future is to come, and may 
never come to us ; the present is all we can call our own. This, then, is our day ; for 
" now is the accepted time, and now is the day of salvation." 5. The purpose for which 
it IS vouchsafed. Day is not merely a measure of time, or portion of duration, or 
period of light, or a unit of a month or of a year, or a fragment of existence, made up 
of so many hours ; it is that season for getting good and doing good which God has 
given us, and which he has assigned us for accomplishing the work for which he sent 
us into the world. It is thy day, reader ; for God has given it to thee for a great 
purpose, and that purpose is the securing of thine own eternal well-being and the 
welfare of thy fellow-creature, and in both the glory of the great Creator. It is thy 
day ; for it is thy property as long as Heaven is pleased to continue the boon. It is thy 
day ; but not thine to waste or misspend ; it is not thine to while away, or trifle away, 
or sin away, at thy option. It is thine ; for it is a talent lent, a treasure given you by 
God, and for which thou shalt have to render an account. It is thy day for imitating 
the Saviour in working the work of him that sent thee : and " This is the work of God, 
that ye believe in him whom he hath sent ;" " This is his commandment, that we should 
believe on the Name of his Son Jesus Christ ; " this is thy day for attending to the 
conditions of peace, the things that tend to and make for peace, such as the righteous- 
ness of Christ received by faith, repentance of sin, and reformation of life. It is thj 
tlay for cultivating personal and practical religion in thine own so'd; thy day, mor^. 



CH. XI. 1—33.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 141 



ov«r, for the discharge of the duties of relative religion, because, in a certain Mnse, 
every man should be his brother's keeper, and no man is to live wholly to himself, or 
to seek entirely and selfishly, and therefore sinfully, his own things only, but to look 
also upon the things of others. It is thy day to do something for God, something for 
the Church, something for the world, endeavouring to leave it better than you found it 
— something useful in thy day and generation.— J. J. G. 

"Vers. 12—26. Parallel passages: Matt. xxl. 12—22; Luke xix. 45 — i8.—The 
hlighting of the barren fig tree. I. Symbolism. 1. Miracles of mercy. Mercy has 
been called God's darling attribute; judgment is his strange work. The only-begott-en 
Son, who has declared the Father unto us, has manifested the selfsame character. His 
miracles are miracles of mercy — all save two. Of these two, one was permissive and 
punitive, when our Lord allowed the devils to enter into the swine of the Gadarenes ; 
the other, which is recorded in this passage, is a sort of symbol such as the old prophets 
used when they inculcated any solemn utterance, or wished specially to impress any 
predicted event. This custom was common in New as well as in Old Testament 
times. Thus Jesus washed his disciples' feet. Thus also Agabus, when he fore- 
told Paul's imprisonment at Jerusalem, symbolized the fact by taking the apostle's 
girdle and therewith binding his own bands and feet, saying, "So shall the Jews 
at Jerusalem bind the man that owneth this girdle." In like manner our Lord, 
by this miracle of the blasted fig tree, most symbolically and significantly lots forth 
the blight of barrenness which so justly fell upon the Jewish people, and which is 
sure to fall upon any people or any person who has only the leaves of an outside 
profession, but who wants the fruits of a genuine faith or a heartfelt piety. To pro- 
nounce a curse on a senseless tree might appear meaningless — it might even seem 
vindictive. Not so, however, when the Saviour, in order to express the hopes 
which the appearance of the tree excited, and the disappointment which its want of 
fruit occasioned, devoted that tree by a striking figure to future and for ever fruit- 
Icsaness. He thereby converts that tree into a symbol of the hypocrite or false 
professor, be he Gentile or be he Jew; and makes it a danger-signal, at once to warn 
us of the danger and ward off the doom. 2. Judgment succeeds the abuse of mercy. 
Another lesson which our Lord teaches us by this tree is the consequence of abused 
mercy. When mercy has been abused, judgment must succeed. The day of grace 
does not always last; and when that day has passed, and its privileges have been 
misused, the axe is tlien laid to the root of the tree, that it may be hewn down and 
cast into the fire. Such was the case with the body of the Jewish nation at the very 
time this miracle was wrought. Their day of grace was expiring. Their heart had 
remained untoucbed by that most pathetic appeal, " If thou hadst known, even thou, 
at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace!" Now, however, 
they were hid Irom their eyes. A woe similar to that pronounced on Chorazin and 
Bethsaida and Capernaum had gone forth against all that people, notwithstanding the 
fact that they had once been the people of God, and notwithstanding the many and 
great privileges which they had enjoyed, as well as the loud and leafy professions they 
had made. 3. The relation of the miracle of the fig tree to the parable of the fig tree. 
The fact of this relationship should be kept in view. The miracle narrated in this 
passage and the parable recorded by St. Luke are in a great measure the converse of 
each other. The parable of the fig tree long spared through the intercession of thu 
vine-dressor, and this miracle of the fig tree suddenly withered to the very roots, are to 
a large extent the right opposite of each other. The one represents mercy pleading, 
the other judgment suddenly and surely overtaking the guilty; the one the long- 
suffering kindness of God, the other the swift vengeance of Heaven ; the one mercy 
prevailing over judgment, the other judgment without mercy ; the one a tree spared 
in hope of fruitfulness, the other a tree suddenly scathed to the very earth because of 
its barrenness. There is, however, one point, and only one point, in common ; and mat 
is, the end of continued vmfruitfulness is cursing, the end of barrenness is burning, 
and the end of all leaf and no fruit is the speedy execution of the sentence, " Bind 
them in bundles, and bum them." 4. A comparison and a contrast. In the sixth 
chapter of the Epistle to ;he Hebrews, we find a beautiful comparison and an awful con- 
trast ; by the former the lesson of the parable is enforced, and by the latter the warn 



148 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xl 1—33, 

ing of this miracle receives a solemn sanction. " The earth," we there read, " which 
driuketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for them 
far whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God : but that which beareth thorns aad 
briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing ; whose end is to be barned." 

IL OtTB Lord's disappointment. 1. J3e hungered. The Saviour was on his way 
from Bethany to Jerusalem. It was in the morning, and he was hun°!ry. This may 
appear strange. What had been the matter with the friendly family of Bethany, under 
whose roof our Lord had been so often and so hospitably entertained? Had they for- 
feited the high character for hospitality which they had so well earned ? Had they 
forgotten its rights and become inconsiderate towards their Guest — a Guest whom they 
80 highly honoured, and who had such claims upon them ? Had they forgotten his 
wants, or neglected to supply them ? Had Martha ceased her thrift, and given up her 
housewifery ? Be this as it may, it could be no intentional neglect, much less a studied 
slight ; it must have been some strange oversight. Or, as our Lord's time on earth was 
soon to terminate, and as much was to be done that day, perhaps he left Bethany at an 
uarlier hour than usual ; and, doing so, he could not wait till the customary hour for 
breakfast, and would not allow the household arrangements to be broken through for his 
convenience. Or perhaps he wished to reach the temple in time for the morning sacri- 
flce at nine o'clock, before which time a devout Jew seldom broke his fast. Or perhaps 
he was so intent on his Father's business, and so intensely absorbed in his own great 
work, and so rapt in contemplation of its grand results, that he neglected the food pro- 
vided for him. Or, in the absence of any direct statement, and where we are left to 
conjecture, we may suppose that it is just possible that he had shunned the shelter 
of any roof, and spent the previous night in prayer on some lone hillside or other 
Mquestered spot. At all events, the broad fact stands out that he, by whom all things 
were made, became hungry; that he, who had fed thousands in a wilderness with a few 
loaves and fishes, would fain have satisfied the cravings of appetite with a few unripe 
figs. 2. Leafage without fruitage, or all leaf and no fruit. The district through 
which our Lord passed on his way, as he went from Bethany to Jerusalem, was a fig 
region. A village by the way had its name from this very circumstance ; that village 
was Bethphage, which, as we have already seen, means " house of figs." Joumejing 
through this district, he would, as might be expected, see many fig trees. His eye, 
however, rested on one at some distance. From St. Matthew's special mention of this 
0ne fig tree we conclude that there must have been something peculiar in its appear^ 
snce. Our Lord singled it out from all or any in the district. It was rich in leaves, 
and so, full of promise. We must have in recollection the well-known fact in reference 
to the fig tree, that it puts forth its fruit before its leaves. The leaves of the fig tree, 
when they appeared, warranted the expectation of the figs. The leaves of this tree, 
visible to a distance, must have been large and numerous, and thus they held out the 
hope of abundant figs. The leafy honours of the tree bespoke its abundant fruitful- 
ness. On the other hand, we are informed that " the time of figs was not yet," by which 
some (1) understand that the fig harvest had not yet come — the time of gathering the 
figs had not yet arrived. According to this understanding, in which Wakefield, 
Wetstein, Newcome, Campbell, Bloomfield, and others coincide, while the leaves indi- 
cated the existence of figs on the tree, the season of the year intimated with equal 
certainty that they had not been gathered oflf the tree ; whatever firuit, therefore, the 
tree had, it retained. Figs there should have been, and if the tree had been true to its 
promise, figs there would have been. Figs there should have been still on the tree, for 
they had had time to grow, but not yet time to be gathered. There was every reason 
to expect figs on that fig tree, still green they might be, still immature, and not yet fully 
ripened. And yet this forwardness of the foliage implied the forwardness of its fruit. 
The advanced state of the one naturally induced the hope of a proportionately advanced 
state in the other. But not so. Our Lord approaches this goodly tree, but no firuit is 
there — not one fig among all its branches, not one fig among all its leaves. We must 
notice another explanation of the supposed difficulty in the words " for the time of figs 
was not [yet]." We put aside at once such attempted explanations as that of Hein- 
sius, who, by accenting and changing the breathing, read oS instead of ou the negative, 
•nd rendered accordingly, "for where he was, it was the season of figs," that is, fruit« 
ripened in Judtea considerably earlier than in the less mild climate of Galilee ; also the 



ea.ti. 1-33.] THE dOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. 149 

Btill more forced interpretation of those who read the clause interrogatively, viz. " for 
was it not the time of figs ? " and the no less objectionable explanation of Kcuphi in the 
sense of a favourable season, for in that case the season, not the tree, would have 
deserved the malediction ; or in the signification of favourable weather, as Olshausen. 
All these, however ingenious they may appear, are evasive shifts and no more. But, 
discounting them, we find an interpretation other than that first given and simpler, 
which, (2) understanding the reference to be to a precocious or premature /oliation, 
takes the words in their plain and natural sense. It was not the time or season of 
figs — "denn es war nioht Feigenzeit," as Pritzsche properly renders it ; but this tree 
antedated the season by putting forth its leaves prematurely. The appearance of the 
leaves was unseasonably early ; still, as their appearance implied the prior existence of 
fruit, the passer-by was thus invited to approach the tree, and induced to expect and 
hope for fruit. The show of leaves, though not the season of the year, favoured this 
expectation ; accordingly he came, if therefore (&pa), as it was reasonable to expect from 
the tree having leaves, he shall find anything in it (h> aurp) within the compass of this 
umbrageous tree, among its leaves and branches. But though he came (in' air^v) close 
upon it, right up to it, yet, notwithstanding his nearness to it, and the narrowness with 
which he inspected it, he found nothing but leaves. 3. Symbol of profession without 
performance. According to either of the explanations above given, either (1) or (2), 
especially perhaps the latter, that large fig tree, with its fine foliage and luxuriant 
leaves, occupying, as it did, a prominent position near the wayside, and visible far off 
by reason of its grand proportions and magnificent appearance, was nothing better 
than a huge practical lie, an embodied falsehood, a palpable untruth. That tree made 
a promise, but it broke it; it held out a hope, but it disappointed it; it professed much, 
but performed nothing. Never was there a more striking symbol of any people than 
that fig tree was of the Jews. They had enjoyed covenant promises and covenant 
privileges and covenant hopes, and their professions corresponded therewith. These 
were their leaves, but they had no real fruitfulness. They occupied a high and promi- 
nent position ; theirs were a very fruitful hillside — the horn of the son of oil — an 
exceedingly fertile soil, glorious fostering sunshine, and rich refreshing dews ; " they 
were Israelites ; to whom pertained the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, 
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises ;" but they proved 
themselves unworthy, shamefully unworthy, of these favours. They had command- 
ments and ordinances ; they made loud professions and long prayers ; they were strict 
in certain religious observances, and scrupulous in their ritual. In some things they 
went beyond the letter of the Law, for they tithed rue and anise and cummin ; but, in 
matters of much greater magnitude and really enjoined by the Law, they fell short, ^d 
were in fact woefully deficient. God " looked for judgment, but behold oppression ; for 
righteousness, but behold a cry." They called themselves children of Abraham, but 
they had none of that precious faith that so distinguished Abraham. They were proud 
of Moses, their great lawgiver, but they attended not to the Prophet to whom Moses 
pointed as greater than himself, and to whom he commanded them to hearken. They 
professed themselves expectants of Messiah, but when he came to them they received 
him not. They were no better than the dark world around — " a world that knew not 
when he came, even God's eternal Son." We need not trace further the application of 
this symbolic fig tree to the Jews; let us see its application to Gentiles also. 4. Adum- 
brative of Oentile as well as Jew. There may be the leaves of profession without any 
corresponding fruitfulness in the case of Gentiles as well as of Jews. This symbolic 
fig tree may have a personal application to ourselves. We may profess Christ to please 
men, to keep up appearances, to maintain a respectable position, or advance in some 
way our worldly prospects. We may rest in a mere form ; we may have a form of 
godliness without the power ; we may have a name to live, and yet be spiritually dead; 
we may be content with the outward visible sign, and care nothing for the inward 
spiritual grace. This was the complaint of God against his professing people in the 
days of Ezekiel: "They come unto thee as the people cometh, and they sit before thee 
as my people, and they hear thy words, but they will not do them : for with their 
mouth they show much love, but their heart goeth after their oovetousness. And, lo, 
thou art unto them as a very lovely song of one that hath a pleasant voice, and can 
play well on an instrument : for they hear thy words, but they do them not." Here ia 



jgO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARS. [cH.xi,!— 3a 

the too common defect of profession without practice, naming the name of Christ and 
not departing from iniquity. Others, again, it is to be feared, are downrightly insincere; 
they put religion on like a cloak, and lay it aside when it suits them ; like their Sun- 
day clothes, they wear it on the sabbath, but lay it past throughout the week. They 
impose on their fellow-men, they trifle with the Almighty, and deceive their own souls. 
5. The Saviour's dissatisfaction with barren professors. Many a time Christ comes to 
professors, and when he finds no fruit, no figs, no real goodness, nothing but leaves, 
oh, how he is disappointed I Many a time he is wounded in the house of his friends; 
many a time he has reason to be indignant with the false professor ; many a time 
religion is scandalized by the leaf of profession and the life of sin. We can conceive 
Christ coming to such professors and saying — Was it for this you trod my courts? 
for this you joined yourself to my people ? for this you sat at my table ? for this you 
took the cup of salvation in your hand? for this you avouched yourself to be the Lord's 
in solemn sacramental action ? 6. His remonstrance. Besides the expression of just 
indignation, there is tender remonstrance on his part. That remonstrance may b« 
supposed couched in some such terms as the following :— After all my care for you, 
and love to you, and provision for your salvation ; after all my goodness and grace to 
your soul ; after all my sufferings, both in life and death ; after all my agony of soul 
and anguish of body; after the many precepts I have given you, the exhortations I have 
addressed to you, the warnings I have sent you ; after all the checks of conscience, and 
after all the strivings of my Spirit, — is this the return you make me? Have you so 
soon forgotten your covenant engagements ; so soon forgotten all your vows ; so soon 
belied the profession you made, saying by act, if not by word, " Lord, I am thy 
servant : thou hast loosed my bonds " ? Have yon bo soon and so sadly violated your 
pledged allegiance expressed in the words, "I am not my own; I am bought with a 
price ; and bound therefore to serve the Lord with body and spirit, which are the 
Lord's "? God forbid that this should be the case with any of us ! May better things 
be hoped, and reasonably hoped, of us all, and " things that accompany salvation" I Let 
our motto be, " Now being made firee from sin, and become servants of God, we have our 
fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life." Let our conduct be in accordance with 
the statement, " I have put off my coat ; how shall I put it on ? I have washed my 
feet ; how shall I defile them ? " Let our meditation be on " whatsoever things are 
true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are 
pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report ; " and " il 
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise," let us " think on these things." 

IIL Dooa ?BONorrK0£S cn thk no tbee. 1. Se stereotypes its state. Christ does 
not make this fig tree barren, he only stereotypes its barrenness ; he found it in that 
state, and, as far as its condition of barrenness was concerned, he left it pretty much 
ds he found it. It bare no fruit before, it should bear no fruit afterwards, and so no 
fruit for ever. As far, however, as his own action was concerned, he did more ; for he 
withered its leaves, he scathed its trunk, he blighted it both root and branch. It was 
cursed, and so devoted to barrenness ; it was dried up from the roots, and so inevitably 
destined to decay ; it was completely withered, and so doomed to entire destruction. 
To the present hour the Jew has an unmistakable resemblance to this symbolic fig 
tne. Nationally, he is barked and peeled ; he is a tree of which the branches are 
withered ; he is one of a nation on which the blight of Heaven rests ; the curse has 
come upon them to the uttermost. He has neither Church, as in days of old, nor 
State, nor proper nationality. He has neither temple, nor priest, nor sacrifice. He is 
still doomed to the "wandering foot and weary breast "—one of a people resembling 
this withered fig tree to which the curse of Heaven clings. 2. Applicability of tlu 
symbol to ow own case. What is the conclusion from all this, and what is its 
connection with ourselves ? Just that of which the apostle, in writing to the Romans 
(xi. 21, 22) speaks : " For if God spared not the natural branches, take heed lest he also 
spare not thee. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of Qoi : on them which 
fell, severity ; but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in bis goodness : otherwise 
thou also shalt be cut off." 3. Sesponsibility pertaining to the Church of Ood. It 
is no light matter to have the Church of God in our midst, its ordinances dispensed 
to us, its sacraments enjoyed by us, its doctrines proclaimed to us, its duties declared 
to us. What weighty responsibilities does all this impose? " Unto whomsoever much 



OH.XI. 1— 33.] THE GOSPEL ACCOIiDING TO ST. MARK. 161 

is given, of them shall much be required." What a blessing, if we improve tbest 
privileges, and know the time of our merciful visitation 1 What a millstone weight 
of condemnation is hung about our neck, when, in the full enjoyment of ordinances, we 
prove ourselves at once unfaithful and ungrateful ? We see here what Christ expects 
of us, and what he has every right to expect. He sees on us the leaves of profession ; 
he requires the living power of religion in our souls. He beholds the leaves of con- 
fession ; he demands correspondence of character, conduct, and conversation. He hai 
heard your proclamation with the lips to the effect, " Henceforth shall the Lord be my 
God ; " he looks, therefore, for piety of heart and purity of life. He observes with you 
the show of godliness ; he will not be satisfied unless you diffuse the savour of it all 
around. Truth binds you to this ; you have sworn, and must not go back ; yon have 
vowed, and must fulfil your vow ; you have avouched the Lord to be your God, and 
the covenant entered into may not be broken, except at terrible risk. Gratitude binds 
to this. What shall we render unto the Lord for all his gracious benefits and gifts 
tons? 

* Lore so amazing, so Divine^ 
Demands my heart, my life, my alL" 

Consistency binds to this. What can be thought of any one who enters Into the most 
solemn engagements and then practically repudiates them? Our welfare, both for 
time and eternity, binds to this ; for " blessed is every one that feareth the Lord ; that 
walketh in bis ways. For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands : happy shalt thou 
be, and it shall be well with thee." 

IV. Application of the wholb. 1. Think for a moment of the awful doom of 
this withered fig tree. It is the doom of every hypocrite and of every false professor. 
The first blessing pronounced on man was fruitfulness ; one of the severest curses is 
barrenness. The leaf of the merely nominal Christian will soon wither ; it will soon 
decay and die. There is no root, and so even the leaf of profession will not last long ; 
no faith, and so no fruitfulness ; no principle, and so no practical godliness. The 
sparks of his own kindling make but a flickering light at best ; and that light, bad as 
it is, soon goes out altogether in utter darkness. " The wicked is driven away in his 
wickedness, but the righteous hath hope in his death." 2. As it fared with the Jews, 
BO will it fare with every individual who abuses God's mercies by continued unfruitful- 
ness. God's ancient people has been unchurched, and, if we may so say, unpeopled ; 
and if this was done in a green tree, what shall not be done in a dry ? The seven 
Churches of Asia had been unfaithful, and the candlestick was removed out of its 
place. So with the African Churches — Alexandria, Hippo, and Carthage. 3. God looks 
for fruit, and claims it as his due. The more fruitful you are, the more is he glorified. 
" Herein," said the Saviour, " is my Father glorified, that ye bear much fruit ; " the 
more, also, is your own soul benefited and blessed. Often, when men become unfruitful, 
and prove false to their vows, neglecting God's ordinances, and abusing his mercies, he 
gives them over to judicial blindness of mind, hardness of heart, searedness of con- 
science, or to strong delusion, or to a famine not of bread but of hearing the Word of 
the Lord. Sickness, or age, or poverty, or removal of their habitation, deprives them 
of the once possessed, but little esteemed and much abused, mercies. So with 
Ephraim ; he is "joined to his idols: let him alone." 4. During our walks in summer 
or early autumn we used to see a tree withered and decayed ; its leaves were gone, its 
bark peeled off, and its branches quite bare. Near to it on every side were trees green 
and leafy, healthy and vigorous, beautiful and flourishing. How ghastly looked that 
naked skeleton tree beside them 1 We often said as we passed it by — What a true type 
of a barren professor, " twice dead, plucked up by the roots " 1 5. From this miracle 
©ur Lord took occasion to speak of the wonders which faith works, and to urge the 
necessity of faith to the success of prayer. — J. J. O. 

Vers. 27—33. Parallel passages : Matt. xxi. 23—32 ; Luke xx. l—6.—Chrisf$ 
authority questioned. L Cause op Christ's aothokity being called m question. 
The ostensible cause was the events of the preceding day ; the real cause Satan's oppo- 
sition to the work of Christ. On the day before he had displayed his zeal for the 
•anctity of God's house and the purity of its worship. He is now called to aceounl 



lS2 THE GOSrEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oa.xi.l-3S 

■because of the extraordinary efforts he had made to put a stop to the public profanation 
of the house of God, and because of the no less extraordinary authority which he had 
exerciwd. Such appears to he the right reference of the raSra in the question, though 
•long with the purging of the temple may be included the miracles of healing that had 
been performed on the blind and lame who, as St. Matthew informs us, had resorted to 
him in the temple. Others, with less probability, refer the word to his teaching ; for 
" he taught daily in the temple," as we read in St. Luke. All these, together with 
our Lord's triumphal entry, had sorely displeased and greatly discomfited the Jewish 
rulers, who now proceeded to call his authority in question. But the prime mover 
ofgthis cavilling opposition was Satan. He was pursuing his usual tactics. Good is 
often done in an informal way, or by voluntary agencies, or by very humble instru- 
mentalities ; and Satan, when the fact of the good done is undeniable, stirs up men to 
impugn the authority or assail the commission of those Christian workers by whom 
the good is done, thus endeavouring to raise a false issue and stay its progress. 

n. Gbeed op gain versus godliness. The Church has its counterfeits as well as 
the world ; there is no class altogether free from false disguises. Some, perhaps many, 
of those unholy traffickers who were desecrating the temple so that a second cleansing 
of it within the short period of three years had become a necessity, fancied they were 
doing God service and accommodating his worshippers; while their own sordid and 
selfish interests — their own love of gain and usurious greed — were their real and 
actuating motives. Was it strange that our Lord was roused to indignation, and 
resorted to the most active measures to expel from the sacred precincts those dealers in 
sheep and oxen, with their droves of cattle, those dove-sellers and money-changers, who, 
under the pretext of supplying the requisites for sacrifices to such as came from a 
distance, and the temple half-shekels to foreign Jews for their larger coins or coins 
with heathenish images and inscriptions, had their heart set on driving a profitable 
trade in this matter of the sacrifices, and their eye fixed on the K6\\v$ot, or twelfth of 
s shekel, as the agio of exchange ; while the noisy bargainings, unseemly wranglings, 
and general hubbub made the house of God resemble one of those caves where robbers 
quarrelled over their ill-got gains ? 

III. OuB Lobd's answer to the question about authority. The twofold ques- 
tion about our Lord's authority and its source was put by a deputation from the 
Sanhedrim — a deputation representative of the three chief sections of that body: 
namely, chief priests or heads of the twenty-four classes ; scribes, the theologians or 
authorized interpreters of Scripture ; and the elders or heads of the principal families. 
The question of this formidable deputation called forth a counter-question on the part 
of our Lord ; nor was there any evasion in this. By asking them whether John's 
baptism was of heavenly or human origin, he eflfeotually answered their question, and 
put them into a dilemma from which there was no escaping. If they admitted John's 
mission to have been from God, the matter was settled at once and decisively ; for .John 
had testified most positively and repeatedly to the Divine mission and consequent 
Divine authority of Jesus, saying, " Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the 
sin of the world ; " and declaring that he would " baptize with the Holy Ghost." 
The alternative of John's mission being derived from a human source was what they 
dared not face, for it would bring them into collision with the crowd, and they were 
too cowardly for that. 

IV. The unfairness of the question of the Sanhedrim. Had they not had 
evidence of Jesus' authority in his exceptionally sinless life in the midst of all the 
temptations of a sinful world? Had they not evidence of his Divine authority in his 
teaching? — "for he taught as One having authority, and not as the scribes;" in " the 
gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth"? — for the universal testimony was that 
"never man spake like this Man." Had they not proof in the miracles which ha 
HTought — nut prodigally, but properly and appropriately ? 

" But who so blind as th6se who will not see ? 
And who so deaf as those who will not hear?" 

J. J. a. 



ott.xa.l-4i.] THE QOSi'EL ACCOSWnQ TO ST. MASK. 18S 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XIL 



Ver. 1. — ^And he began to speak nnto them 
In parables. This particular parable which 
follows was specially directed against the 
scribes and Pharisees ; but it was uttered in 
the presence of a multitude of the people. 
" He began to speak ... in parables." He had 
not used this form of instruction till now in 
Jerusalem. A man planted a vineyard. The 
imagery of the parable would be familiar to 
them from Isaiah (t. 1). But Palestine was 
eminently a land of " vineyards," as well as 
of " oil olives." The man who planted the 
vineyard is no other than God himself. 
''Thou hast brought a vine' out of Egypt; 
thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted 
it" The imagery is specially appropriate. 
No property was considered to yield so rich 
a return as the vineyard, and none required 
such unceasing care and attention. The 
vine represents the 1 kingdom of God in 
its idea and conception; not the Jewish 
Church in particular. The owner of this 
vineyard bad himself made it. tHe had 
" planted it." This planting took place in 
the establishment of the Jewish polity in 
the land of Canaan, when the heathen were 
cast out. He set a hedge about it. This 
and the following descriptions are not mere 
ornaments of the parable. The "hedge" was 
an important protection to the vineyard. It 
might be a wall or a "quick hedge," a living 
fence. The vineyards in the East may now 
be seen often with a strong Ledge planted 
round them. Such hedges, made of the 
prickly oactns, are to be seen at this day in 
the neighbourhood of Joppa. Figuratively, 
this hedge would represent the middle wall 
of partition which then existed between the 
Jew and the Gentile; and in this, their sepa- 
ration from the idolatrous nations around 
them, lay the security of the Jews that they 
should enjoy the continued protection of God, 
It is well remarked by Archbishop Trench 
that the geographical position of Judeaa 
wa6 figurative of this, the spiritual separ 
ration of the people — guarded as Judsea 
was eastward by tiie river Jordan and its 
chain of lakes, northward by Anti-libanus, 
■outhward by the desert and Idumsea, and 
westward by the Mediterranean Sea. Digged 
• place for the winepress (,Kni/6s, toreular); 
the words are literally, digged a pit for tha 
wintpreu (fipv^ev iiroKititov); the digging 
oonld only apply to the pit, a place hollowed 
out and then fitted with masonry. Some- 
times these pits were formed out of the solid 
rock. Examples of these are frequent in 
Palestine. There were usually two pits 
hollowed out of the rock, one sloping to the 



other, and with openlngt between fhen. 
The grapes were placed in the upper pit; 
and the juice, crushed out by this feet of 
men, flowed into the lower pit, from whence 
it was taken out and put into wine-skins. 
"I have trodden the winepress alone." And 
built a tower. The tower (irrfpyoK) was 
probably the watch-towdr. where a watch- 
man was placed to guard the vineyard from 
plunderers. Particular directions are ^ven 
in the rabbinical writings (see Lightfoot) 
for the dimensions both of the winepreif 
•nd of the tower. The tower was to be ten 
cubits high and finir oubiti square. It ia 
described aa " a high place, where the vine- 
dresser stands to overlook the vinward." 
Such towers are still to be seen in Pales- 
tine, especially in the neighbourhood of 
Bethlehem, of Hebron, and in the vine- 
growing districts of Lelranon. And let it out 
to husbandmen. The husbandmen would 
be the ordinary stated teachers of the people, 
though not excluding the people themselves. 
The Jewish nation in fact, both the teachers 
and the taught, represented the husbandmen, 
each member of the Church, then aa now, 
being required to seek the welfare of the 
whole body. And vent into a far country 
(ical iiircS^/i7)<r6) i literally, and went into 
another eountry. St. Luke (xx. 9) adds 
(XP^vovs 'Mdvois), " for a long time." 

Vers. 2 — 5. — And at the season he sent to 
the husbandmen a servant, that he might 
receive from the husbandmen of the fruits 
of the vineyard. St. Matthew (xxi. 34) says 
he sent " his servants." St. Mark mentions 
them in detail. These servants were the 
prophets, as Isaiah. Jeremiah, and others, 
whom the Jews persecuted and slew in dif- 
ferent ways, as the reprovers of their vices. 
But the mercy of God was long-suffering, 
and still triumphed over their wickedness. 
In his account of this parable St. Mark 
ia very minute. The first servant that was 
sent received no fruit, and was beaten. The 
second received much worse usage. Accord- 
ing to the Authorized Version the words are, 
At him they oast stones, and wounded him in 
the head, and sent him away shamefnlly 
handled (jehittivop \iBoPo\i\aavTa iKs^a\ai- 
oirav, Kol aWaTc^Xw tfrifUiiUvov). The wurd 
KiBoBoKiiaaints is, however, not to be found 
in the best authorities ; and the right reading 
of the next word ia apparently iKe(^a\luiaa.v, 
a very unusual word ; but the context makes 
it plain that it expresses some injury done 
to the head. The other form of the word is 
nsual enough; but it ordinarily aignifiea 
"a summing up," "a gathering up into a 
head." And handled thamefully {tiTi/uaiil. 
vov) ; liteirullr, diehmtomred. The third aiea* 



-64 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDIXG TO ST. MARK. [ch. xn. 1—44. 



senger they killed outright. The words 
run. And bin they killed; and many others ; 
beating some, and killing some. The con- 
gtruotion here is incomplete, although tlie 
meaning is plain. The complete Beuttnce 
would be, " And him they killed; and fliey 
did violenee to many others, beating some 
Bnd killing some." 

Vers. 6 — 8. — Having yet therefore one 
son, his well-beloved. There is strong 
evidence in favour of a different reading 
here, namely (In eVo elxe*', vihv ayairrir'bv'), 
he had yet one, a beloved eon. There is 
something very touching in this form of ex- 
pression. Many messages had been sent ; 
many Beans had been tried. But one other 
resource remained. " There is one, a beloved 
Son. I will send him; they will surely 
reverence him {iyrpairficrovTai rhp vl6y fiov). 
They will reflect, and reflection will bring 
shame and submission and reverence." Tiiis 
was the last effort of Divine mercy — the 
sending of the Incarnate God, whom the 
Jews put to death without the city, St. 
Mark's words seem rather to imply that 
they killed him within the vineyard, and 
cast out the dead body. But it is possible 
that in his narrative he mentions the climax 
first — they killed him, and then returns to 
a detail of the dreadful tragedy ; they cast 
him out of the vineyard, and there slew him. 
(See Matt. xxi. 39.) 

Ver. 9.— What therefore will the lord of 
the vineyard do % In St. Matthew's narra- 
tive the scribes answer this question. St. 
Luke, as St. Mark here, assigns the answer 
to our Lord. It would seem probable that 
the scribes first answered him, and that 
then he himself repeated their answer, and 
confirmed it by his looks and gesture; so 
that from thence, as well as from what 
followed, they might sufficiently understand 
that he spake these things of them. Then, 
according to St. Luke (xx. 16), they sub- 
joined the words, " God forbid I " an expi es- 
sion wrung from their consciences, which 
accused them and told them that the parable 
applied to them. Here, then, we have a 
distinct prediction of the rejection of the 
Jews and the call of the Gentiles. 

Vers. 10, 11. — This quotation is from Ps. 
cxviii. 22, where David prophesies of Christ. 
The meaning is plainly this, that the chief 
priests and scribes, as the builders of the 
Jewish Church, rejected Christ from the 
building as a useless stone ; yea, more — they 
condemned and crucified him. They re- 
jected him (InreSoKifmaav). The verb in the 
Greek implies that the stone was first 
examined and then deliberately refused. 
But this stone, thus disallowed and set at 
nought by the builders, was made the head 
of the comer. The image here is different 
from that nsed in the Epistles, where Christ 



is spoken of as the chief Comer-stone in th« 
foundation. Here he is represented as th« 
Comer-stone in the cornice. In real truth 
he is both. He is the tried Foundation-stone, 
But he is also the Head of the corner. In 
the great spiritual building he is "all and 
in all," uniting and bimling together all in 
one. This was the Lord's doing (irapii Kvpiov 
iyiv^To oKxr;) ; literally, this was from the 
Lord. The feminine (otfTr)) refers apparently 
to K€(p!iKii. This lifting up of the despised 
and rejected stone to be the Comer-stone 
of the cornice was God's work; and was a 
fitting object for wonder and praise. 

Ver. 12. — The scribes and Pharisees 
knew, partly from the words of this psalm, 
and partly from the looks of Glaiat, that 
they were spoken against them. So they 
sought in their rage and malice to lay hold 
on him ; but they feared the people, with 
whom he was still popular. Thug, however j 
by his rebuke of the scribes and Pliariseea, 
he prepared the way for that death which, 
within three days, they brought upon him. 
And the counsel of God was fulfilled for the 
redemption of men by the blood of Christ. 

Vers. 13, 14.— St. Matthew (xxii. 15) tells 
US that "the Pharisees took counsel how 
they might ensnare him (Sirais abrhv irayi- 
SeiaaiTiv) in his talk;" namely, by pro- 
posing to him captious and insidious ques- 
tions, which, in whatever way he might 
answer them, might expose him to danger. 
On this occasion they enlisted the Herodians 
to join them in their attack upon him. 
These Herodians were a sect of the Jews 
who supported the house of Herod, and 
were in favour of giving tribute to the 
Roman Csesar. They were so called at 
first from Herod tlie Great, who was a 
great supporter of Caesar. TertuUian, 
St. Jerome, and others say that these 
Herodians thought that Herod was the 
promised Messiah, because they saw that 
in him the soeptie had departed from 
Judah (Gen. xlix. 10). Herod encouraged 
these flatterers, and so put to death the 
infants at Bethlehem, that he might thus 
get rid of Christ, lest any other than him- 
self might be regarded as Christ. They 
said that it was on this account that he 
rebuilt the temple with so mucli magnifi- 
cence. The Pharisees took, of course, 
altogether the other side, and stood forward 
as the supporters of the Law of Moses and 
of their national freedom. So, in order that 
they might ensnare him, they sent to him 
their disciples with the Herodians, and m 
the most artful manner proposed to him, 
apparently in good faith, a question which, 
answer it how he might, would, as they 
hoped, throw him upon the horns of a 
dilemma. If he said that tribute ought 
to be given to Otesar, he would expose him- 



cs. xa. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, 



15S 



self to the malice of the Jewish people, 
who prided themselves upon their freedom. 
ir, on the other hand, he said that tribute 
ought not to be given to Otesar, he would 
incur the wrath of Csesar and of the Boman 
power. 

"Vers. 15, 16.— St. Matthew (xiii. 18) says, 
" But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and 
said, Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites?" 
You pretend that you are approaching me 
with a good conscience, sincerely desirous 
to know how you ought to act in this 
matter ; when at the same time you are 
enemies alike of me and of God, and are 
thirsting for my blood, and are doing all 
in your power to torment me, and to en- 
tangle me by fraud. "The first virtue," 
says St. Jerome, "of the respondent is to 
know the mind of the questioner, and to 
adapt his answer accordingly." These 
Pharisees and Herodians flatter Christ that 
they may destroy him; but lie rebukes 
them, that, if possible, lie might save them. 
Bring me a penny, that I may see it. The 
Roman denarius was equal to about eight- 
pence halfpenny. This was the coin in 
which the tribute money was to be paid. 
It had stamped upon it the image of Tibe- 
rius CsBsar, the then reigning Roman em- 
peror. The cognomen of Caesar was first 
given to Julius Csssar, from whom it was 
devolved to his successors. The current 
coin of the country proved the subjection of 
the country to him whose image was upon it. 
Maimoaides, quoted by Dr. John Lightfoot 
(vol. ii. p. 230), says, " Wheresoever the 
money of any king is current, there the 
inhabitants acknowledge that king for their 
lord." 

Ver. 17. — ^Bender unto Caesar the things 
that are Ceesar's, and unto God the things 
that are Ood'a. It is as though our Lord 
said, " Since you Jews are now subject to 
CsBsar — and there is here this evidence of it, 
that his coin is current amongst you; you 
would not use it were you not oblige(l, be- 
cause all Gentile rites and symbols are an 
abhorrence to you ; — but since Csesar de- 
mands nothing of you but his tribute — the 
coin stamped with his own image and name 
— ^it Is your duty to render to him his own 
denarius for tribute. But spiiitual things, 
such as worship and obedience, give these 
to God ; for these he demands from you as 
liie right, and by so doing you will offend 
neither God nor yet Csesar." Our Lord, 
in his infinite wisdom, avoids the ques- 
tion altogether whether the Jews were 
rightly in sulvjection to the Romans. This 
was a doubtful question. But there could 
be no doubt as to the fact that they were 
tributary. This was made plain by the 
evidence of the current coin. Now, this 
being m, it was manifestly the duty of the 



Jewish people to give to Caesar the tribute 
money which he demanded of them for the 
expenses of government, and especially of 
supporting an army to defend them from 
their enemies. And it was no less their 
duty to give their tribute to God, which he 
in his own right demanded of them as liis 
creatures and faithful subjects. The rights 
of Caesar are one thing, and those of God 
are another ; and there is nothing that need 
clash between them. State polity is not 
opposed to religion, nor religion to state. 
Tertullian says, " ' Render to Caesar the 
things that are Caesar's, and to God the 
things that are God's;' that is, give to 
Caesar his image stamped upon his coin, 
and give to God his own image stamped 
upon you: bo that while you render to 
Caesar the coin which is his due, you may 
render your own self to God." This wonder- 
ful answer of our Lord teaches us that we 
ought to try to speak so wisely, and so to 
moderate our speech amongst those who are 
captious, that we may, if possible, offend 
neither side, but steer safely between Soylla 
and Charybdis. And they marvelled at 
Mm. The true Greek reading of the verb 
here is not i6a6fia(rav, but €|€0ai5/xafoi', they 
marvelled greatly at Mm ; they stood marvel- 
ling greatly at him. They marvelled at hia 
wisdom and skill in extncating himself so 
readily out of this net in which they had 
hoped to entangle him. Indeed, the words 
of the psalmist (Ps. ix. 15) were verified in 
them : " The wicked is snared in the work 
of his own hands." He vaulted over the 
trap set for him, leaving them entangled in 
it. He lifted up the question far above the 
petty controversy of the hour, and affirmed 
a great principle of natural and religious 
obligation which belongs alike to all times 
and persona and places. 

Vers. 18—23. — ^And there oome unto him 
Sadduoees, which eay thit there is no resur- 
rection. Josephui states that in the time of 
Judas Macoabsaus there were three sects of 
the Jews, differing amongst themselves, 
namely, the Pharisees, the Sadduoees, and 
the Esgenes. The Hebrew word Zadoo, 
from which the Sadduoees derive their 
name, means "just," or " righteous." These 
Sadducees accepted the Pentateuch, and 
probably more than the Pentateuch; but 
they rejected any oral tradition. They were 
known in the time of our Lord as denying 
those doctrines which connect us more im- 
mediately with another world, such as the 
existence of spirits and of angels, and the 
resurrection of the body. They altogether 
denied fate, afSrming that all things are 
in our own power. They heard Christ 
preach the resurrection, and by meana 
of it persuade men to repentance and a 
holy lite. They therefore pro^iosed to him 



ise 



tm GOSPEL AOOOfiDlNG tO ST. MAtlK. [cH.ml-44 



• question which appeared to them to be 
fatal to the doctrine of a futnre state and 
a resurrection. The case supposed is that of 
■even brethren, who, in compliance with the 
Law of Moaea, one after another, as each 
died in succession, took the same woman to 
wife. It is probable that such a case may 
actually have occurred ; at any rate, it was 
a possiljle case. And the question founded 
upon it by the SadUucees was this — Whose 
wife would she be of them in the resurrec- 
tion ? Here, then, they hoped to entangle 
him, and to show that the doctrine of the 
resurrection was absurd. For if our Lord 
should say that in the resurrection she 
would be the wife of one only, the other 
brethren would have been excited to envy 
and continual strife. Nor could he have 
said that she would be common to the 
seven brothers. Such were the absurdities 
which, as they intimated, would flow out of 
his doctrine of the resurrection, if it could 
be proved. But our Lord scatters to the 
winds all this foolish reasoning, by adding 
one clause omitted by them, and overlooked 
by men of mere earthly minds, namely, 
that in the world to come this widow would 
be the wife of none of the seven brethren. 

Ver. 24. — These Sadducees erred in two 
ways ; (1) They did not know or remember 
the Scriptures, such as that in Job (six. 25), 
" I know that my Redeemer liveth," etc., 
or in Isaiah (xxvi. 19), "Thy dead men 
shall live, together with my dead body shall 
they arise ; " or in Daniel (xii. 2), " Many 
of them that sleep in the dust of the earth 
shall awake," etc. (2) They did not know 
the power of Ood, namely, that he can 
raise the bodies of the dead again to life, 
even as at first he created them out of 
nothing ; for a greater power is required to 
make that to be which was not,, than to 
make that again to be which once was. But 
then the resurrection life will be a new 
life, spiritual, glorious, eternal, like that of 
the angels. So in these words our Lord 
struck at the double root of the error of the 
Sadducees : (1) ignorance of the Scriptures, 
which plainly teach the resurrection; and 
(2) ignorance of the power of God, which 
led them to interpret these Scriptures, 
which speak of the resurrection, to meau only 
a mvstical resurrection from vice to virtue. 

Yet. 25. — But are as angels in heaven — 
not "the angels;" the oils omitted. The 
blessed, after the resurrection, will be like 
angels as to parity, as to a spiritual life, as 
to immortality, a* to happiness and glory. 
There will be no necessity for marriages in 
heaven. Here, on earth, the father dies, 
but he lives on in his children after death. 
In heaven there is no death, but every one 
will live and be blessed for ever ; and there- 
fore tt it that St. Luke adds here, '• Neither 



ran they die any more." St. Augustine 
says, " Marriages are on account of children ; 
children on account of snccession ; succession 
on account of death. But in heaven, a* 
there is no death, neither is there any maiw 
riage." 

Yer. 26.— ^t. Mark ii here carefnl to state 
that what St. Matthew describes as "the word 
spoken by God" was to be found in the 
hook of Moses (Exod. iii. 5), in the place 
concerning the Bush (^iirlT^sPdrov), as it i« 
correctly rendered in the Revised Version. 
Our Lord might have brought yet clearer 
proofs out of Job, Daniel, Ezekiel, eto.; 
but in hia wisdom he preferred to allege 
this out of Moses and the Pentateuch, 
because, whatever the views of the Sad- 
ducees may have been as to other parts of 
the Old Testament, these books of Moses 
they readily acknowledged. I am the God 
of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the 
God of Jacob. The force of the argument is 
this, that " God is not the God of the dead, 
but of the living." Their souls are still 
alive ; and if these patriarchs are still aUve, 
there will be a resurrection. If men are to 
live for ever, they will, sooner or later, live 
again in the completeness of their being, 
namely, of body and soul and spirit Our 
Lord would, therefore, say tMs: "In a few 
days you will put me to death; but in three 
days I shall rise again from the dead. And 
after that, in due time I shall raise them 
from the dead at the last day, and bring 
them in triumph with me into heaven." 
The Sadducees and the Epicureans denied 
the resurrection, because they denied the 
immortality of the soul ; for these two 
doctrines hang together. For if the soul 
is immortal, then, since it naturally depends 
upon the body, it is necessary that the body 
should rise. Otherwise the soul would con- 
tinue to exist in a dislocated state, and 
would only obtain a divided life and an 
imperfect existence. Hence our Lord here 
distinctly proves the resurrection of the 
body from the immortality of the soul. 
When he speaks of Abraham, Isaac, and 
Jacob, he does not speak of their souls 
only, but of their whole being. Therefore, 
though they are for a time dead to us, yet 
they live to God, and sleep, as it were, 
because ere long God will raise them from 
death, as from a sleep, to a blessed and 
endless life. For all, though they have 
passed out of our sight, still live to him. 

Ver. 27.— Ye therefore do greatly err. 
The Greek is, omitting the aiv, simply 
i/ius iroAii irKavaaOe, Ye greatly err. The 
omission is more consistent with St. Mark's 
usual style. The Sadducees entirely mi»> 
understood the meaning of their own Scrip* 
tnres. 

Ver. 28.— St Matthew (xxii. M) wys ltM« 



W. xn, 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



1.^7 



that th» Pharieeea, when they heard that 
he had put the Sadducees to silence, gathered 
themselves together, and that then one of 
them, who was a lawyer (vo/ilnos), that is, 
"a scribe," asked him this question, What 
commandment is the first of all 1 It appears 
here from St. Mark that this scribe had 
been present at the discussion with the 
Siidducees, and he had probably informed 
the others of what bad taken place, and of 
the wisdom and power of our Lord's answer; 
■o he was naturally put forward to try our 
Lord with another crucial question. It 
does not necessarily appear that he had an 
evil intention in putting this question. He 
may, in his own mind (seeing the wisdom 
and skill of our Lord), have desired to hear 
what Christ had to say to a very difficult 
question on a matter deeply interesting to 
all true Hebrews. The question was one 
much mooted amongst the Jews in the time 
of our Lord. "For many," says Bede, 
"thought that the first commandment in 
the Law related to offerings and sacrifices, 
with regard to which so much is said in 
Leviticus, and that the right worship of 
God consisted in the due offering of these." 
On this account the Pharisees encouraged 
children to say " Corbau" to their parents; 
and hence this candid and truth-loving 
scribe, when he heard our Lord's answer 
about the love of God and of our neighbour, 
said that such obedience was worth " more 
than all whole burnt offerings and sacri- 
fices." With regard to the love of God, St. 
Bernard says, " The measure of our love to 
God is to love him without measure ; for the 
immense goodness of God deserves all the 
loTe that we can possibly give to him." 

Ver. 31. — Thou shalt love thy neighbour 
as thyself. God is to be loved above every- 
thing — above all angels, or men, or any 
created thing. But after God, amongst 
created things, our neighbour is above all 
to be loved. And we are to extend to our 
neighbour that kind of love with which we 
love ourselves. Our love of ourselves is not 
a frigid love, but a sincere and ardent love. 
In like manner we should love our neigh- 
bour, and desire for him all those good 
things both for the body and for the soul 
that we desire for ourselves. This is what 
our Lord himself teaches us. " All things 
whatsoever ye would that men should do to 
you, even so do unto them." There is none 
other commandment greater than these. St. 
Matthew (xxii. 40) says, "On these two 
commandments hang the whole Law and 
the prophets." There is no commandment 
greater than these, because all the precepts 
of the Divine Law are included in them. 
So that our Lord here teaches us that we 
ought continually to have these two pre- 
cepts in our minds and before our eyes, and 



direct all our thoughts and words and 
actions by them, auJ regulate our whole life 
according to them. 

Ver. 32. — The first words of this verse 
should be rendered thus : Of a truth, Master, 
thou hast well said that he is one, In the 
remainder of the scribe's answer we find a 
different word used in the Greek for " mind," 
or " understanding," from that just used by 
our Lord. In our Lord's answer the word 
is Sidvoia, Here it is triveais. Both words 
are well rendered by " understanding." It 
is an act of understanding. It is the thought 
associating itself with the object, and 
"standing under" it so as to support it. 
(See Dr. Morison on St. Mark.) 

Ver. 33. — Is more (■irepi(r(r6Tep6y) — eujoord- 
ing to the most approved reading, much 
more — than all whole burnt offerings and 
Bicrifices. This scribe was evidently emerg- 
iiig out of the bondage of ceremonial things, 
and perceiving the supremacy of the moral 
law. 

Ver. 34. — And when Jesus saw that he 
answered disoreetly (rawc^'''^)) he said unto 
him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of 
God. It would appear from this answer 
that our Lord regarded him as one who 
approached him with the sincere desire to 
know the truth, and so he encouraged him. 
This shows how powerful an influence our 
I.oid's teaching had already exercised 
amongst all classes of the Jews. This 
scribe, notwithstanding the prejudices of 
his class, had reached the border-land of 
the kingdom. He had learnt that the true 
way to the kingdom was by the love of God 
and of our neighbour. He was not far 
fiom the kingdom — not far from "the 
Church militant here on earth," by which 
is the way to the Church triumphant in 
heaven. He was not fir from the kingdom, 
but still he wanted thnt which is the true 
pathway to the kingdom — faith in Christ 
as the Saviour of the world. And no man 
after that durst ask him any question. St. 
Matthew (xxii. 46) places these words after 
the next occurrence. But there is no incon- 
sistency in the two narratives, because in 
this next incident our Lord puts the 
question to them; and this silenced both 
their questioning and their answering. All 
felt that there was sucli a vast reach of 
wisdom and knowledge in all that he said, 
that it was in vaiu to contend with him. 

Ver. 35. — Our Lord was now in the 
temple, and he took the opportunity lor 
instruct! np; the sciibes and l^harisees oou' 
corning his person and his dignity. Thus, 
as ever, he returned good for evil. He here 
taught them that the Messiah was not a 
mere man, as they supposed, but that he 
was both GU>d and man, and that tlierefors 
they ought not to wonder or to be offended 



158 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [caxn. 1-44. 



because he called himself the Son of God. 
Bt. Matthew (xxii. 42) more fully gives 
their answer first, namely, that " Christ is 
the Son of David." They should have said 
that, as God, he was the Son of God, ao- 
eording to those words, " Thou art my Son j 
this day have I begotten thee ; " but that, 
as man, he was the Son of David. Their 
answer was very different from that of 
Peter: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of 
the living God." But they wanted the 
Divine knowledge which the disciples had 
gained. 

Ver. 36. — ^The lord said unto my Lord. 
Prom this verse (Ps. ox.) our Lord shows 
that the Messiah, such as he was, was not 
a mere man, as the Pharisees thought, but 
that he was God, and therefore David's 
Lord. The meaning, therefore, is this, " The 
Lord God said to my Lord," that is, Christ; 
" Sit thou at my right hand," that is, when, 
after his cross, his death,and his resurrection, 
he will exalt him far above all principality 
and power, and place him next to him in 
heaven, that he may reign with supreme 
happiness and power and glory over all 
creatures. These words show that this is a 
Divine decree, fixed and irrevocable. TiU I 
make thine enemies thy footstool (_imoir6Stov 
T&v rroSaii ffov) ', literally, the footstool of thy 
feet; that is, reign with me in glory untU 
*.he day of judgment, when I will make the 
wicked, all opposing powers, subject to thee. 
The word "tUl" does not imply that Christ 
will then cease to reign. " Of his kingdom 
there shall be no end." But he will then 
formally deliver up the kingdom to God, 
even the Father, only that he may receive 
it again as the second Person of the God- 
head. 

Vers. 38, 39. — ^These verses are a conden- 
sation of the woes recorded at length by St. 
Matthew (xxUi.). And he said unto them in 
his doctrine (^c rp StSaxv ""toG) — literally, 
in hit teaching — Beware of the scribes which 
desire (rav ee^ivTuv) to walk in long robes 
(^K o-toAoTj). The utSKti was a rich robe 
which reached down to the ankles, and was 
adorned with fringes. The scribei took 
pleasure in this kind of display. The 
salient points in their charaoler were os- 
tentation, avarice, and religious hypocrisy. 

Ver. 40. — There is a change in the con- 
struction here, which is not marked in the 
Authorized Version. The sentence in this 
fortieth verse should stand alone, and be 
read thus : They which devour (^ot KareaOl- 
ovTes) widows' houses, and for a pretence 
make long prayers; these shall receive 
greater condemnation. The sentence thus 
read is far more graphic. The statement thus 
becomes indeed more general, but the refer- 
ence is still to thL' ecribes who through their 
avarice swallowed up the property of help- 



less widows, and through their hypocrisy, in 
the hope of thus more effectually imposing 
upon their victims, lengthened out their 
prayers. Cheater condemnation. The word 
in the Greek is Kpi/ia, that is, "judgment." 
A severer sentence would fall upon them in 
the day of judgment and a heavier condem- 
nation, because, under the semblance of 
piety, they practised iniquity, and indulged 
their avarice under the mask of religion. 

Ver. 41.— He sat down over against the 
treasury (ya(o<tn)\iKiov, from yoi(a, a 
Persian word meaning "treasure," and 
ipuKiTTeiv, to guard). This was the recep- 
tacle into which the offerings of the people 
were cast, for the uses of the temple and for 
the benefit of the priests and of the poor. 
Hence that part of the temple in which 
these gifts were kept was called the treasury. 
He beheld (iBtdip^C) — literally, he was behold- 
ing ;hewae observing — how the multitude (toj 
6 Sixmos) — that is, in what manner, with what 
motives (for he was the heart-searcher) 
the crowd of givers — cast money ((SiiAAei 
XaAKdi/); literally, is casting. St. Luke 
uses the term (tA Sapo) " their gifts." Many 
that were rich cast in much (iroWd), that is, 
"many pieces." There were several aper- 
tures in the treasury, which from their 
shape were called trumpets. Some of these 
had special inscriptions, marking the dea- 
tination of the oiferings. 

Ver. 42,— A poor widow (jxla xhpa i'to>xV) ; 
literally, one poor viidow; one specially 
singled out for notice. St. Luke says, e?5e 
Se Kal Tiva x^P'"' Tfyixp^" '• literally, a widoa 
who supported herself by her own little labour. 
And she cast in two mites (\^vTa), which 
make a farthing. The farthing was the 
fourth part of an as, and ten of these made 
a denarius. The Greek word (Keirra) means 
literi^Uy " thin pieces." 

Vers. 43, 44. — This poor widow hath cast 
in more. The right reading of the verb here 
is e/3a\e, not $e^\riKe ; this aoristic render- 
ing has very good authority — this poor 
widow cast in more. Her act is completed, 
and has gone up for a memorial before God. 
She " gave " more than all the others who 
are casting (twp fia\K6vTii>v), not "have cast 
in (jav fiaK6vTa>v)." She gave more, when 
she threw in those two mites, than all the 
others were giving — more, that is, in the esti- 
mation of him who sees not as man sees. 
God does not weigh the gift so much as the 
mind of the giver. That gift is really the 
greater in his sight, not which is actually of 
greater value, but which is greater in respect 
of the giver. Therefore this poor widow, 
when she gave her farthing, gave more than 
they all, because she gave idl her living — all, 
tliat is, that ehe had beforehand for that 
day, trusting that the Lord would give her 
her bread for that day. And so she carried 



<m. xiL 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. 



159 



off the palm for liberality, Christ himself 
being the Judge. St. Ambrose says, " That 
which God esteems is not that which you 



proudly present, but what yon offer with 
humility and devotioa." 



HOMILETICa 

Vers. 1 — 12. — Rebel vine-dressers. By this time theie was no further prospect o» 
possibility that the fate of Jesus might be averted. His entry into Jerusalem in state, 
and his cleansing of the temple, were acts that the priests, scribes, and Pharisees could 
not pardon, for they were a claim to authority altogether incompatible with their own. 
And the words of Jesus were as bold as his acts ; their justice and severity enraged the 
rulers beyond all degree. The enemies of truth and righteousness were by this time 
fully resolved to strike down him whose character and ministry were the living embodi- 
ment of what they most hated. It was only a question of time and manner and 
instrumentalities. All this Jesus knew, and he knew that " his hour was come." There 
was no occasion now for reticence, and there was no longer any end to be subierved 
by it. His speech was always plain and faithful, but now his denunciations wera 
unsparing, and his warnings terrible. On this Tuesday morning of his last week, our 
Lord summed up in this parable of " the wicked husbandmen," " the rebel vine- 
dressers," the rebellious history of Israel in the past, and the approaching doom of 
Israel in the future. It was in the temple precincts, and in the presence l»th of the 
people and of the chief priests, that the great Teacher so boldly aserted his own special 
mission and authority, and so emphatically foretold his own fate and the judgment 
which should overtake the guilty nation. The immediate application of the parable is 
clear enough. Israel was the vineyard planted in the election of Abraham, and hedged 
about and provided with all things needful, in the giving of the Law by Moses and in 
the settlement in Canaan under Joshua. The Eternal, who had so favoured the chosen 
people, had sent prophets in three periods — that of Samuel, that of Elijah and Elisha, 
and that of Isaiah and Jeremiah — to summon Israel to a life of spirituality and obedience 
corresponding with their privileges. The Jews had not fulfilled the Law of God, of 
rendered to Heaven the fruits meet for repentance. And now he, the Son of God, waj 
among them, the final Embassy from the throne of the great King. It was but too 
plain to all eyes that the unfruitfulness and rebellion of Israel reached the most awful 
heii;ht just when their advantages were the greatest, and the mercy of the Eternal was 
most conspicuous. They, who had rejected and slain tlje prophets, were now plotting 
against the very Son of God. They were about to put him to death, because he told 
them the truth and urged the rightful claims and demands of his Father. They might 
think, and did think, that this would be the end ; but such an eipectation was delusive : 
it was incompatible with the righteous government of God. And the Lord plainly 
foretold them that, as surely as God reigned in heaven and" on earth, so surely should 
the rebellion of Israel be awfully and signally chastised, their special privileges come to 
a perpetual end, and the blessings which they were rejecting be conferred by God's 
sovereign favour upon others, who should render the fruits in their seasons. Forty 
years afterwards Jerusalem was destroyed, the Jews were scattered, and their national 
li fe came to an end ; and the kingdom of God was established among the Gentiles. 
The parable has lessons, not only for Israel, but for us ; it embodies truth spiritual, 
practical, and impressive. 

L OUK EARTHLY OCCUPATION : TO TILL THB VINEYARD OF GoD. The flgm'e SCtS forth 

our vocation and responsibility. It represents our life as one of privilege. It is not a 
wiliiemess, but a vineyard, which we are called to cultivate. God has done much for 
us, iL appointing for us the circumstances and opportunities of our existence. Our life 
is one of work. The most favourable situation and the most fruitful soil avail little if 
the plot be neglected ; only faithful and diligent labour on our part can secure that the 
purposes of the Divine Lord shall be fulfilled. It is for us to " give diligence to make 
our calling and election sure." The greater our privileges, the moremeed that we should 
be diligent, laborious, and prayerful. Opportunities must be used, and not neglected 
or abused. 
II. God's righteous expectation : that we shall yield him fruit. What is th« 



160 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. hi. 1—44, 

erop, the produce, he desires to see^ Holiness and obedience, love and prais«, as far as 
he is concerned ; and, as far as regards our fellow-men, justice and gentleness, benevo- 
lence and helpfulness. He looks for repentance from the sinner, for faith from the hearer 
of the gospel, for improvement in character and for usefulness in service from the 
Christian. Why he does this is obvious enough. He has given us the means of know- 
ledge and the opportunities of devotion, and looks for a return. " What more," he says, 
" could I have done than I have done ? " And this expectation is for our sake as well as 
for his own. Our fruitfulness is our welfare and our happiness ; it brings its own reward. 

m God's bbquibembnt and demand upon men, by his mbssbngees and by his 
Son. Our Lord appeals to us both by the Law and by the gospel. The teaching of 
his Word brings before us his rightful claims, and shows us how much it ia for our 
highest advantage that we should not be unmindful of them. He summoni us by the 
lessons of his providence, and by the counsels of our Christian friends, to a religious 
life. Yet there is no appeal so powerful, so persuasive, as that which God makes to us 
by his own " dear Son." Christ comes to us with authority ; he comes to us with grace. 
He comes from the Father, and he comes with the deepest interest in our condition, 
anxious to overcome our rebelliousness, and to lead us to a holy and gratel'ul obedience. 
The gospel of Jesus Christ is the one great, Divine appeal to the hearts of men. It is 
the method which infinite Wisdom and Mercy have devised of winning our confidence 
and love, and securing our ready obedience and loyal service. Those who have rejected 
other messengers of Heaven may justly be enjoined to receive with reverence the Son 
of God. 

rV. The penalties of fbditlkssness and bbbellion. These are described in this 
passage in the most affecting terms. Privileges are removed from the unfaithful. The 
negligent and rebellious are punished and cast out. The advantages which they have 
spurned are transferred to others. 

V. The ebwabd of fbuitfulnbss and lotaltt. 1. Christ is glorified, even though 
there may be those who reject and contemn him. Christ himself quotes a passage of 
Scripture, in which this great truth is set forth, though by a change of figure. ". The 
stone which the builders rejected is become the Head of the corner." The purposes of 
God are accomplished, and cannot be frustrated by the guilt of man. 2. Other hus- 
bandmen are found who will deal more faithfully with the sacred trust. These shall 
offer the fruits of obedience, which shall be acceptable to the Lord of the vineyard. 
They shall be confirmed in their occupation, shall be blessed in their work, shall enjoy 
the Master's favour, and shall live in the light of their Master's glory. 

Vers. 13—17. — Caesar's due. There could not have been a more decisive proof of the 
duplicity and hypocrisy of the Jewish leaders than that furnished by this incident. It 
is certain that they were opposed to the Roman sway, that they nursed in their hearts 
hopes of Jewish independence, that they would have eagerly welcomed such a Messiah 
as they looked for — one who should deliver them from the yoke of foreign bondage. 
Yet, in their malignity, they were ready to denounce Jesus to the Roman governor 
should he express an opinion adverse to the paying of tribute, just as they were ready 
to deliver him up to the fury of the populace should he formally approve and sanction 
the rights of the empire over the Jewish people. Thus — 

I. A JDST BUT INSINCERE COMPLIMENT VEILS A MALIGNANT DESIOH. It is an astOUudiug 

instance of duplicity, this method of approaching the Lord Jesus. These Pharisees 
and Herodians make admissions which they would never have made except as the 
means to an evil end. They address the Master with the acknowledgment that he is 
•' true "—in this a striking contrast to themselves ; that he is impartial, caring not for 
any one, nor regarding the person of men ; that he taught the way of God. This was 
not empty, complimentary language ; it was just. Whether in their hearts they believed 
it to be so, we cannot say ; but Christ's enemies were often unintentional witnesses, both 
to his virtues and to his Divine authority and mission. Their only aim was to con- 
ciliate him, so that, in an unguarded moment, he might, with natural frankness, commit 
himself to some judgment which they might use to his harm. 

II. A CBAFTY ALTERNATIVE, AN INSIDIOUS SNAEE, IS WISELY ELUDED. " Is it lawful tQ 

give tribute unto Csesar, or not?" A categorical answer either way would have been 
immediately and effectively used to hia injury ; he could not, after so answering, both 



CH.xa,l— 44J THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAEK. 161 

stand well with his countrymen and remain free from the imputation of disloyalty to 
the then supreme power of Home. The alternative was fairly evaded, and the snare 
was escaped, by the method in which Jesus dealt with the question propounded. There 
was something picturesque and impressive to the popular mind in his asking for the 
donarius, and pointing to the emperor's image and superscription. There was manifest 
reasonableness in yielding to Ciesar what was so obviously his own ; yet it was pointed 
out that this might be loyally done without detriment to the higher obligations of 
relie;ion. 

III. A PRINCIPLE OF ACTION IN THE 8EVERAI. DBPAETMENT8 OF HUMAN LIFK IB ONCE 

FOR ALL ASSERTED. 1. We havo here a recognition that civil government is of Divine 
authority. It docs not follow from this that every government deserves approval, or 
even that under no circumstances is it lawful to resist constituted authority. But our 
Lord teaches, and his apostles teach, as a general principle, that civil governors are to be 
obeyed, that " the powers that be are ordained of God." 2. An implication that there 
is a province into which civil governors may not intrude, that there are obligations which 
take precedence even of the duties we owe to the earthly sovereign. There are claims 
which the Divine Lord himself prefers, and which he re;j;ardH as supreme. The apostles 
clearly grasped this principle, and put it into practice when the rulers interfered with 
their discharge of wliat they held to be their reli.iious duties. When a conflict occurs 
between the allegiance due to the civil ruler anM that due to the supreme King, our 
Lord's words warrant the preforence of the Divine to the human law. In times of 
persecution especially, the principle of our Lord's words has ofien guided the wavering 
and sustained the feeble. " Whether it bo rij^ht to obey God rather than man, judge 
ye I " We may say that the motlern privilege of religious liberty has grown out of this 
incident in our Lord's ministry, these wonls from our Lord's lips. And to the same 
source we may attribute the growing tendency on the part of secular powers to with- 
draw from the province of religion, and to alluw free scope to the action of conscience 
and full liberty for the profession and for the rites of reli'jjion. There is a province into 
which no earthly authority may intrude, and where the Creator reigns supreme and 
alone. 

VeH. 1 8 — 27. — Saddnceea confuted. Of all the subjects which awaken the specula- 
tive curiosity and inquiry of men, none approaches, in dignity and importance, the 
future life. The nobler spirits, in every civilizeil and cultured community, have either 
held as an article of faith, or have cherished with fondest hope, the prospect of immor- 
tality. Annihilation is a prospect which none but the degraded and sinful can consent 
to accept without shuddering horror. It has often been observed as very remarkable, 
though not inexplicable, that the Pentateuch contains no express, explicit statement 
regarding a future life. It appiars that the revelation of immortality was progressive ; 
for expectations regarding a conscious existence of hajipiness after death are certainly 
foimd witli growing frequency in the later books of the Old Testament. The psalmists 
a.nJ pro|>h('ts rejoiced in the hope of a heavenly rest and nn imperishable fellowship with 
the Father of spirits. At the time of our Lord's ministry there was a division among 
the i-eligious authorities of the Jewish people upon this all-important subject; the 
Pharisees holding to the doctrines of immortality and resurrection, and the Sadduceea 
denying and appaiently ridiculing both. Amongst the Sadducees were rnany of the 
most intellectual of the upper classes of society. They also retained in their own lead- 
ing families the office of high priest. Both our Lord Christ and his apostle Paul took 
a very decided stand against the Snrhlneaic doctrine and party. During the last week 
of our Lord's ministry, when the con 11 ct with his enemies was reaching its height, many 
assaults were made from various quarters against Jesus and his claims and leaching. 
This passage records the attack of the rationalistic party upon the Divine Master, and 
his original and conclusive repulse of that attack. 

I. The reasonins of the Sadducees against the tbaohins of oub Lord upoif 
iMMOHTALiTif AND RESURKEOTION. 1. It was indirect leasoning. Instead of attacking 
the doctrine, they simply attacked a supposed iufuriiice from it, viz. the continuaacae of 
physical human relations in another life. 2. It w.is frivolous reasoning. They must 
havB round it hard to stale with serious faces a case so absurd. It would have been 
childish had they supposed the womaft to i^ave married twice ; the supposition that she 
WARR— H, * 



1«2 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch.xilI— 44. 

should confront in the resurrection life the rival claims of seven husbands was ridiculous. 
This is not the temper in which great problems regarding human destiny should be 
diaoussed. 3. It was inconclusive; for no one of the alternative solutions of the 
difficulty proposed would have been incompatible with a future life. 

II. The general reply of the Lord Jesus to this eeasonino. 1. He refutes the 
argument, if it can be so called, which they had adduced. Marriage is an earthly 
institution, and is especially adapted to a mortal race, providing that generation shall 
succeed generation. Love is indeed imperishable, and shall bo perfected in heaven ; 
but marriage shall no longer be necessary when men shall be equal to the angels, and 
shall sin and die no more. Therefore no reasoning founded upon the continuance of 
this physical relationship has place with reference to the life beyond the grave. 2. He 
bases the doctrine of the future life upon the power of God, which they strangely 
overlooked. It is the reasoning which was repeated by St. Paul, "Why should it 
be thought a thing impossible with you that God should raise the dead?" The 
omnipotence which first called human nature into being is surely able to revive the 
spirit and perpetuate its consciousness and activity. Thia is an unanswerable 
argument still against all dogmatic denial of the future life. It does not in Itself 
establish the doctrine, but it is conclusive against those who deny it. It removes the 
presumption from the opponents to the upholders of immortality. 3. He refers to the 
Scriptures for grounds for belief in a future life. Those who admitted their authority 
would find it hard to reconcile such admission with disbelief in the resurrection. 

III. The special argument bt which the Lord Jksus establishes faith in 
iMMORTALiTT AND A FUTURE LIFE. 1. Jcsus refers to an authority which the Sadducees 
professed emphatically to revere — the Pentateuch. "The Law" was their especial 
pride, and they may have justified their scepticism by the absence of explicit teaching 
upon this great doctrine from the books of Moses. 2. Jesus quotes a familiar passage, 
in which he reads, or from which he deduces, a new and striking and convincing 
argument. It is upon record that God declared himself to Moses as "the God of 
Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob." Now, what did this imply ? That God liad heen 
their God, but that, they having ceased to exist, he was no longer? Or, that he was 
the God of their mouldering or dispersed dust, which, upon the theory of annihilation, 
was all that remained of them ? Either those who had been wont to read this passage 
must have passed it over without reflection, or they must have been satislied with an 
interpretation crude and empty. Or else they must have drawn the inference which 
the great Master now drew : " God is not the God of the dead, but of the living." 
Once he declares himself his people's God, he remains such for ever ; and they remain 
his, — conscious recipients of his favour, and responsive partakers of his Divine and 
Fatherly love. He is a covenant God ; his promises are never broken, and his declara- 
tions never fail. An immortal God involves the immortality of those whom he has 
created in his image, redeemed by his grace, renewed by his Spirit. If he is what he 
has revealed himself as being, if his people are what he has declared them to be, then 
death has no power over them ; they are destined to " glory, honour, and immortality " 
Por"allliveinhim." 

Vers. 28 — 34. — The great commandments. This passage of the Gospel affords 
common ground, upon which those who lay the greatest stress upon Christian doctrine 
may meet with conciliation and harmony those who are wont to insist most upon 
Christian morality. Here is a statement, upon the higliest authority, as to what God 
requires of man, as to what man owes to God and to his fellow-men. " Do this, and 
thou shalt live ! " It is a sublime view of the great purposes of our spiritual being. 
Beyond this religion cannot go ; for this is the end for which our nature was framed' 
for which revelation was vouchsafed. Yet who can read these requirements of a holy 
»nd benevolent Creator and Bulei' without feeling that by himself they have not been 
fulfilled ? The man must be besotted by self-conceit, or must have silenced conscience, 
who claims to have loved God with all his powers, or to have uniformly loved his 
neighbour as himself. The purer, the more stringent the Law, the deeper the humilia- 
tion and contrition of the transgressor. What, then, more fitted to induce sinners to 
'•eceive the gospel with faith and gratitude than these words of Jesus? What can 
n^iks so welcome the tilings of Divine forgiveness secured through tl^e redemptiop 



CH. XII. 1—41] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINti TO ST. MARK. 16S 

wrought by the Saviour on the cross? And, further, aa we meditate upon this ideal of 
a beautiful and acceptable moral life, how profoundly are we impressed with a sense of 
our own weakness I And surely this must lead us to seek and to accept the aid of the 
Spirit of God, who is the Spirit at once of power and of love 1 Thus the inculcation 
of Christian morality naturally suggests the doctrines upon which we build our hopes 
for time and for eternity. On the other hand, in the presence of these inspiriting 
words of the Master, how is it possible for the candid and the faithful to rest in that 
view of the gospel which represents religion as merely securing the forgiveness of sin, 
and immunity from wrath and punishment ? Here is a summons to a spiritual, a self- 
denying, and a benevolent life. 

I. The question proposed to Jesus. 1. In itself it was a worthy, a noble ques- 
tion. Unlike the trifling and ridiculous riddle propounded by the Pharisees, it was an 
inquiry becoming on the part of the scribe who urged it, and fit for the consideration 
and judgment of the holy Master himself. It respected commandments, and thus 
acknowledged the rule of a just God, and the duty of man's obedience and submission. 
It concerned morality — the highest of all human interests. It evinced an evident 
desire to do what was right, and to give precedence to what should be acknowledged 
best. There can be no nobler inquiry than this — What is the will of God ? What 
is the duty of man? Wliat shall I do? 2. In its spirit and purport, the question 
was commendable. The questioner observed that Jesus had answered well ; that he 
had solved with marvellous wisdom the difficult question of the Pharisees ; that he had 
dealt skilfully and conclusively with the cavilling of the Sadducees. The limits of 
civil submission are an interesting branch of study ; the future life is of all speculative 
questions the most engrossing to the thoughtful ; but of even wider interest are the 
foundation, the character, the means, of human goodness. The inquiry as to the first 
of commandments was put as a testing question, but in no captious spirit ; it was the 
expression of a desire to learn — to learn from the highest authorit}', to learn the most 
sacred principles of moral life. And not to learn only, but doubtless to practise the 
lesson acquired. 

II. The answer of Jesus to the sombb. There was no hesitation in the Master's 
reply to the question proposed ; the challenge was at once taken up. And consummate 
wisdom was shown in the reference to the Mosaic Law, the very words of which were 
quoted. Thus the right-minded were conciliated, yet at no expense, but rather by 
the manifestation, of truth. And the hostile were silenced ; for who of the Jewish 
rabbis could call in question the authority of their own sacred books ? When we look 
into the substance of the response, several remarkable facts become apparent. 1. Love is 
represented as the sum of the Divine commandments. The Pentateuch contained the 
injunctions our Lord repeated, but they were included in a vast body of precepts and 
prohibitions. It could scarcely be said with justice that love was the most prominent 
of the Mosaic commandments. Christ'? independence, discernment, and legislative 
authority were shown in his fixing upon the two requirements which occur in different 
books and in different connections, and in bringing them out into the light of day, and 
exhibiting them as in his view of surpassing importance, and so promulgating them as 
the laws of his spiritual kingdom through all time. God himself is love ; Christ is 
the expression and proof of the Divine love ; and it is therefore natural and reason- 
able that love should be the law of the Divine kingdom, the badge of the spiritual 
family. 2. The Object of supreme love is God himself. The personality of God is 
assumed, for we cannot love an abstraction, a power ; only a living being, who thinks, 
feels, and purposes. The unity of God is asserted ; for although, when Jesus lived on 
earth, the Jews were no longer subject to the temptation to idolatry, such temptation 
had beset them when the Law was originally given, and for a long period subsequently. 
The relationship between God and man is presumed — " thy God ; " for he is ours and 
we are his. The daims of God are implied ; his character, his treatment of men, his 
redeeming love in Christ. " We love him, because he first loved us." 3. The 
description and degree of love demanded are very fully stated in the text. The expres- 
sioa is a very strong one : " With all thy heart, soul, miud, and strength." Attempt* 
hare been made accurately to discriminate among these. But it seems sufficient to 
8»y thdt the love requirrd in such language is cordial and fervent ; cordial, as dis- 
tinguished frona Baere profession, and fervent, as disAnguished from lukewarmness a,vfi 



IM THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xii. 1—44. 

indifference. The whole of our nature is expected to combine, so to speak, in this 
exercise. Not only so, but God is to be regarded as the supreme Object of affection 
and devotion. He demands the first place in our heart ; and those who see his grace 
in Christ cannot find it hard to offer what he demands. 4. Love to man follows upon 
love to God. It may, indeed, in order of time, in some measure precede and prepare 
for it. But in the moral order, in the order of obligation, love to God comes first, and, 
indeed, furnishes the one sound and safe basis for human love. The designation of the 
objects of this love deserves notice ; they are our " neighbours." We must interpret 
this term in the light of our Lord's answer to an earlier question put to him by a cer 
tain lawyer : " Who is my neighbour? " In the parable of the good Samaritan Jesus 
then laid a broad foundation for human charity. Not our own family, or Church, or 
nation, but all mankind, are to be regarded with good will, and treated, not only with 
justice, but with kindness. Practically, those have a claim upon our kindly feeling 
and good offices whom Providence brings into any contact with us in human society. 
Bemark the measure of this love : " As thyself." It is, then, right to love self ; but 
in subordination to Divine love, and in accordance with love to neighbours. The test 
is an effective one, and can always be applied; tlie Law is parallel with the golden rule, 
" Do unto others as ye would they should do unto you." The dependence of this law 
upon the preceding is obvious. Christianity bases morality upon religion ; we love 
our fellow-men as the children of God, because he loves them and for his sake. 5. 
Love, to be acceptable, must display itself in practical forms. The love we cherish 
toward God should lead to worship and to obedience — in a word, to a religious life. 
The love we entertain to our fellow-men will reveal itself in the demeanour, the lan- 
guage, and still more in the conduct. Helpfulness, self-denial, liberality, forbearance, 
are all fruits of love ; which is destructive of discord, malice, and envy, of jealousy, 
hatred, and persecution. Here is the power to banish the vices, and the remedy to 
heal the spiritual maladies which afflict mankind 1 

III. The scribe's appkoving consent to Christ's reply. 1. He thus proved his 
independence of judgment. Others, when answered and silenced by Jesus, retired dis- 
comfited, but unconvinced. This rabbi, with a mind candid and open to the truth, 
receives the Lord's saying as sufficient and decisive, and renders his own consent and 
approbation in the words, " Thou hast well said." 2. He shows his pleasure in the 
grand utterances of inspiration by repeating the language which Jesus had quoted — 
language evidently both familiar to him and congenial to his character. 3. His dolq- 
ness and spirituality are apparent in his stating, what Jesus had implied, the supe- 
riority of the heart's affection to all service of the hands. 

IV. The commendation expressed bt Jesus. 1. The position of the lawyer was 
very different from that of others. There were many who were " far " from Gt)d's 
kingdom. The Pharisees for the most part by their formality, the Sadducees by their 
scepticism and arrogance, the publicans and sinners by their vices, the multitude by 
their ignorance, — these were far from the kingdom. Amongst those who may justly be 
so described are always some who are outwardly numbered among the religious, as 
well as multitudes who are without God, and manifestly have no hope. 2. There 
\i ere several respects in which this scribe approached the spiritual kingdom of the 
Saviour. (1) He was acquainted with God's Word, and was interested in it ; he explored 
and studied it. He appreciated the grandeur and beauty of the Divine Law, and he 
was bold and earnest in speaking of it. In all this he displayed sympathy with him 
who came to magnify and to fulfil the Law, and who bade the people search the Scrip- 
tures. (2) He thoroughly agreed with the dictum of the great Master, with regard 
to the first and most binding and comprehensive ordinances of the inspired Word. 
Whether or not he was prepared with this answer to the question he proposed, it is 
evident that the answer commended itself to his judgment and conscience, and that 
the Divine Eespondent was regarded by him with reverential admiration. It is well to 
find the truth ; but it is also well, when others have found it, to recognize and to 
acceipt it. f3) Grand indeed was this scribe's confession, that love " is much more than 

whole burnt offerings and sacrifices." All religions — the true as well as the false are 

corrupted by a tendency in human nature to substitute the sacrificial, the ceremonial, 
the verbal, for the real, the spiritual. Men think that to comply with directions, 
iftsjiructive and profitable i» themselves, but having reference onlj- to symbolical actions, 



ca. xii. 1—44.1 THE GOStBL ACCORMNG TO ST. MARK. 1«« 

Ib all important, and they give diligent attention to these, and neglect the weightier 
matters of the Law. It is presumed that bodily service is sufBcient, in forjietfulness 
«f the fact that God is the Searcher of hearts, and that he will be worshipped in spirit 
and in truth. This is a lesson which still needs to be inculcated, even in days of Chris- 
tian light and evangelical fervour. Never be it forgotten that character and conduct 
are of supreme importance, and that the only sufBcient, conclusive evidence that a man 
has received the benefits of redemption, and has felt the renewing power of the Spirit 
of God, is to be found in the reiga of love within his soul, and the manifestation of 
love in his whole character and life. 

v. The reservation and qualification in otra Lord's approval. If there was so 
much that was admirable in the spirit and the language of this student and expositor 
of the Law, what was lacking? If he was near the kingdom, what separated him 
from it, and prevented him from entering in ? This question we cannot answer with 
certainty ; we can only surmise. There may have been an inadequ-lte sense of sin ; 
his admiration of Jesus may have come short of true faith in him ; and he may have 
been unready to make a complete surrender of himself to the Lord Jesus. At all 
events, we have no difficulty in enumerating various hindrances which, as a matter of 
fact, do keep outside of the kingdom those who are very near its confines. Christ's 
dominion is one which cannot be entered except through the door of repentance and of 
faith. True subjects come in sincere and childlike humility, and receive the welcome 
promised ; by the new birth they enter the new life of the kingdom. The laws of the 
kingdom are spiritual, and demand spiritual conformity. And the King is enthroned 
in the heart as well as in society. You must become as little children in order that 
you may enter the kingdom of God. 

Application. 1. Let faith work by love in Christian natures ; and let those who 
Irve Christ prove by their spirit and their actions the sincerity of their love. 2. Let 
those who are near the kingdom, instead of resting in their nearness, regard this as a 
reason why they should, without delay, enter the gates before which they stand. 

Ver. 34. — " Not far from the kingdom.'' That this scribe should have shown so 
deep an admiration for the Divine Law, so clear a perception of the superiority of the 
spiritual to the ceremonial, so discerning an appreciation of the Divine Master, — all 
this was to his credit, and awakened the approval and elicited the commendation of 
our Lord. In the language Jesus addressed to him, a description is given of not a few 
hearers of the gospel, who present in their character much that is admirable, but who 
come short of true consecration to Christ, who are " not far from the kingdom of God." 
Of this class we may ask — 

I. How NEAR HAVE THEY COME TO THE KINGDOM ? 1. They havo been, in many 
cases, brought near by the action of others. A Christian education and Christian 
influence have moulded their habits and improved a naturally well-inclined disposi- 
tion. 2. They are well acquainted with the truths of religion, have studied the Scrip- 
tures, and have mastered the doctrines as well as the facts they contain. 3. They 
assent to the revelation contained in the Bible, either unreflectingly or after inquiry 
and doubt. 4. They admire Christ's moral character and beneficent life, his pure 
teaching, and his purposes of compassion towards mankind. 5. They conform to the 
practices of Christian worship, and even make use of the language of praise and prayer. 
6. They obey many of the laws of Christ, either from habit or from a conviction of their 
justice and expediency. 7. They have had many desires, and may even have formed 
resolutions, to go further than this — ^to yield all to the Saviour. Of such it may indeed 
\sB said, they are " not far from the kingdom of God." 

II. How FAR ARE THET STILL FROM THE KiNODOM ? Men may travel a long distance 
in the right diredtion, and yet may leave untraversed the last and most important 
stage of the journey. So is it with many hearers of the gospel. 1. They may yet 
have to receive the gospel of Christ with their whole nature. The assent of the under- 
standing must be followed by the consent of the will. 2. They may yet have to sur- 
render themselves and their all to Jesus. Men may give much, but withhold more. 
The test which our Lord proposes is a readiness to offer the heart, and with it all 
powers and possessions, unto himself. Less is not acceptable to him who claims, and 
lias a right to, all 3. They may need to overcome much self-righteousness, self-<»nfi« 



i^e THE GOSPEL ACC5Rt)ii^(J TO St. MAttK. [ca. xit 1^4*, 



dence, self-seeking, before their state of mind is such as to enable them to accept tha 
terms of Heaven : " Except ye become as little children," etc. 

III. How SHOULD THOSE SO SITUATED NOW ACT ? 1. They should reflect how vain ia 
past progress except it lead to future consecration. 2. They should rejoice at the 
thought that their approach to the kingdom makes it easier for them to enter in. All 
their knowledge, good feelings, and partial obedience are so many steps upon the road, 
leaving the fewer to be taken in order to salvation. 3. They should remind themselves 
how unwise and dangerous and sinful it is to pause where they are. " It is the first 
step which costs ; " and it is the last step which pays 1 Why should not that last step 
be taken at once? True repentance, sincere faith, cordial surrender, the new birth, — ■ 
such are the descriptions given of the change yet to pass over those who are aot far 
from the kingdom, in order that they may enter it. Illustrations : The builder rears 
the arch of a bridge ; the keystone has yet to be placed ; if that be left undone a storm 
may rise, the river may swell, his work may be swept away, and all that has been done 
may count for nothing. The traveller exploring a continent may endure many hard- 
ships and perils, may come within a day's march of the vast lake of which he hopes to 
be the discoverer : shall he turn back ? The manslayer, pursued by the avenger of 
blood, may be within sight of the city of refuge : to pause is to be slain ; to summon 
up all his strength and to bound forward is to find himself safely within the protecting 
walls. The captain, the adventurous explorer, after a long voyage over unknown seas, 
sights the land of which he has dreamed : shall he give orders to put about the ship, 
and abandon the glorious discovery within its reach, and all the honour, wealth, and 
fame which now at length await him ? 

Vers. 34, 37. — Farious effects of Chrisfs ministry. There was a vigour and directaiess, 
an unsparing boldness and fidelity, peculiar to the ministry of our Lord in Jerusalem 
during the last week of his life. This no doubt precipitated the crisis, enraging his 
enemies at the same time that it silenced their reasonings. Two remarks are made by 
the evangelist which show us what was the effect of Christ's discourses and conversa- 
tions both upon his foes and upon the multitude. 

I. His enemies were silenced. These included most of the members of the more 
prominent classes, who occupied positions of influence and authority in Jerusalem. 1. 
Their varied efforts to entrap Christ in his speech are recorded at length. The Phari- 
sees, the Herodians, the Sadducees, and the scribes, all questioned Jesus and reasoned 
with him, largely with the hope of either weakening his influence or taking some 
advantage of his replies. There was much craft in the way in which they sought thus 
to injure him and his work. 2. Their uniform confutation by his wisdom and moral 
authority. All their efforts, from whatever quarter, and however conducted, proved in 
vain. None were able to withstand him. He either put them to shame, or convinced 
them by the wisdom of his answers. The evangelist sums up the impression produced 
by our Lord's demeanour and language in these several interviews in the words, " And 
no man after that durst ask him any question." Christ's wisdom is flawless ; Christ's 
authority is irresistible. Now, as then, it is true that none can dispute with him 
except to be discomfited. " Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain 
thing?" 

II. The multitude were attracted and delighted. Whilst the self-confident 
and the self-righteous were put to shame and confusion, the common people, or rather 
the multitude, "the people" (as we say), heard him gladly. There were several 
sufficient reasons for this. 1. He spoke to them as one of themselves. Not from a 
height of official distance and superiority, but in their own language, with illustrations 
drawn from their own daily lil'e, and as one who knew them and their ways. 2. His 
personal interest and sympathy w<ire very marked. He did not break the bruised 
reed. Often brought into contact with the suffering, he pitied and healed them. Often 
meeting with sinners contrite and penitent, he pardoned and cheered them. 3. His 
fearless exposure and denunciation of the wickedness of the religious leaders of tha 
Jews. The selfishness and hypocrisy of Pharisees and lawyers were well known ; but 
such was the mental bondage of the people, that they dared not speak of the iniquities 
of the rulers save with bated breath. Jesus, however, who regarded not the person of 
ftuy man, boldly upbraided the iniquitous rulers for their misdeeds. And those wljg 



Ml. XII. 1—44.] THte GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 167 

suffered from the extortion and oppression which they endured, rejoiced in the Lord 
Jesus as in a Ctiampion of the down-trodden, and an Upholder of the right. 4. Hia 
direct appeal to the conscience and heart of the people. It is thus, indeed, that masses 
of men are ever to be moved. Whilst in the preaching of Jesus statement of Divine 
truth and exhibitions of Divine love formed the substance of his addresses, he so spoke 
as to reach the moral nature of his hearers. No raving, no exaggeration, no vulgarity ; 
but simplicity, vigour, earnestness, moral authority, were manifest in all his utterances. 
5. He brought the fatherly grace of God home to the erring and helpless. This was 
what the religious leaders of the time did not. The hearts of men responded to the 
revelation of the heart of G«d. How could the people do otherwise than hear him 
gladly, when he said, " Come imto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest " ? 

Vers. 35 — 40. — The scribes. The profession of scribes, which had existed among the 
Jews ever since the Captivity, was in itself an honourable and useful profession. And 
there were members of this learned body who came into contact with the Lord Jesus 
who showed a candid disposition, a love of the truth, and who evinced respect and 
admiration for the great Babbi. Yet some of the most bitter and virulent of our Lord's 
enemies were of this class. Their superiority to the people was a snare as well as an 
advantage. Many of them hid beneath the cloak of learning an evil heart, selfishness, 
arrogance, and unspirituality. In the discourse of Jesus here recorded, we find a pro- 
test against the general teaching, and a protest against the too common character, of 
these adversaries of his ministry and doctrine. 

I. Christ's ookreotion of the scribes' teaching regardino the Messiah. 1. 
What was this teaching ? It was the simple statement, that the Messiah should be a 
descendant of David. This was Scriptural truth, and the Gospels exhibit its applica- 
tion to Jesus. But it was only part of the truth. 2. In what respects did Jesus add 
to this conception of the Messiah ? He quoted from the Scriptures, and he attributed 
their declarations to the inspiration of the Holy Spirit. And thus he transmuted the 
bald doctrine of the scribes into a doctrine full of spiritual significance and dignity. 
These points especially are brought out : (1) Pre-eminence is assigned to the Messiah 
over even his illustrious ancestor, David. (2) The Messiah is represented as the Assessor 
of the Most High himself. (3) The Messiah is depicted as the Conqueror of his foes. In 
all these respects the truly Scriptural representation of the Christ is an immense 
advance upon the customary teaching of the Jewish scribes. Thus Christ teaches con- 
cerning himself. 

II. Christ's denunciation of the oharaoter and conduct op the scribes. 1. 
Their loud professions of sanctity, and their ostentatious devotions, are censured. 
Long prayers may sometimes be the outcome of deep feeling and many needs ; they 
may, as in the case of these scribes, be a cloak for sin. Long robes, like long 
prayers, may be a profession with which nothing spiritual corresponds. Hypocrisy was 
a crying evil of the times. There is no vice that is more hatefnl to God ; and it may 
be questioned whether it often imposes upon men. 2. Their love of pre-eminence is 
blamed. Both in " Church and State " they loved to be supreme, and in all social rela- 
tions they sought the honour which cometh from man. In the synagogues, in the 
market-places, and at festive gatherings the scribes would fain be first. 8. Their cruel 
rapacity is held up to obloquy. The bereaved and the defenceless were their victims. 
On some pretext or other they gained possession or management of the property of 
widows, and were not satisfied until they appropriated the whole. There are those in 
our own days, and in Christian lands, who grow rich by similar practices, and who 
incur by such infamous cruelty " the wrath of the Lamb." 4. Christ predicts the con- 
demnation of such sinners, and at the same time puts the people on their guard against 
them. His threat of condemnation was authoritative ; and his warning was one 
which was needed and timely. Against the wrongs and cruelties, the assumptions 
and the errors of such pretenders, the Good Shepherd would fain protect hia feeble and 
defenceless sheep. 

Vera. 41 — 44. — The widov/s mite. The presence of this poor widow, among an- 
■pirituftl and ostentatious worshippers and offerers, is m a sunbeam amidst the gloonOi 



1«S tttE GOSPfiL ACCOHblNG TO ST. MAlltt. [oh. iit. 1— 44, 



a rose In the wilderness. It is a toiicliing picture, this of the lonely woman, who had 
lost her husband, and whose heart was sad, whose means were scanty, and whose life 
was obscure and cheerless. But she had found strength and consolation in waiting 
upon God. And the temple, the appointed place for worship, with its services, so 
helpful to devotion, and associated with holy gatherings, and with opportunities for 
Divine communion, was dear to her heart. She could not be absent when the sacred 
services were proceeding, nor could she withhold her liltle gift in passing the treasury, 
as she left the scene of worship and of fellowship. And thus she was noticed by the 
Master, and her memory was immortalized, and her action has become a model and an 
ins[jlration to Christ's people through all time. We may learn from this incident— 

L What in gifts and alms is, in God's sight, inconsidbbablb. The view taken 
by men is different. But we are, as Christians, bound by the judgment 6f our Lord, 
who here teaches us that: 1. The actual amount is in itself of little moment. With 
reference to the material ends to be obtained by money, this is of course not the case. 
When a spacious, durable, and handsome clmroh is to be built, when an expensive 
missionary expedition to some distant land is to be undertaken, there is need of large 
pecuniary contributions ; and it is only where there is large wealth that such enter- 
prises are possible. But as far as the spiritual value and acceptableness of alms and 
benefactions are concerned, the mere pecuniary amount is unimportant. The mite of 
the widow is as much approved by God as the gnld of the wealthy. 2. The compara- 
tive amount which is contributed is in this regard unimportant. The offering which 
is less than that presented by a neighbour is not, therefore, necesparily bad; nor is the 
ofleiing which exceeds that of a neighbour, therefore, necessarily good. It is too 
common among pivers to ask — What is customary ? What is the amount contributed 
by others? The relative sum is disn garded by the Observer of all donations and the 
Searcher of all hearts. If one gives largely from his superfluity, he may nevertheless 
give less than his neighbour, who out of his poverty gives what seems a trifling sum. 

II. What in gifts and alms is valuable in God's sight. 1. The relation they 
bear to the giver's means. This is brought out very efiectively in this narrative. The 
poor widow "of her want" gave "all thiit she had," even "all her living," i.e. perhaps 
what she had in hand for that day's sustenance. It has often been remarked that God 
has regard, not merely to what a man gives, but to what he keeps. The gifts of the 
oi)ulent are acceptable, but " dearer to God are the gifts of the poor." 2. The purpose 
and intent for which they are given. Money, which is bestowed merely with a view 
to secure the good opinion of men, to attain a certain position socially or in tke 
religious community, is not regarded by the Omniscient as given to his cause. If 
the motive be the relief of human suffering, the enlightenment of human ignorance, the 
diffusion of religious knowledge and privileges, then doubtless gifts are acceptable, 
even though there may be some deficiency in the worldly wisdom according to which 
the means are directed to the ends in view. 3. The spirit in which they are given. 
An unostentatious act of charity, an ungrudging devotion of property, a disposition to 
forego some luxury, some personal comfort or pleasure, in order to do good, a pious 
reference of the act of giving to him who gives alike the means and the inclination for 
liberality, — tliese are qualities which render beneficence acceptable to the Lord and 
Judge of all. " The Lord loveth a cheerful giver." Ho who thus bestows his charity 
shall indeed receive again from him who ackuipwk(lc;es all true service. A gift ii 
accepted according to what a man hath, and not accordiug to what he hath not. 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

▼ers. 1—12. — The parable of the vineyard. The imagery adopted would at Mice 
address itself to the understanding of the hearers. Palestine pre-eminently a land of 
the grape. The proiihetic writings are full of symbols and figures from the vine 
This was spoken in continuation of his dispute with the Sanhedrim, and in the presence 
of all the [leople in the temple. The historical allusions to the prophets and the per- 
sonal one to himself must have been only too clear. It was a detailed and cresc«Dt 
indictment of the most solemn and awful character. 



«k. xlt t-44.1 TSe GOSPfet ACCOEblNa tO St. MAtllt. 169 

L God'B loving provision for the SPIKITtrAL INTERESTS OF HIS PEOPI-K mTOlVED 
00HRBSP0NDIN8 OBLIGATION. 

II. Instead op serving God, the eeligious leaders o» Israel sought their 
OWN advantage. 

III. Selfishness and unbelief led to the rejection of the prophets, akd 
EVEN op the Son op God himself. 

IV. Such conduct entails a judgment, which, although delated, is nevbb- 
theless sure and terrible. 

V. The loving purpose op God, although hindered bt such means, will be 
ultimately and gloriously fulfilled. — M. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The politics of Christianity. Christ, in his visits to the temple, met 
with the various representatives of religious, ecclesiastical, and political opinion in 
Palestine. He is the centre and touchstone of all. Their very attacks and dishonest 
questions were so many confessions of his moral and intellectual supremacy. To Christ 
do the different schools of thought and life amunsst men still come, and the problems 
they raise can never be satisfactorily settled until he solves them. 

L A trap laid fob Christ. 1. By whom f Ultimately and originally by the Pha- 
risees, the leaders of ultra-Judaism and advocates of a restored theocracy and national 
independence. But that this view, having its root at first in profound spirituality of 
aim and motive, had been subsidized by baser considerations, is only too evident. 
Their hatred for Christ on the present occasion led them to throw away all scruples 
they might have felt, and to assume a disingenuous position of inquiry. But they 
could do this the more effectively in concert with others, with whom, although some- 
what disagreeing on the solution to be accepted of the theory of national independ- 
ence, they yet agreed upon the general question itself. The Herodians were a recent 
party, attached to the fortunes and politics of the Herods, and accepting their rule as a 
satisfactory compromise of the difficulty arising from the theocratic views of the Jews 
and the actual supremacy of the Roman empire. They are supposed to have origin- 
ated with the Pharisees, with whom they still retained general relations, and with 
whom they for the most part co-operated. Menahem the Essene, who was a Pharisee, 
being captivated, it is said, by the predicted ascendency of the house of Herod, attached 
himself to Herod the Great, and brought over many of his co-religionists. They 
believed that in the monarchy of Herod the national aspirations of the Jews were 
reasonably met, and at the same time the demands of Home, whose creature he was. 
They were as a party, as might be expected, less scrupulous than the original Phari- 
sees. The latter imagined, as many like them have done since, that by suborning 
others to do a dishonourable action they avoided the disgrace of it themselves. 2. In 
what did the snare consist f In an attempt to get Christ to commit himself to, the 
tenets of one or other of the political parties of the day. This was not with the view 
of strengthening the influence of either, but simply to compromise him, according 
to his answer, either with the Roman government on the one hand, or with the 
national party of Judaism on the other. 3. Ebw was it baited f With flattery : yet 
flattery which unwillingly witnessed to the "openness" and uprightness of Christ's 
character, his Divine impartiality, his fearless truthfulness. 

IL The trap evaded. Ttie simplicity of Christ, upon which they had calculated 
for the success of their scheme, was the very cause of its failure. " Wise as serpents, 
but harmless as doves," is a principle which has its root in the nature of the Divine life. 
The inquiry is answered : 1. By an appeal to matter of fact. " Show me a penny," etc. 
The existence of such a boin (the denarius, which was the standard silver coin of the 
Komans, value about eightpenoe or ninepence), with its " image and superscription," 
proved beyond question the subject condition of Palestine. The actual situation being, 
therefore, what it was, and, so far as they could do anything, irreversible, it was not 
right for them to ignore it. If the privileges attending it were freely tcade use of, the 
duties involved should also be discharged. 2. By enunciating a deeper and wider 
principle than they recognized. As things were, the practice of their own religion was 
freely permitted to the Jews, toleration being a principle of imperial policy. There 
was, therefore, no really spiritual difficulty involved. The political nostrums of Pharisea 
%ui Herodian alike were, therefore, party cries and nothing more. They were thus owr- 



1?0 THiE GOStSiL ACCORClira To ST. MARK. [cfi. Xtu 1-4*. 

victed of unreality, of hypocrisy, or acting a part. It was not religion they cared for, 
but their own personal or party ends. Yet at the same time, for such as then or at 
any future time might have their religious scruples affected by political conditions, 
Christ laid down a general principle of action. When human government is not 
opposed to Divine, submission may be conscientiously made to both. Only where 
they differ is there any room for doubt ; but even such a doubt will be satisfactorily 
dealt with by beginning from the Divine side of obligation. This principle, which 
stands good for all times, is essentially a spiritual one. Under all circumstances, there- 
fore, the duty of the Ghristian, or conscientious religionist, is thown to he fundamentally 
a moral one. Actually existent authority imposes obligations which have to be recog- 
nized in the spirit of submission and piety, when not conflicting with Divine preroga- 
tives. Christianity has only indirectly a bearing on politics ; its direct and immediate 
concern is with morals. — M. 

Ver. 15. — " Bring me a penny." I. Christ will have account of the smallest 
THINGS. The denarius was a small coin in common use. The spirit of Christ, sun- 
like, discovers even the " motes." In all things there is duty. Christ's attitude to 
the Law not only general but particular. " Not one jot or tittle " was to pass away 
unfulfilled because of the influence of Christianity. " Ye are my disciples, if ye do 
whatsoever I have commanded you." We shall have to give account of smallest 
things at last — idle words, false shame, " the cup of cold water," etc. The parable 
of the pounds has for its moral, " He that is faithful in that which is least," etc. 
There is no slurring over of little things because of a general disposition and amiable 
intention. 

II. Small things often eepebsbnt great principles, and become the vehicles 
OP great duties. Coins are often of value, apart from their intrinsic worth, in wit- 
nessing to conquests, political influences, the progress of civilization, etc. ; and numis- 
matists have made many important contributions to history through their testimony. 
In this case the witness was even more pregnant and precious. It proved what actually 
existed, and represented the claim of earthly powers. The duty to Qod was shown 
thereby to be something quite distinct, and the general relation of the human and the 
Divine in human obligations was thereby permanently settled and set forth. It is 
equally so in regard to other things. "A straw will sliow which way the wind 
Wows, or the water flows." Illustrated in such instances as the Massacre of St. Bar- 
tholomew ; watchwords and flags of truce in time of war ; the petty dealings of common 
life ; the " minor moralities " of the Christian, etc. 

III. We are encouraged and commanded to bring small things to Christ. 
Do not say he has no interest in them. See how he looks at that widow with her two 
mites. Hear how he calls the little children. We need a more thorough Christianity, 
and if we follow this rule of bringing our daily concerns, our griefs, our moral difficul- 
ties, our sins, to the throne of grace, we shall become " Israelites indeed, in whom is no 
guile." He will interpret the minutest uncertainty or perplexity, and show us the 
great in the little. Erasmus Darwin wrote (April 13, 1789) : " I have just heard that 
there are muzzles or gags made at Birmingham for the slaves in our islands. If this 
be true, and such an instrument could be exhibited by a speaker in the House of 
Commons, it might have a great effect. Could not one of their long whips or wire- 
tails be also procured and exhibited ? But an instrument of torture of our own manu- 
facture would have a greater effect, I dare say " (' Life,' p. 46). — M. 

Vers. 18 — 27. — The puzzle of the Sadducees. I. The case stated. An extreme one; 
and probably a locus classicus in the works of the rabbins. It was supposed to be a 
reductio ad absurdum of all theories of resurrection or immortality. " In the resur- 
rection " is used apparently in a pregnant sense, as including the judgment, when all 
questions would be deoidpd, and the conditions of the future state settled. The case 
as stated referred only to legal and external conditions, questions of sentiment OJ 
spiritual attachment being ignored. The only case in Scripture of Christ coming into 
direct collision with the Sadducees. That the questioners were not maliciously disposed 
in presenting these difficulties may be inferred from the manner in which they ara 
answered : not, indignantly, or with an epithet expressing moral condemnation ; but in 



ek. tit 1-44.1 tSte GOBtfiL ACCOllDllfG *0 St MARK. itl 

a straightforward, matter-of-fact way, although censure is also expressed — a kind of 
censure peculiarly distasteful to such men, who generally pretend to great originality 
and critical acumen. They are accused of ignorance and spiritual inexperience. 

II. How Christ disposed op it. 1. By reference to the possibilities of Divine power. 
" In the resurrection state there will not be a repetition, pure and simple, of present 
conditions; there will be advance of inward and outward development. Love will 
continue ; but in the case of the holy it wiU be sublimed. ' The power of God ' is 
adequate, not only to the re-formative, but also to the transformative changes that may 
be requisite ; and his wisdom will see to it that they be in harmony with the perfecti- 
bility of individual personality and the general procession of the ages. Even on earth 
there are loftier loves than those that are merely marital " (Morison). " They neither 
marry, nor are given in marriage." " His words teach absolutely the absence from the 
resurrection life of the definite relations on which marriage rests in this, and they 
suggest an answer to the yearning questions which rise up in our minds as we ponder 
the things behind the veil. . . . The old relations may subsist under new conditions. 
Things that are incompatible here may there be found to coexist. The saintly wife 
of two saintly husbands may love both with an angelic, and therefore a pure and unim- 
paired, affection. The contrast between our Lord's teaching and the sensual paradise of 
Mahomet, or Swedenborg's dream of the marriage state perpetuated under its earthly 
conditions, is so obvious as hardly to call for notice " (Plumptre). " The present life 
is but a partial revelation of the Divine power. All the relations of earthly families do 
not continue in heaven " (Gkidwin). 2. By interpretation of Scripture. Not the letter 
of Scripture is appealed to, but the underlying truth involved in the statement of Scrip- 
ture, " I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He is 
not the Ood of the dead, hut of the living." The copula connecting the first clause of 
the quotation is not in the original, so that no argument can be founded upon it. Pro- 
fessor Plumptre's explanation — " The principle implied in the reasoning is, that the 
union of the Divine Name with that of a man, as in ' I am the God of Abraham/ 
involved a relation existing, not in the past only, but when the words were uttered. 
They meant something more than ' I am the God whom Abraham worshipped in the 
past " — is, therefore, manifestly inadequate. That of Dr. Morison is more explicit and 
profound : " It amounted to this : If there was at all a patriarchal dispensation, em- 
hracing a Messianic or redemptive scheme, and thus involving a Divinely commissioned 
Messiah or Redeemer, who was tojbe in due time incarnated, then there must le a life to 
come. But there was such a dispensation, if it be the case that Ood became ' the Ood of 
Abraham, and the Ood of Isaac, and the Ood of Jacob' in any distinctive sense whatever. 
And then, moreover, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob took personal advantage of the 
Messianic covenant into which God entered with them, they ' live.' They have ' life,' 
' everlasting life,' in the intense acceptation of the term " {in loc.). Cf. Heb. xi. 13, 14, 
16. A more direct proof might have been obtained in other portions of the Old Testa- 
ment, but the skill of this argument lay in the reference to a book received by the 
Sadducees, and in the unexpected interpretation of familiar words. Thus their literalism 
and narrowness were rebuked, and the popular longing of the Jews confirmed. The 
line of evidence led by Christ not only meets the objection to resurrection, but includes 
the proof of tnat of which resurrection is only a portion, viz. immortality. If such depth 
of meaning lay in the words of an old pre-Christian revelation, what may not the 
gospel itself unfold, when spiritually interpretated in the light of new conditions and 
experiences ? — M. 

Ver. 24. — Sowrces of heresy. I. PkinoipaIi causes of religious bbrob. X. Ignorarice 
of Holy Scripture. (1) Unaided human nature is prone to error. Bather might it be 
said that of itself human nature cannot possibly know the truth. We have but to 
remember the idola of which philosophy warns us, to perceive how much there is in the 
circumstances and very constitution of the human mind to interfere with the attain- 
ment of intellectual truth. DifBculties of this nature, however, may be practically 
overcome by diligence, candour, and careful study ; and the phenomena of the senses 
will yield up the secret of their working to the educated thinker. But there are thinga 
beyond sense concerning which the methods of intellectual research can give us no 
iufgrmation. The agnosticism of science concerning these things is therefore, an a 



i1% tHE GOSf EL ACCOftDlNG tO St. MARK. [ch. xn. 1-44, 



whole, to be accepted as real. Were it not that there are moral as well as purely intel- 
lectual and constitutional causes for this ignorance, no fault need he found with it. But 
any view af mental error which omitted consideration of the fact of human depravity 
could not be considered adequate. The natural mind "loves darkness rather than 
light." (2) Scripture is intended to correct human error. " The entrance of thy words 
giveth light " (Ps. cxix. 130). They "eveal the existence, works, character, and purpose 
of God. By so doing they solvo the mysteries attaching to human life and duty. They 
are the Word of God, anticipating and transcending the findings of the world's experience. 
This is done, not only by communicating what is above sensible perception, but by 
affording a discipline to the spiritual nature. " For the Word of God is quick, and 
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder 
of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discemer of the thoughts and 
intents of the heart " (Heb. iv. 12). " Every Scripture inspired of God is also profitable 
for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction which is in righteousness : that 
the man of God may be complete, furnished completely unto every good work " (2 Tim. 
iii. 16). " Ye search the Scriptures, because ye think that in them ye have eternal life ; 
and these are they which bear witness of me " (John v. 39). 2. Lack of spiritual 
experience. " Nor the power of God." This ignorance may consist partly in ignorance 
of the facts of the Divine history of mankind as recorded in Scripture ; but it is chiefly 
due to absence of personal, experimental consciousness of God in the spiritual nature. 
It is the "darkness of the heart" which exaggerates and intensifies the effects of 
general ignorance. " The power of God " works its miracles in the inward as well as 
the outward life; in conversion, sanctifioation, communion, and providential grace. 

II. In whom these may exist. The Sadducees were, according to the standards of 
their day, educated men. Wiih the letter of the books of Moses they were familiar 
(ver. 26) ; and they were most careful to preserve them from addition or intermixture. 
1. Highly educated men may err in Divine things. " Thou didst hide these things from 
the wise and understanding, and didst reveal them unto babes " (Matt. xi. 25). Secular 
cuhure has not furnished an atom of the transcendental knowledge upon which religion 
is based ; the Bible is not its product, nor can it be interpreted by it. Yet is not 
literature, art, or science to be discarded as a secondary aid to the interpretation ot 
Scripture. If God does not require our knowledge, neither does he, as it has been 
finely said, require our ignorance. 2. There are many who know the letter of God's 
Word without knowing its spirit. Religious training may bestow an acquaintance with 
Scriptural history and doctrine and the chief outlines of moral duty, but it cannot 
ensure the inward knowledge of the heart. The interpretation of Scripture is only 
possible to those who are spiritually enlightened. Knowing the Bible externally may 
actually prove a hindrance to an inward knowledge of it, if it be made too much of, or 
imagined sufficient in itself. Superficial acquaintance with Biblical literature, doctrine, 
etc., " puffeth up ; " and it requires the sternest and most frequent assaults ere its true 
character is exposed to itself. 

III. How THEY ARE TO BE BEMOVBD. 1. Th« teaching of Christ ; awakening a sense 
of inward need and repentance, and revealing the correspondence of the Word of God to the 
expanding and maturing spiritual consciousness. 2. The gift of the Holy Sjjirit; which 
takes of the things of God and reveals them to us. " Things which eye saw not, and 
ear heard not, and which entered not into the heart of man, whatsoever things God 
prepared for them that love him. But unto us God revealed them through the Spirit : 
for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of Qoi " (1 Clor. ii. 9). Not 
least of the enlightening influence of the Holy Ghost is due to the purification of the 
heart. — M. 

Vers. 28 — 34. — Hie Law akin to the gospel, hut inferior to it. I. Tbub BELiaioui 

IKQUIEY 18 INCOtTBAaBD BY OANDOtTB AND SPIRITUAL INSIOHT ON THE PAST OF BELIGIOtTS 

TBAOHEBB. Matthew tells us that ihe Pharisees " came together to the same place," 
when they saw tlie discomflture of the Sadducees ; and " then one of them, a lawyer, 
asked him a question, tempting him, and saying." Mark introduces him as one of the 
scribes. In the one Gospel the motive and encouragement are represented as experienced 
by the Pharisaic party in general ; in the other they are represented as individually felt 
and Mted upon. There were, therefore, elements of earnestness and spirituality amoogs^ 



OH. xn. 1—44.1 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINO TO ST. MAKK. 173 

the Pharisees, and these were called forth by our Saviour's teaching. They were now 
in a more favourable attitude for receiving the truth than they had ever been before. 
As to the idea expressed by " tempting," it need not be understood in a sinister sense, 
but generally as proving, testing, etc. Our Lord did not crush the spirit of inquiry, 
but courted it. They felt that there was more in him than they could explain, and that 
his knowledge of Scripture was spiritual and profound, and therefore they wished to 
discover what he could possibly have to tell them that was not already taught by Moses or 
his prophetic exponents. He had all but converted his enemies and critics into hii 
disciples. He had infected them with his own spirit of religious earnestness. Of this 
mood the " lawyer " was the mouthpiece. He pushes inquiry to its highest point, and 
desires to know the chief duties of religion. 

II. The best mode of answering such inquibt is that which pbesents the bfibit 

AND substance OV DUTY, OB TBUB EBLIGION IN ITS UNITY AND UKIVEBSALITT. " Deut. 

vi. 4. This is not given as a part of the Law of Moses, but as the principle of all 
service. Lev. xix. 18 contains a similar principle lor all social duties " (Godwin). 
Passing over all matters of mere ceremonial, and questions of less or more, he lays hold 
of the spirit of the Law and presents it to his inquirer. It is out of the very heart of 
the book of ceremonies (Leviticus) that the duty to neighbours is extracted. He declares 
" the three unities of religion : (1) the one God ; (2) the one faith ; (3) the one com- 
mandment " (Lange) ; and compels the agreement and admiration of his questioner. 
" Note also the real reverence shown in the form of address, ' Master,' i.e. ' Teacher, 
Babbi.' He recognized the speaker as one of his own order " (Plumptre). All reli^ou 
is summed up by him in a " great commandment," viz. the love of Ood, and that is 
shown in its earthward aspect to involve loving our neighbour as ourselves. That true 
religion is not ceremonial but spiritual is thus demonstrated ; and in quoting the highest 
utterances of the prophets, the scribe but endorses and restates the same doctrine. 
Teacher and inquirer are therefore theoretically one. But more is needed ; and towards 
the attainment of this the stimulus is given, " Thou art not far from the kingdom of 
God." This meant that- 
Ill. Such inquiby can only be satisfied and ceownedby acting upon its highest 
SPIEITUAL CONVICTIONS. " The woids are significant as showing the unity of our Lord's 
teaching. Now, as when he spoke the sermon on the mount, the righteousness which 
fulfils the Law is the condition of the entrance into the kingdom of God (Matt. v. 19, 20). 
Even the recognition of that righteousness as consisting in the fulfilment of the two 
commandments that were exceeding broad, brought a man as to the very threshold of 
the kingdom. It is instructive to compare our Lord's different method of dealing, in 
Luke X. 25 — 37, with one who had the same theoretical knowledge, but who obviously, 
consciously or unconsciously, minimized the force of the commandments by his narrowing 
definitions " (Plumptre). " The kingdom of heaven is, for the moment, pictorially 
represented as localized, like the ordinary kingdoms of the world. The scribe, walking 
in the way of conscientious inquiry, and thus making religious pilgrimage, had nearly 
reached its borderland. He was bordering on the great reality of true religion, subjec- 
tion of spirit to the sovereign will of God" (Morison). This state can only be attained 
to by conversion, the identification of the sinner through faith with the righteousness 
of the Saviour, and the indwelling of the Spirit of God. It is thus scientific conviction 
becomes moral, and we are able to carry into effect what we know to be true and 
right. — M. 

Ver. 34. — " Not fir from the kingdom of Ood." I. The highest intebfbktatioh 

OF human duty APPB0ACHE3 THE GOSPEL, BUT FALLS SHOBT OF IT. 

il. The CONDITIONS of bntbancb INTO Christ's kingdom abe mobal, and not 
MERELY INTELLECTUAL. Faith ; obedieucc ; love. The heart, or central being. 

III. No MAN OUGHT TO BE SATISFIED WITH MERELY BEING " NOT PAR " FROM THE 

KINGDOM. 1. To stop there is to stultify our highest spirituid instincts and tendencies. 
2. To stop there is to fail of salvation. 3. To stop there is to aggravate our misery and 
wn.— M. 

Vers. 35 — 37.— Great Davi^t greater Bon. I. Unspiritdai. intebpbetmbs of 
SPBHTURP are INVOLVEP JN INCONSISTENOY and SSliF-OONTBADICT^ON, 1. /» th» 



174 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST, MARK. [ch. xii. 1—44. 



present instance they proved to be so with respect to the most important truths. It il 
ouly the spiritual mind that can harmonize the apparent discrepancies of revelation 
(1 Cor. ii. 14 ; cf. Heb. v. 12, sej.). 2. This results in their own loss and injttry (1 Pet. 
iii. 16). They failed to recognize the Messiah when he did come, because of their false 
conceptions of what he was. 

II. The oloet of the Mmsiah is seen fbom prophetic Sokiptube to be horb 
THAN ROTAL — TO BE, IN FACT, DiviNB. The hundred and tenth psalm is rightly called 
" a psalm of David." Merely to apply it to David is to destroy its Messianic character. 
" The psalm is not only quoted by our Lord as Messianic in the passages already referred 
to (viz. this and Matt. xxii. 41—46) ; it is more frequently cited by the New Testa- 
ment writers than any other single portion of the ancient Scriptures. (Gomp., besides 
these passages in the Gospels, Acts ii. 34, 35 ; 1 Cor. xv. 25 ; Heb. i. 13 ; v. 6 ; vii. 17, 
21 ; I. 13.) In later Jewish writings, in the Talmud and the rabbis, nearly evtiry 
verse of the psalm is quoted as referring to the Messiah " (Perowne). " The majority ol 
ancient Jewish interpreters apply the psalm to the Messiah " (Strauss, ' Leben Jesu,' iL 6, 
79). If, then, ii is David's own composition, and is Messianic, the language used with 
respect to the Eoyal One who is to come is only to be explained as involving divinity : 
" Jehovah said to my Lord." 

III. In APPLYING the psalm to himself, Christ suggested the trtte solution of 
THE APPARENT CONTRADICTION. The psalm is deliberately and by implication adopted 
by Christ. He testifies to the Divine inspiration of its author. His own person and 
work are the key to its meaning. As he was Son of David on the human side, so wan 
he David's Lord by virtue of his Divine Sonship. — M. 

Ver. 37.—" The common people heard him gladly.'' I. The persons thus affected. 
The reference of the words " common people " misunderstood. Literally the expression 
is, " the great multitude." It was in the temple, and must have comprehended all 
classes, especially the middle and upper ; the very lowest being but sparsely repre- 
sented. It was also nationally homogeneous — Jewish. 

II, Eeasons foe their being bo. Not on account of eloquence, or so-called " popu- 
larity " of address. That the highest qualities were exhibited " goes without saying." 
The full splendour and majesty of Messianic teaching were exhibited. The Man himself 
was more, and felt to be more, than his words. Two circumstances lent a passing 
interest to his teaching : he exposed and defeated the religious pretenders of the day, 
Pharisees, Sadducees, lawyers, whose true character the people's instinct felt had been 
revealed; and he appealed to the national religious spirit, in setting forth the true 
doctrine of the Messiah. 

in. The mobal value of this eeoeption of Christ. 1, It showed that the deepest 
instincts of humanity are on the side of religion and Divine truth. 2. But it did not 
involve discipleship. Admiration, intellectual assent, even some wonder at what was 
truly Divine; but no moral conviction. There are many to whom the gospel is a 
thing gladly heard, but soon dismissed from the thoughts. It is in obedience and faith 
that the " glad tidings " are practically and permanently experienced by the human 
heart. — ^M. 

Vers. 41 — 44, — The widov/t ttoo mites. The treasury, "in front of the sanctuary," 
consisted of thirteen brazen chests, called "trumpets" from their peculiar shape, 
" swelling out beneath, and tapering upward into a narrow mouth or opening, into 
which the contributions were put." The contributions given were towards the sacrifice 
fund, and they were voluntary. This incident has a deep, permanent interest for all 
Christians. 

I. Christ's obbeevation of beligiocs oiviko. He "sat over against the 
treasury, and beheld how the people cast money into the treasury." This has been 
felt to be typical of his eternal attitude : he still sits "over against the treasury" of his 
Church. 1. It was deliberate. Ho did it as one who had purposed to do it ; and he 
was not in any hurry. The position was chosen, and was well suited to carry out his 
intention. 2. It was careful and discriminating. The different classes of people were 
noted — rich and poor, ostentatious and retiring, mean and generous. He beheld }u)w 
the people cast in. 3, It was comprthensive. No individu^ seeuta to ha^ escaj)^ 



CH. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 171 

his attention. Even the poor widow is observed. 4. It was his last act ere quitting 
the temple for ever. 

IL His knowledge op its motives and oiroumstances. 1. How penetrating 
The outward actions and bearing of the donors would doubtless reveal to his eye, who 
" knew what was in man," their real characters. Now he looks directly upon -our 
secret thoughts and feelings, and is acquainted with all the conditions of mind and 
heart through which we pass. He knows the history of the gift, as well as its actual 
bestowal. 2. Bow complete I The domestic circumstances of the widow were well 
known to him. No tax-surveyor could have reckoned the income of the people more accu- 
rately. 3. How m,inute ! The exact nature and number of the widow's coins are noted. 

III. His judgment as to its wobth. His attitude now, as on the day when " he 
looked round about upon all things," was authoritative and judicial. He sat as one 
who had a right to be there. It is from a supreme elevation of moral sentiment that 
he looks, for already clearly visible to his spirit is his own great gift — of himself. 1. 
Given from a spiritual point of view. Not the objective amount, but the motives and 
feelings of the givers. The spirit of sacrifice, the religious enthusiasm of each, is 
measured and declared. 2. TTie standard indicated is not how much is given, but from 
how much it is given. They al] cast in " of their abundance." What they gave was, 
therefore, a mere superfluity. Their comforts were not decreased, their luxuries still 
abounded. The need — the absolute poverty — of the widow rendered her gift a sacri- 
fice, and a heroic act of faith. It was prophetic of the Divine charities that were to 
be awakened in the breasts of regenerate men, when his own great sacrifice should 
have borne its fruit. The Macedonian Churches (and many a one since) gave not only 
to their power, but beyond it, their deep poverty abounding to the riches of their 
liberality (2 Cor. viii. 1, 2). " Now, many would have been ready to censure this poor 
widow, and to think she did ill. Why should she give to others when she had little 
enough for herself? ... It is so rare a thing to find any that would not blame this 
widow, that we cannot expect to find any that will imitate her ! And yet our Saviour 
commends her, and therefore we are sure that she did very well and wisely " (Matthew 
Henry). — M. 

Ver. 41. — Jesus lingering in the temple. This is one of the best-known incidents in 
the life of our Lord. It is strange that it should be so. If we consider the greatness 
of his work, we should hardly expect that room would be found in a brief record of it 
for so trivial an event. It was an e very-day occurrence for the worshippers who 
entered the temple to cast their offerings Into the treasury, and not a few widows 
would be found among them. Yet an evangelist, who was Inspired of God to select or 
reject any of the multitudinous facts of Christ's ministry, did not leave untold the 
story of the widow's mite ; and it is repeated with equal emphasis by Luke. Evidently 
God judges not as man does. We think much of a philanthropic scheme which 
loudly asserts itself; but he , probably estimates more highly the scheme of some 
obscure Christian worker, who gathers together the poor and wretched, telling them of 
a nobler, purer life, and lifting them up towards the light of God's love. In trivial 
incidents great principles are found, and we should dig in them as for hid treasure. 
Our Lord Jesus Christ is naturally the Centre of this scene, and we will see what we 
may of his characteristics as exhibited in it. 

L Te« gentleness of Chbist. For the last time our Lord had appeared in the 
temple as a public Teacher. Before crowds of people he had once more strongly 
denounced the hypocrisy of the scribes and Pharisees. They were convicted by their 
own consciences, and incapable of reply, so " they answered not a word ; " but, in their 
desperation and malignity, they resolved the more speedily to put him to death. He 
knew it perfectly well. Yet, after speaking as the righteous Rebuker of sin, he gladly 
turns aside to discover and commend a hidden act of goodness. Indeed, he seemed 
eager to see something which would redeem his Father's house from the wickedness 
which dishonoured it. Hence " he sat over against the treasury," and watched till 
he saw one worshipper whose sacrifice he could rejoice over — that of a poor widow, who 
cast in all the living that she had. That act of hers came to him like a streak of sun- 
shine through the clouds. How tenderly and patiently does he still watch for any 
glimmer of faith and love in humaii hearts i 



THE GOSPEL ACCOKDKXG TO ST. MARK. [ch. xii. 1—44 



n. The serenity of Chbist. His calmness was like the blue of the heaven^ 
unruffled and uncbanged by storms that stir the lower atmosphere. An ordinary man, 
after uttering a rebuke which enraged his foes to madness, would put himself out oj 
reach. He would not linger in their stronghold, which was full of perils to him. But 
in patience Jesus Christ possessed his souL He knew his hour had not yet come. He 
would not hasten away. It might be that some of his hearers would repent, and 
come to him, confessing and forsaking their sins. So, while many passed him whose 
beetling brows were black with hatred, he in the court of the women quietly sat and 
waited. Such serenity was habitual with him. When there was haste and agony 
and terror in Bethany, Jesus abode three days in the same place where he was. When 
the warning came, " Depart hence, ior Herod will kill thee," he calmly continued his 
works of mercy. When the armed band followed him into Gethsemane, he confronted 
them with a calmness that paralyzed them. When he conquered death and rose from 
the grave, there was no sign of haste — the linen clothes were laid orderly, and the 
napkin was folded in a place by itself. Too often our hearts are perturbed. We are 
fussy, anxious, fretful ; but, if we will but receive it, this is his legacy: " Peace I leave 
with you, my peace I give unto you : not as the world giveth, give I unto you. Let 
not your heart be troubled, neither let it be arraid." 

IlL The condescension of Christ. Our Lord was full of great thoughts, not only 
respecting this world, but that other world from which he came, with its vivid realities 
and awful mysteries. He looked on to the future of the work he had begun, and 
which in a few days would be consummated on the cross — a work which would not 
only stir Jerusalem, but shake the Roman empire, and go onward through distant ages 
with pi'owing force, till all nations would call him blessed. Yet here he was, watching 
a few Jewish worshippers go into their temple ; and he notices each one. He sees even 
this poor widow, whom others brush past with haste or contempt. He knows her 
struggle and sacrifice and single-heartedness, as she brings that tiny offering, with a 
blush of shame that it is so little, and secretly lets it fall into the treasury of her God. 
His condescension is still displayed to the meanest and the humblest worshippers, and 
broken words, paltry gifts, and feeble efforts will not be without his notice and 
recompense. May he see, in all Christian assemblies, not the outward formalism which 
he must rebuke, but prayer and praise, gift and work, which loyal hearts are offering 
to the Lord their God 1 — A. B. 

Vers. 42 — 44. — Tlie luidow's mite. If we get a single ray of light, decompose and 
analyze it, we may argue from it to all the light that floods the world ; to its nature, 
its source, and its effects. So this act of generosity and devotion, simple and slight 
though it is in itself, contains in it elements of truth which are world-wide in appli 
cation. Amongst the many lessons it teaches, we select the following : — 

I. That God's people abb expected to be givers. Many have a singular 
objection to insistence upon that. They willingly listen to words of solace; they 
rejoice in descriptions of heaven ; they are not reluctant to hear the errors of their 
theological antagonists exposed and rebuked : but the duty of Christian giving is 
scarcely so popular with them. However, " it is enough for the sei-vant that he be as 
his Master ; " and we find that he who taught in the temple also " beheld how the 
people cast money into the treasury." That treasury was a Divine institution. In 
spite of abuses, it was for many generations a witness of what God expects ; as a 
recognition of bis claims, and of the claims of others, on the part of rich and poor. If 
God i» our Creator and Preserver, if every day we live and every power we have is his 
gift, we must honour him " with our substance, and with the firstfruits of all our 
increase." If he has redeemed us by hi.s Son, if " we are not our own, but bougttt 
with a price," any sacrifice we make in gift or work should be a source of joy. If we 
be members of one brotherhood, we are bound to have the same care one for another. 
We are to do this, not in the way which is easiest to ourselves, most accordant with 
our tastes, or most likely to bring us credit ; but as those who are seeking to become 
like him, who is kind to the unthankful and to the unworthy. 

IL That some kinds of oivinq abb of hishbb worth than others. Out Lord 
did not blame or desi)ise the gifts which the rich made when they oast in much. They 
were 4oin^ what was right. Whether their offerings went to support the temple, or m 



m. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 177 



■ substitute for sacrifices, or for distribution to the poor, they were given towstrda what 
was regarded as the work of Grod. But there was nothing in the offering of the riok 
wiiich called for the special praise bestowed on the widow. 1. It is to he observed here 
that Christ commended what most people would HaTne. You would probably argue 
thus : " Two mites were of little importance to the treasury, but of great importance 
to her. If she had given one and kept the other, she would have showed not only 
piety, but good sense. As it was her gift was insignificant, and at the same time it 
was rash and needless." Yet, in the eyes of our Lord, the gift was right ; and it was 
commended for this very reason — that she had cast in &11 the living that she had. We 
cannot but be reminded here of an incident in the house of Simon. When Mary 
broke the alabaster box, and poured the spikenard on her Saviour's head, the disciples 
said that it was a foolish impulse — that if sold for three hundred pence, and given to 
the poor, it would have been of real utility ; now a waste of the ointment had been 
made. In reply, Jesus taught them that nothing given to God was wasted ; that the 
aroma of such an offering went beyond the world of sense. On both occasions our 
Lord commended what others blamed. 2. Further, the reason for his commendation 
was not what many loould expect. It was not the value of the gift ; for two mites was 
a smaller sum than we could give if we tried to find our smallest coin. Nor was it 
the object to which the money was given which Christ approved. He knew how 
much there was of what was false under the glitter of the ceremonial worship of the 
temple. He had just rebuked the very men who would manipulate these funds. Ha 
looked on to the day when the temple would perish, and a nobler Church would arise 
on its ruins. Hence, in commending the widow's gift, which supported this ritual, ha 
condemned those who withhold their help tiU an organization is exactly what they 
wish — who refuse to support what does not accord precisely with their ta'stes and 
views. Those who habitually do this crush in their hearts the germ from which gift 
and sacrifice spring. 3. The widow's gift was approved because it wm the offering of a 
simple hea/rt,full of love to God. She wished to show gratitude, and to give a deli- 
berate expression of her confidence in ' God ; and therefore she gave up her living, and 
threw herself on him who feeds the birds, and never forgets his children. 4. Most of all 
the gift was valued because it represented self-sacrifice. They gave of their abund- 
ance — she gave all her living ; in other words, herself. Too often we lose the highest 
blessedness because we do not cross the border-line which lies between self-indulgence 
and Christ-likeness. When we begin to feel that some service is a burden, and demands 
a strain, we give it up to some one else to whom the effort would be less I Let us 
seek the spirit of the poor widow, who knew that God could do without her gift, but 
felt that her love could not be satisfied without her sacrifice. 

III. That our Lord quietly watches oub gifts and services. We may put 
Into the treasury wealth, talents, prayers, tears, etc. None are unnoticed by him. 
And he looks in order to approve, not to condemn. His disciples might have said, 
" She is imprudent to give her all ; she is priest-ridden ; she is supporting a foriral 
worship which is a barrier to the kingdom of Christ." But the Lord looked beneath 
the surface. He saw the pious intention, the pure purpose, and out of aU the chaff on 
that threshing-floor he found one grain of purity and reality, and rejoiced over it as 
one finding great spoil. 

IV. That oub Lord appbotbs all that is done m a bmht spibit. He did not 
praise her to her face, nor in her hearing. When the delicate flower of devotion is 
taken in the hot hand of popular applause, it withers ; but, left in the cool shadow of 
secrecy, it lives. Hence the widow heard no flattery or approval, though she went 
home with inward satisfaction because she had done what she could. It is a pleasure 
to make a sacrifice for one we love. The young girl gives up her money, her position, 
her future, herself, to the man she loves, and rejoices in doing it. The father will not 
begrudge it when he looks at his children's faces, though for their sakes he goes off in 
a shabby coat to his daily duty. Love longs for sacrifice, and glories in making it. 
Now it is a sacrifice so inspired which our God approves and commends. In the day 
when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, when nothing will be overlooked, 
services which the doer had forgotten, which the Church thought trivial and the 
world laughs to scorn, will be recompensed, and even " a cup of cold water, given ia 
the name of a disciple, will not lose its reward,"— A. B. 

BT, MABK — n ■ 



178 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xn. 1—44 



Vers. 1 — 12. — The parable of the mneyard; or, unfaithfulness and its reward. A 
rude demand upon Jesus lor his authority led him to ask in reply " one question " which 
iwatened the consciences of his interrogators and threw them into confusion and 
difficulty. They were hurrying him on to his final hour, and he must needs take 
idvantage of every opportunity of finishing the work given him to do. Therefore " in 
parables" he spake both "unto them" and "against them," which but roused their ire, 
and sent them away to plot and plan for his destruction. No word was needed to 
declare who was represented by the vineyard. " For the vineyard of the Lord of hosts 
is the house of Israel." And the details of the parable were minutely historic. How 
often had " a servant " been sent " that he might receive of the fruits of the vineyard " ! 
How often had he been " handled shamefully " ! Now a last chance is offered. " Ho 
had yet one, a beloved son : he sent him last unto them." The rest is prophecy ready 
to be fulfilled, and so soon to become history also. But the appeal, "What therefore 
will the lord of the vineyard do ? " he does not leave them to answer, but supplies it 
in simple words and in such manner as to make the reply an admonitory warning. 
Alas! our eyes behold the precise fulfilment. And the rejected stone is now the 
Foundation-stone, " the Head of the corner." The parable reveals — 

I. A QBACIOUS EXAMPLE OF THE DiVINB GOODNESS AND PATIENCE. It WaS a direct 

dealing with Israel, but it was an indirect dealing with all men. The comment is 
found in the historic development of the history of Israel. 

II. A PAINFUL INSTANCE OP HUMAN UNFAITHFULNESS. TMs, as in all instances of 
a want of fidelity to important trusts, was sadly disastrous. But not only to them to 
whom the trust was committed, for all men expiate the sins of every unfaithful one. The 
condition of society is lowered ; good fruits are blighted and cannot be gathered ; pains 
and penalties are incurred which fall heavily upon all. Had every man been faithful 
to his trust, what a paradise this hard earth would have presented 1 But the world 
walks on a lower plane for every unholy life passed upon it. Had that vineyard 
brought forth its due fruits, all nations would have been made partakers. Of the few 
small patches which bore, the world has the fruit in those holy records which are as 
the salt of the earth. But how much of the corn and the oil and the wine is wanting ! 
On this account is presented — 

III. A SAD ILLUSTRATION OF THE DiviNE JUDGMENT. Israel is deposed. The sacred 
trust is withdrawn. The vineyard is in other hands. The unfaithful husbandmen, as 
such, are destroyed. Alas for Israel 1 Her crown is in the dust, her harps upon the 
willows. She does not with her voice sing the pleasant songs of Zion. She is not the 
great spiritual power in the earth for which she was designed. Her calling and election 
she did not make sure. True, lor the fathers' sakes she remains a testimony in the 
earth. But it is as a broken-oflf branch. The world gains nothing by Israel's rejection. 
The Gentiles are wise to weep and mourn on her behalf; and, knowing that "God is 
able to graft them in again," they are wise to pray earnestly for their recovery. 
" The receiving of them " would be " life from the dead." So let every Gentile believer 
pitifully behold the nation sitting in the dust, having become the uncircumcision in 
the spirit : and at this time, alas ! " separate from Christ " and really " alienated from 
the commonwealth of" the true "Israel, strangers from the covenants of promise, 
having no hope." Nor can it be otherwise till they who now are " far off are made 
nigh in the blood of Christ." — G. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The tribute money. Unable to take him with their wicked hands, 
because they dared not, they send selected men from the Pharisees and the Herodians. 
They have instructions to lay a trap with a view " to catch him in talk." " In vain 
is the net spread in the sight of any bird." But these blind catchers thought him 
to be blind also. In specious words they ply him with a question relating to a 
oppressive tax. " If he held that payment should be refused, he would compromi« 
himself with the Romans ; if he sanctioned it, he would embitter himself both with th« 
Herodians and the ultra-national party." But he who "knew what was in man" 
knew " their hypocrisy," and in a word, and doubtless with a look, exposed it. " Why 
tempt ye me?" Then with the coin before their eyes, which was at once the symbol 
of their unfaithfulness to God and their subjection to man, he threw back upon them 
the onus of answering themselves in their own conscience mnd by their own deeda, 



OH. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 179 



Ah I "in the net which they hid ia their own foot taken." But Jesus does not only 
evade the dilemma on which they had cast him ; nor does he merely utter a word of 
condemnation to them who had failed to " render unto God the things that are Gkid's,'' 
and who would be only too glad to escape rendering " to Cassar the things that " wer« 
" Csesar's." But he, in high wisdom, teaches the great truth for all time, that fidelity to 
the demands of God and fidelity to the constituted powers of earth need not clash. The 
loyalty of the subject and the obedience of the saint are on the same plane. So a just 
distribution is made of things pertaining to Csesar and of things pertaining to God, and 
yet the true unity of the service rendered to both is declared ; and, moreover, as God 
is above all, the duty to him includes the duty to Caesar. For our learning we may 
see — 

I. That Christ beabs his tebtimont to the EiaHTEOusNEss o» the claims o» 
EABTHLT AUTHOBITT. The Christian need be under no apprehension of following this 
principle out to its eitremest limits. For if the earthly government be oppressive and 
unjust, he knows full well that the King of kings has his own methods of deposing ; for 
he believes that " he putteth down one and setteth up another." He has learned to 
submit even to oppression for conscience' sake. But these questions respect the extreme, 
the occasional, the exceptional conditions of political life. Fidelity to the constituted 
head of authority would, according to Christian principles, secure the divinely appointed 
Head. 

II. ChBIST nTTEBS HIS ETEB-BGITEBATED DEHAKD FOB FIDELITT TO THS IHALIENABLa 

OLAiMS OF God. "Bender unto God the things that are God's." Is anything not 
God's? If in truth all ia first rendered to him in an honest consecration to his will, 
then may that which he ordains for the neighbour be given to the neighbour ; that 
which is for the poor to the poor ; or that for the family, or for self even, so given ; and 
therefore that which is for " the king, as supreme," to the king may be rendered. 

III. Let THE MAN HIMSELF, WHO TBDLY IS GoD'S, BE BENDERED UNTO GOD. One haS 

beautifully taught thus : " That which bears Caesar's image is, as belonging to Caesar, 
to be given to him ; but that which has God's image belongs to Qoi." Had Israel been 
faithful to " render " themselves " to God " they would not in those late days have 
been given up to the Bomans, as in earlier days fidelity to God would have kept back 
the armies of Nebuchadnezzar. The great principle to guide nations and individuals 
alike is truly to be the Lord's. Then, when he is the God of the nation, all other service and 
all other obligations fall into their proper order and degree of importance. And he who 
serves his God in humility wUl serve his king in fidelity. He who is obedient to the 
Lord's claims will know how to render the claims of masters, and lords, and rulers, and 
sovereigns. Not more truly is the Law one, " Thou shalt love the Lord thy God," and 
" Thou shalt love thy neighbour," than is " Bender unto Cffisar the things that are 
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's." — G. 

Vers. 18 — 27. — The resurrection from the dead. A new class of antagonists now 
assail the great "Master" with a case of casuistry, designed evidently to bring the 
doctrine of the resurrection into contempt. " In the resurrection whose wife shall she 
be of them?" Was this one of the flimsy difficulties on which they relied for a 
defence of their position, as so often men screen their scepticism behind a mere veil of 
difficulty ? And did they depend in any real degree upon an imaginary inconsistency 
to warrant them in denying the grandest hopes of the human heart ? Be it so or not, 
they gave opportunity for the most precious defence of the common faith. The Church 
to-day is rich in an inheritance of defensive writing drawn from the pens of holy 
apostles and righteous men. But though it is of unspeakable value to her to read 
the inestimable words of the great Apostle to the Gentiles, yet to them who h«v« 
wholly committed themselves to Jesus, who truly own him as " Master," and no other, 
it is most comforting to find him entering the lists against all Sadducean unbelief for 
all ages. It is enough : Jesus is the defender of the faith. We want no more. In one 
sentence we read both an answer to the difficulty and a confirmation of the truth : 
" For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage ; 
but are as angels in heaven." Thus is clearly revealed — (1) The fact of the reswmetwn ; 
and (2) the conditions of the reswrection life. 

L The first clear teaching is, Tine dead live. " That the dead ar« raised ( 



180 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. [oh. xn. 1—44, 



showed;" lo little had these lo&s of Moses understood his words. And now Jesus 
shows it more clearly, and points to the life as an immortal life : " Neither can they die 
any more: for they are equal unto the angels; and are sons of God, heing sons of tha 
resurrection." True, this is affirmed of them " that are accounted worthy to attain to 
that world, and the resurrection from the dead." But that " the dead " — that is, all 
the dead — " are raised Moses showed, as touching the dead that they are raised." Oh, 
precious words 1 Thanks be to God, life does not end in a tomb ! Abraham and Isaac 
and Jacob live ; yea, " all live unto him," if unto us they die. Jesus points to the 
source of all error on this as on so many subjects : " Ye know not the Scriptures, nor 
the power of God." On these two hang all the true faith of men. No one can read 
"the Scriptures" and deny the resurrection. In Jesus' view the old Scriptures 
sufiiciently affirmed the great truth. And he who in these days would defend himself 
against the assaults of unbelief must sit at the feet of Jesus. No one can doubt his 
belief in the resurrection. " And why is it judged incredible ? " All difficulties vanish 
in presence of "the power of God." If the question of the "foolish one" be urged, 
" How ? — How are the dead raised ? " the only answer faith should vouchsafe is, " The 
power of God." And if the further demand is pressed, but " with what manner of body 
do they come ? " it must still be replied, " God giveth it a body." Let the true believer 
stand by the Word of God. The resurrection rests not for its certainty on a founda- 
tion of human ratiocination or scientific deduction, neither is it by them to be over- 
turned. The one impregnable wall of defence for this most precious article of human 
faith and this most precious conditicm of human life is in the combined words, " The 
Scriptures : the power of God." 

II. As to the CONDITION OF THB EBSUBBEOTION LITE. We Wait to know this. One 
only truth is enough to carry with us, an earnest of all — ^"as angels in heaven." The 
truths are almost antiphonal: "Neither can they die any more; as angels in 
heaven."— O. 

Vers. 28 — 34. — The great command. One more question ere it could be said, " No 
man after that durst ask him any question." Alas 1 on the human side it, like the others, 
is a mere quibble, or based on one. But though man asks in his folly Jesus never 
answers according to it, but always according to his supreme wisdom, in a manner so 
high, so far-reaching, so seriously. He trifled not with the perplexities of men. He 
knew nations and tribes of men would feed on his words to the end of time, and he 
gladly bore witness to all those truths against which the human errors in that erring 
a^e stood out in humiliating contrast. The Christian teaching j^rows up nut of the 
Mosaic. The later development of the one system does not sot .iside a single moral 
principle of the earlier. The solution of the difficulty which beset a few amidst the 
many commandments for which priority was urged laid down a permanent principle for 
all time, and took up into Christianity the essential teaching of Mosaism. We read — 

I. The simplicity of the Chbistian teaching. One word embodies it — the word 
"love." To this Christ gave the utmost prominence and the most beautiful illustia- 
tion. This simple rule engages the devotion of the central energy of the entire life. It 
describes the first effort of feeble infancy and the ripest experience of the mature 
Christian age. It is at once the point from which all pure and active obedience takes 
its departure, and it is the end towards which all spiritual growth and culture tends. 
It is the alpha and the omega of the Christian spirit. To love, to love God first and 
supremely, and in that love to love the neighbour, is so complete a dedication of the 
entire inner man to the service of the Most High, that all commands requiring the 
detail* of that service are anticipated. Prom these branches hang all the rich, ripe 
clusters of fruitful obedience. 

II. The elevating tendency of that teaching, which sets fobth thk love of 

THE infinite BIOBLLBNCB AB THE HIGHEST AND MOST OBLIGATOKY OF ALL ITS EEQUIEfi- 

MENT8. That holy system of spiritual morality first called Mosaism, or Judaism, and 
now called Christianity, is for ever raised to the highest pitch of excellence and worthi- 
ness by making this its central, its almost solitary, command. All that is good in 
morals, all that is pure in aspiration, all that is beneficent in action, flows from thii 
fountain. The perpetual aim to reach to the most entire love of the most exalted 
Object of hunuut thought must insenubly raise the mural and spiritual character <A 



ek. th. 1—44.] TAB GOSPEL ACdORDliia TO ST. MARK. 1«1 



every one who Is controlled by so worthy an endeavour. It ensures the recognition 
of the soul's subjection to the authority of God; it makes the Divine excellences 
objects of ceaseless contemplation ; it subordinates all the aims and activities of life 
to the holiest purposes; and, while withdrawing the life from the degradations of 
low and unworthy motives and pursuits, it regulates the whole by an ever-present, 
powerful, and satisfying principle of hfe, at the same time preserving the simplicity and 
moral cohesion — the unity — of the character. Never was a holier law uttered; never 
were the feet of men directed to a purer, safer path ; never was a firmer, truer basis 
laid on which to found a kingdom of truth, of peace, and of well-being. 

III. The pbaotioal chabacteb of the Chbistian teaohino — " Thou shalt love thy 
neighbour." To present rules for the government of every hour and the regulation of 
every transaction of life would be far leas effective than to seize upon a principle like 
this, which underlies all conduct. It may be entrusted with the guidance of the life ia 
the absence of controlling regulations and minute details of obligatory observance. It 
leaves the spirit free to act according to its own generous impulses or prudent caution. 
Such a rule prevents the necessity for " Thou shalt not steal ; " " Thou shalt not kill." 
Love embraces all virtues ; it fulfils all righteousness. The regulating principle, " as 
thyself," points to the due estimate of one's own life ; such a love for it as would pre- 
vent its exposure to evil, and such a discernment of the true interests of life, and the 
common participation in those interests, as would lead to right adjustment of the 
relative claims of self and the apparently conflicting claims of others. Truly, " there is 
none other commandment greater than these." This, indeed, is " much more than all 
whole burnt offerings and sacrifices." And he who has come to appreciate the truth 
and beauty of this is " not far from the kingdom of God ; " v/hile he who kr.eps this 
commandment already dwells within the security and shares the blessedness of that 
kingdom.— O, 

Vers. 41 — 44^— I%e twdow's gift. How many lessons cluster around this unique 
ineiiient 1 The watchful eye which is ever over the treasury of the Lord's temple ; the 
discernment between the gifts that come of " superfluity," large perhaps in themselves, 
but small in comparison with the abundance left untouched ; and the gifts that betoken 
the penury of the giver, but at the same time declare the entireness with which all hia 
living is devoted to the service of God ; and the great Master's principle of judgment. 
" Many that were rich cast in much ; " one that was " poor " cast in little ; yet the 
one " cast m more than all." Let not our thoughts leave the Lord's treasury, and 
let that toeasury denote to us whatever is employed for the right ordering of the Lord's 
worship in his own holy house ; all that is expended in charitable works for the benefit 
of men, whether in ministering to their spiritual or temporal necessities. The good 
Lord has himself chosen to represent works of benevolence shown to the suffering and 
poor to be works done unto himself. All that is thrown into their treasury is thrown 
into his. " Inasmuch as ye did it unto one of these my brethren, even these least, ye 
did it unto me." So it comes to pass that both the Lord and the poor — the Lord in 
heaven and the sufiering and needy on earth — make their appeal to our charity for 
such help as we may be able to render. In responding to this double appeal let us 
measure our gifts : I. By the claims of omr Lord upon us. 2. By the necessities «f 
our neighbour. 3. By the measure of our lympathy urith him and them. 

I. If THE CLAIMS OP ouB LoKD guido US, what limit shall we put upon our " gifts " ? 
To him we owe more than our all. To him we are indebted for life and breath, and all 
things ; for the bright light of the mom and the cooling shades of eventide ; for reason 
aTvd affection and friendship. The good and perfect gifts of righteousness, of holy hope, 
of calm faith, of heavenly love, come down from him. All that is beauteous and bright 
in life ; all that raises us from degradation and need. Ah 1 the sands on the sea-shore 
aire as little likely to be numbered as the gifts of the Lord's bounty, which lay us under 
tribute from sheer thankfulness to him. 

II. But OUB nbighboub's need presents little less impressive claims upon us. How 
multiplied! How various 1 How imperative! Christian charity needs little labour 
to find out the suitable channels of its activity. How greatly has that charity grown 
and multiplied since the Lord cast the first handful of seed into the warm hnart ot 
mfLu I Many ages have been characterized by large gifts for the comfort, the phyucal 



182 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oh. xn. 1—44 

need, the Bpiritiial help of man. This present age is not a whit hehind the chief in the 
largeness and variety of its gifts and efforts. To the Lord be praise 1 
III. But the true spring of all charity and the true quality of it is to he found in 

a PERFECT UNITY OF INTBEB8T WITH MEN, AND A PEBFECT SYMPATHY WITH THE LOBD. 

True charity is the outflow of the love of God and love of man. It is one of the highest 
reaches of wisdom to discern the perfect community of interest which every man has 
with every other. This the Lord saw : this, alas 1 is but little seen by us. He who 
can once become possessed of the belief that he has no true and permanent interest 
which is not identical with the highest interests of his race, has taken the first step 
towards the attainment of a pure, a boundless, a Divine charity. And he who would 
sustain this lofty sentiment must learn to see that all he has he holds by the will and 
for the good pleasure of the Lord on high. He will learn that concerning himself his 
utmost wisdom is, with St. Bernard, to say, " Lord, I have but two mites, a body and 
a soul J I give them both to thee." — G, 

Vers. 1 — 12. — The evil .husbandmen. L Faithless to God ; unjust to men. If 
men do not know God, neither can they know those who are sent of him. The 
Pharisees were set against Jesus because he was the only living presentment of their 
own neglected duties to God. 

II. Violence fallacious to those who employ it. The wicked husbandmen blindly 
slay the emissary. It is of no avail. The Erinys, the fury, the avenging spirit of the 
dead man, will come back. The violence against Jesus brought about the removal of 
his murderers from their place. 

III. Abuse of good means its loss. " The vineyard given to others." So do great 
inheritances melt away from their possessors; and the industrious servant comes to the 
seat of the dissipated lord. The very intelligence that is misused decays ; and the 
loss of influence means loss of moral life. 

IV. The scales of Divine and of human estimation often ddtee. A less m 
often suggested by Christ. " Men are not what they seem." In science, in literature, 
in politics, the greatest men often rise up, untrained in the schools, to confute the con- 
ventional judgment of the time about education. So in religioD. It is difficult to 
realize that the Saviour was once scoffed at as a rustic, illiterate teacher from Nazareth. 
Tet so it was. There is a profound wonder in the turns of human life ; and so long as 
we have eyes for the hand and working of God, miracles in the truest sense will never 
cease. — J. 

Vers. 13 — 17. — The diahelie tf Jena. 1. Dishonest subtlety hatched by oleae- 
mghtbd wisdom. We must be, if possible, " wise as serpents," but, above all, honest 
in purpose. It ia the false tongue that stammers, and the fox-like cunning that entraps 
itself. 

II. Vebbal tbttth hat conceal heabt faIiBerook They spoke most truly to 
Jesus about himself, and yet most untruly. So of all Words designed to flatter and 
deceive. There may be a divorce between the tongue and the heart. 

III. Condensed argument. In the use he made of the coin, Jesus suggested • whole 
train of argument. The coin with its image was a symbol of earthly rule. The 
kingdom of Jesus is ideal, and independent of the forms of this world (John xviii. 36). 
The loyalty of the Christian to the kingdom which is righteousness, peace, and joy in 
the Holy Ghost, teaches him how to act in relation to worldly governments. But 
Christianity is not to be confounded with politics. " No earthly governments can 
prevent the spiritual service of God. That should not be rendered to them which vk 
due to God only " (Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 18 — 27. — Badducea/n error. I. Difficulties of belief abb often idlb 
LuzuBiEB OF the MIND. One Cannot suppose that these men were really troubled 
by such a question as they raised. It was sheer idleness, bred of useless school life. 
And 60 with many theoretical questions pretended to be of serious importance: 
pressing into what is inaccessible and kept in reserve by God. They are " solved by 
walking." Act — act rightly here and now, and the question will solve itself, or cease 
to interest. 



OH. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK, 183 

IL DisiNQEiTDOtrs EKA80NING FALLS INTO STUPiDiTT. What else but childish if 
this confusion of earthly relations with the spiritual kingdom ? Marriage, birth, and 
death are time-changes ; belong to the idea of earth and time, not to eternity. And 
the least instructed mind/eeZs that this is so. There are enough mysteriei in tka 
present life to engage our attention without prying into those beyond. 

III. Thb bat of truth. The one great historic Word, the basis of the national 
consciousness, sheds its sufficient light upon the question. God does not claim dead 
objects for his own. Souls that he calls his, " do of his own dear life partake," and 
"never will he them forsake." It was a mystical interpretation of the ancient Word ; 
and often there are times when we may take refuge in the mystical interpretation, and 
feel that it is the deepest and the best. " Those who are now dead to men still lire in 
God."— J. 

Vers. 28 — 34. — Tkt sssenee of religion. I. The leading idea fob the intelliqencb. 
The unity of God, his personality, his supreme lovableness. " All love is lost sava 
upon God alone." 

II. The leaddio maxim fob the will. To love one's neighbour as one's selfl 
Kant said, trying to translate the gospel into his own dialect, " Act so that the maxim 
of thy will may be the principle of an universal legislation." 

III. The mokal strRPASSBS the eittjal in religion. Surpasses it by including it 
with itself. Nothing can be offered to God dearer than a just and a loving life. Ijove, 
in fact, is the measure of life's worth. And he who believes and acts upon these 
principles is recognized by Christ as being a Christian. — J. 

Vers. 35 — 37. — Daviess Son. I. David's peophetio spirit. " He was moved by the 
npirit of truth when he foretold that his son would rule over all, and when he owned 
him as Lord." The psalm had originally another bearing. But as all true poesy 
" smacks of something greater than it seems," and has deeper meanings than meet the 
eye, so did the words of the psalmist reach forth into remoter times and higher 
relations. 

II. Christ's idbntifioation. " He declared that he was the Son of David, and that 
his priesthood and kingdom were universal and everlasting." — J. 

Vers. 38 — 40. — Traits of the scribe. I. The sebminq good often thrive ahb abb 
honoured. Insight into character is rare ; men are judged by the outside, and are 
taken largely at their own valuation. 

II. Pretension evbk hides emptiness, and often guilt. Fixed for ever for our 
repugnance, hatred, and contempt is the character of the religious pretender in the 
Gospel. Men need to be warned that there is more danger to the soul in pretending to 
a piety we have not got, than in merely having none at all. — J. 

Vert. 41 — 44. — The gift of poverty. I. The motive makes the action spibitual. 
It is mechanical, conventional, without relation to the spiritual sphere, otherwise. 

n. Love magnifies the value of the smallest gift. The flower to the sick 
person, the penny in the plate, may be worth much. The condition of the world would 
be intolerable without the multitude of such little deeds. 

ni. The true standabd of wobth in life should be oleablt kept m mind. 
We confuse mere giving and doing -with that which springs from love too much. 
Let us not despise little things: seeds of love which become great in their result of 
blessing. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 12. Parallel passages : Matt xxi. 33 — 46 1 Luke xx. 9 — 19. — Parable of 
the vineyard. L The Lord's vinbyabd. A vineyard is often used in Scripture as an 
object of comparison. The heart is probably represented under this pleasing and 
beautiful image in the Song of , 8010731 on, where it is written, " My mother's children 
were angry with me ; they made me the keeper of the vineyards ; but mine own vine- 
yard have I not kept." God's ancient people are set forth under the same figure in the 
eightieth psalm, to denote his care for and kindness to them : " Thou hast brought a 
vine out of Egypt : thou hast cast out the heathen, and planted it." And a few veraei 



184 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MA&K. [cfl. i"- 1— 4t 

Itfterward we have the touching prayer, "Return, we beseech thee, God of Hosts: 
look down from heaven, and behold, and visit this vine, and the vineyard which thy 
right hand hath planted, and the branch which thou madeat strong for thyself." In the 
fifth chapter of Isaiah we have the parable of a vineyard and its explanation, where we 
are expressly told that the house of Israel is God's vineyard ; the men of Judah hi* 
pleasant plants ; the grapes which he looked for, judgment and righteousness ; the wild 
grapes produced, wickedness and oppression ; so that instead of honesty in the dealings 
of the people there was the cruelty of the oppressor, and instead of the strict administra- 
tion of justice on the part of the magistrates there was the cry of the oppressed. Every 
reader of the New Testament is familiar with our Lord's representation of himself an 
the true Vine, of disciples as the branches, of his Father as the Husbandman, and union 
with himself as the secret of fruitfulness. The parable in the passage before us is 
recorded, with slight variation, by St. Matthew and St. Luke. This threefold occurrence 
of the same parable proves its importance, shows its instruotiveness, claims our attention 
to it, and commands our interest in it. 

II. God's cabb of his Chuech. 1. T^e culture of the vine laborious. The care neces- 
sary for the proper culture of a vineyard is surprising, and to those unacquainted with 
it almost incredible. It is so in the vineyards of the Ehine, for example, at the present 
day. As you pass along the " wide and winding " river, many a vine-clad hill presents 
itself to view. Vineyard rises above vineyard, and terrace above terrace, from the 
bottom to the top of the hill, in some instances to the height of a ttiousand ieet. How 
beautiful they look ! How pleasant to work among them and keep them I you are apt 
to suppose. If, however, you visit them and talk with the vine-dressers, you will find 
your supposition a grave mistake. The duty of the vine-dresser is no sinecure. His 
work is never over. It is continued throughout the year. Every season brings some- 
thing for him to do. Planting, propping, pruning, plucking the useless leaves, weeding, 
hoeing, and gathering the vintage occupy all his time. Prom year in till year out he 
knows little or no relaxation ; his care ceases not all the year round. How beautifully 
this illustrates God's care of and attention to his people! It was so also in ancient 
times. There is a fine didactic poem on husbandry by an old poet who flouriiihed 
nearly two thousand years ago, and whose works are read at school and college still. 
He has left us a glowing and life-like description of the continuous toil and laborious 
industry of the Italian vine-dressers in his day. He there tells us that it was indis- 
pensable to plough the soil three or four times a year, to break the clods daily, tti 
unload the branches, and thin the leaves. Even in winter the vine, after being bared 
ef its leaves and fruit, has to be subjected to the pruning-knife, the ground to be dug, 
the lopped branches burnt, and the props brought into the house. Besides, twice in the 
year the luxuriant leaves, and twice the weeds and brambles, were to be removed. 
Further, it remained to cut the reeds and willows that grew on the river's bank, and 
prickly shrubs in the woods, to bind the vines withal aud fence them. In addition to 
all this, the ripening grapes must needs be protected from hail, and rain, and rust, aud 
accidents of the weather. No wonder, then, he adds, that the husbandman's care ran 
in a circle, nor ending with the closing year, extended to the coming season. Su great 
is the attention in general needed by vineyards, whether in ancient or modern times ; 
such and so great God's care for the vineyard of the Church. But particular instances 
are here enumerated. 2. The planting. He planted it. The vineyard soil needed to 
be the choicest and the best. Soil that would do very well for pasturage, or soil that 
might be quite suitable for tillage, would not answer for a \ ineyard. Nothing but soil 
of rich and generous mould would suit the planting of the vine. The situation required to 
be carefully selected. A good deal depended on the aspect, and it needed to be sheltered 
from the wintry wind, screened from the uugeuial cold, and exposed as far as possible 
to the bright beams of a warm Southern sun, like the sunny slopes of Zion, the sides of 
Lebanon, or the vale of Eshcol. Hence the jjiophet says, " My well-beloved hath a 
vineyard on a very fruitful hill." It naturally followed that vineyards were the most 
valuable of all property, at least in land. So the Church of God is very precious in his 
fight. It is very costly, too, for he bought it with his blood ; aiid hence the injunction, 
' to feed the Church of God, which he hath p\irohased with his own blood." It is a place 
distinguished for fruitfulness and enriched with blessings ; a place of precious privileo-es, 
of numerous ordinances, of heavenly lij^ht, where the Sun of Righteousn«ii» sheds °hii 



Ok. »a. 1-44.2 TflE GOSPEL ACCORDING tO ST. MASK. 18S 

brightest beams, and Bpiritual life is cherished ; » place where the Word of truth is 
possessed, perused, and faithfully preached ; where the gospel of his grace is proclaimed ; 
where his Spirit is poured down ; where gracious influences are at work and Ditine power 
felt ; where the Divine presence is promised and enjoyed ; and where every promised 
blessing is sure to be bestowed and fully realized. The plants, moreover, are the most 
precious — even the best of their kind. Man, in his original state, was made but a little 
lower than the angels. God made man upright, and thus, when he proceeded from his 
hands, he was stamped with the Creator's image, possessed of uprightness, and invested 
with dominion. And man, even in his fallen state, possesses noble endowments and 
distinguished faculties. He has understanding capable of studying the works and ways 
ol God, affections to love and prize him, a will that can he mpved by motives, tender 
emotions, and far-reaching sympathies — high powers of head and heart. These powers, 
it is true, are all weakened and misdirected in consequence of sin. But oh 1 when they are 
quickened by the Spirit of God and influenced by his grace ; in other words, when the 
sinner is united to the Saviour, when by faith he is engrafted into him and become a 
living branch of the living Vine, a fruitful branch of the true Vine, he is then a plant 
of the choicest kind, qualified for yielding spiritual fruit, and capable of showing forth 
the praises of the Creator. Then does he correspond and come up in some measure to 
his original condition as God himself describes it : " Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, 
wholly a right seed : how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange 
vine unto me ? " 3. The fencing. He set an hedge about it. The people of Israel 
were hedged in, both politically and physically. The position of Palestine contributed 
to this separation of its inhabitants. On the north were the slopes of Lebanon, on the 
south the Idumsean desert, on the west the Great Sea, on the east the Jordan with its 
lakes, and Perasa beyond. But God's spiritual vineyard was his Church, as existing first 
among the Jewish people and then in Gentile lands. The direct reference is to the 
Jewish Church as established under Moses, Joshua, the judges, and the theocracy ; the 
great fence that hedged it in was the Law. But we may go back yet further; for God 
set an hedge about his Church in Old Testament times, from the call of Abraham, by 
the covenant of circumcision made with that patriarch, and by the whole written Law, 
moral as well as ceremonial, given to his descendants. In this way he separated the 
vineyard of the Church from the wide and wild common of the world. The Law 
was " the middle wall of partition " between Jew and Gentile. But in Christian 
times, and among Gentile peoples also, the Church is fenced around. There is still a 
hedge between the communion of saints and the world of the ungodly. Profession of 
the ductrines which Christ and his apostles taught, and the practice of the duties they 
enjoined, compose that hedge. Faith in his promises and obeilience to his precepts 
draw the line of demarcation broad and wide between them. The exercise of whole- 
some discipline keeps the hedge in order. And a Church that does not or cannot 
exercise this salutary check on its members, saying who are and who are not worthy 
of its membership, is so far forth powerless for good, or like salt that has lost its savour. 
The vineyard of which the Prophet Isaiah (v. 5) speaks had a double fence — both a 
hedge and a wall — as it is written, " I will take away the hedge thereof, . . . and break 
down the wall thereof." We have frequently seen two hedges round a garden — the 
outer one of thorn, the inner one of beech. Thus it is with the vineyard of the Lord. 
A visible profession of Church membership is the outer hedge ; an interest in Christ is 
the inner one — and, it must be added, the essential one. All who have embraced the 
mercy of God in Christ Jesus are within the enclosure of the Church in the true sense ; 
all who have not are aliens to the commonwealth of Israel. " As many as received him, 
to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believed on his 
name." Tnese are safe within the hedge. " He that believeth not shall not see life, 
but the wrath of God abideth on him." All such are outside the hedge. 4. Important 
practical question. Inside this hedge or outside it? This is the question — the great 
question. What, then, is our position individually? Out of Christ, we are without 
(Glod, for " no man cometh to the Father but by him ; '' and without hope, for the hope 
of the hypocrite will perish ; and without happiness, the secret and source of which is 
to "delight one's self in God, and he gives thee thy heart's desire ; " without life, for " this 
is life eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast 
sent;" and without heaven, for Christ is the way thither, as weU as the door ol 



186 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xn. 1—44, 

entrance. In Christ we are sheltered from the stonn of coming wrath. The sunshina 
of the Divine favour rests on us ; the fruit of the Spirit is borne by us. We can then say, 
" There is now no condemnation to them who are in Christ Jesus, who walk not aftel 
the flesh, but after the Spirit." There is the hedge of Divine providence about the 
Church, as we read, " In that day sing ye unto her, A vineyard of red wine. I the 
Lord do keep it ; I will water it every moment : lest any hurt it, I will keep it night 
and day." We are invited to walk about Zion and consider her strong fortifications, 
counting her towers, contemplating her bulwarks, and considering her palaces, so as tc 
convince ourselves that those defences, unscathed by the assaults of enemies in the past, 
will remain as impregnable for the future. 

"On the Book of Ages founded. 
What can shake thy siu'e repose? 
With salvation's walls surrounded. 
Thou may'st smile at all thy foes." 

5. Oospel ordinances. The wine-fat, or vat, was a large stone trough deposited in the 
ground, to receive the juice of the grape squeezed out in the winepress placed over 
it. The winepress thus consisted of two parts — a receiver for the grapes, and beneath 
that a receptacle for the expressed juice. The press above, or upper trough, in which 
the grapes were placed to be trodden out by human feet, amid songs and shouts of joy, 
was called by the Latins torcular ; by the Greeks \tiv6s, the word used by St. Matthew j 
and by the Hebrews gath. Through a hole in the bottom of this the expressed juice 
flowed into the vat beneath, or lower trough, which the Romans called lacus ; the 
Greeks &ro\^<»ioK, the word used by St. Mark in the passage before us ; and the Hebrews 
yekev, from a root meaning " to hollow out " or " deepen ; " while buth wordi occur 
together in the Prophet Joel (iii. 13), " The press (gath) is full, the vats (yekavim) over- 
flow." The winepress and wine- vat were sometimes made out of one block, and communi- 
cated by an aperture; sometimes they were distinct stones connected by a tube. If, then, 
we are to follow out the allegory explaining its particular parts, we may understand 
by the winepress the ordinances of the gospel, namely, prayer, praise, the Word, and 
sacraments ; though others understand thereby gospel fruits or graces, as charity, 
thanksgiving, and devotion flowing like wine through it. If, then, we understand by 
the winepress gospel ordinances, by the wine-vat we may understand the place where 
the grace conveyed through these ordinances is received and enjoyed. Qoi. has 
appointed certain means for the communication of wisdom, strength, consolation, and 
every needful gift and grace. These means are the winepress; and the place where 
these spiritual supplies are obtained and preserved is the wine-vat. Let us take as an 
example, and in order to illustrate our meaning, the sacrament of the Supper. The 
Saviour, when he made himself a sacrifice for sin, trod the winepress of God's wrath 
alone, while " of the people there was none with him." The sacrament of the Supper is 
a feast after and upon that sacrifice ; the place where this feast is dispensed, and its 
benefits to our spiritual nourishment and growth in grace partaken of, is the wine-vat. 
The bread is a lively emblem of Christ's body, and a striking symbol of the hidden 
manna ; the wine is a true token of his blood, and a sweet foretaste of that wine which 
we shall drink new in the kingdom of our Father ; the table of the Lord, round which 
the faithful meet and share the feast, is symbolized by the wine-vat. In any case, even 
if we may not attach a specific meaning to each particular detail, these details imply 
generally God's care of and provision for his Church. 6. Practical remarks. Mark, 
then, the connection of the press and vat ; they go together. So is it with the 
ordinances, and the place of their administration ; the ordinances, and the benefits they 
convey ; the ordinances, and the blessings God gives us to enjoy through them. If we 
would glorify God, it must be in the manner he has appointed ; if we would enjoy him, 
it must be in the use of the means he has provided ; if we would enjoy not only the 
communion of saints, but also the communications of Divine grace, we must tot 
forsake the assembling of ourselves with the people of God ; if we would promote at 
once the glory of God and the growth of grace in our own hearts, we must " remember the 
sabbath day to keep it holy," and the sanctuary to frequent it duly and devoutly. In 
a word, if we would be truly wise for both worlds, we shall ask wisdom of God, who 
"giTeth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not," waiting at the posts of wisdom'i 



•H. xn. 1— M.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. 187 

doors to hear what God the Lord will say to our souls. 7. The tower. This wm a 
place of safety and strength for the watching and guarding of the vineyard, and fur 
the protection of its fruits. The temple in the old economy was the tower, and th« 
priests that lodged around might be regarded as acting the part of the watchmen. 
Store usually, however, the prophets are spoken of as the watchmen. " I will stand 
upon my watch, and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say unto 
me, and what I shall answer when I am reproved." The faithful preachers of the 
gospel and pastors of the Christian Church are watchmen now, who watch as those 
who must give account; while to both teachers and taught, pastors and people, 
preachers and hearers, the words of the Lord, as addressed to the Prophet Bzekiel, 
while he sat by the river of Chebar, are applicable still. In that instructive passage 
we read, " Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel : there- 
fore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me. When I say unto 
the wicked. Thou shalt surely die ; and thou givest him not warning, nor speakest 
to warn the wicked from his wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall 
die in his iniquity ; but his blood will I require at thine hand. Yet if thou warn the 
wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in 
his iniquity ; but thou hast delivered thy soul." In consideration of all these careful 
arrangements, surely God might well say, as he did by the Prophet Isaiah, " What 
could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not done in it ?" 

III. God's expectations prom the vinetabd of the Chuboh. 1, Se tends his 
servants to claim a portion of the fruit. The parable shows in its immediate applica- 
tion the privileges of the Jews, their perversion and abuse of those privileges, and the 
consequent punishment. If, then, by the husbandmen we understand the ordinary 
ministers of the Jews' religion, as the priests and Levites ; the servants sent were the 
extraordinary messengers, the prophets raised up on special occasions and for special 
purposes, and other eminent preachers of righteousness. The householder or owner 
lalaimed a portion of the produce. The rent was thus payed in part of the fruit ; it 
was to be in kind, on the well-known metayer principle, long so prevalent and still 
practised in parts of Europe ; it was to consist of grapes, not gold. The occupiers 
acknowledged the claim, but failed, or rather refused, to meet it, and were ruined in 
consequence. God expects fruit ; why should he not ? Who ever planted a vineyard 
that did not expect to eat of the fruit of it? Who, then, will venture to gainsay the 
justness of God's claims? He is no hard Master; he is no rack-rent Proprietor; he 
does not " reap where he has not sown, nor gather where he has not strawn ; " he 
never requires impossibilities. 2. Correspondence between the fruit of the vineyard and 
the owner's expectations. The fruit of the spiritual vineyard should correspond with 
the expectations of the great proprietor in three respects. (1) In quality this corre- 
spondence should exist. He looks for grapes — good grapes off every vine which he has 
planted in his spiritual vineyard. There is heart-fruit, consisting <rf faith, hope, 
charity, purity, the thoughts being purified by the inspiration of the Spirit ; there is 
the lip-fruit of prayer, praise, holy conversation, edifying discourse, and speech seasoned 
with salt ; life-fruit follows, and is manifested in works of faith, labours of love, 
patience of hope, devotion of spirit, all holy living, and the necessary sequel in holy 
dying at the last. In a word, God looks for holiness in all his people. He looks for 
those blessed and beautiful fruits of which St. Paul writes to the Philippians, when, 
summing up the Christian graces, he says, " Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are 
true, whatsoever things are honourable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things 
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report ; if there 
be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on [or take account of] these things." 
Ho looks for those excellences of character, conduct, and conversation which St. Peter 
recommends to the strangers scattered abroad, saying, " Giving all diligence, add to 
your faith virtue; and to virtue knowledge; and to knowledge temperance; and to 
temperance patience ; and to patience godliness ; and to godliness brotherly kindness ; 
tad. to brotherly kindness charity. For if these things be in you, and abound, they 
make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of ouf 
Lord Jesus Christ." God the Father had these fruits in view when he planted th« 
vineyard, for he "predestinated us to be conformed to the image of his Son;" God 
the Son prepared for them when he gave up the ghost, for it was t« "redeem u* 



m ffifi GOSPilL ACCORDlNa lO OT. MAEtL tcfi. xlt 1— 4i. 

from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works ; " 
God the Holy Spirit provided for them when he renewed us in the spirit of out 
minds, making us new creatures in Christ Jesus, and so commenced our sanctifi- 
cation. He is waiting and willing to produce them; for "the fruit of the Spirit 
is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temper- 
ance." The gospel calls us to hohiess, and when embraced in sincerity and truth, 
produces it in increasing measure froru day to day, leading us to the higher Christian 
life ; for " the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching 
us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, 
and godly, in this present world." (2) But the quantity of the fruit borne must be 
directly proportionate to the grace bestowed. It must be in exact correspondence with 
the talents God has given us, and the time those talents have been lent us ; with the 
mercies great and manifold which he has conferred upon us ; with the privileges with 
which we have been favoured, and the period of their possession ; in a word, with all 
the opportunities of whatever kind and advantages of whatever sort, which we have 
been permitted to enjoy. With every talent God is pleased to give us he says, 
" Occupy till I come." Every one of the blessings bestowed — and oh, how great the 
number ! — lays us under an additional obligation ; every mercy imposes increased 
responsibility. Is it health or wealth ? is it influence or example ? or any other 
means of receiving good for ourselves, or imparting it to others ? Whatever it is, it 
adds to our accountability, and, if abused, it will be sure to augment our guilt, and in 
the end aggravate our condemnation. 3. We are reminded, further, that the fruit must 
be in season ; for " at the season," that is, when the season for the fruit arrived, the 
proprietor sent his servants for the stipulated portion. " When the time of the fruit 
drew near," says St. Matthew; when sufficient time for growth and for reaching 
maturity has been allowed, the time of fruit draws nigh. After opportunities of use- 
fulness have been enjoyed, God comes to see how we have employed them. The 
righteous man yieldeth the right fruit in right quantity, and at the right time. This 
is his characteristic, as stated in the words of Scripture : " He shall be like a tree 
planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season." In the 
natural world, every season of the year has fruit peculiar to itself. Spring has its 
flowers, in addition to its buds and blossoms ; summer has its plants, and tubers, and 
waving fields of corn ; autumn has its own abundant fruitfulness in gulden grain, 
matured fruits, and ripened grapes. So in the spiritual world and in the vineyard of 
the Church ; in a season of prosperity God expects gratitude as well as gladness ; in a 
season of adversity he expects patient resignation to his will ; in a season of depression 
•nd consequent privation, he expects dependence on his providence ; in provocation he 
expects meekness; in temptation, resistance by the help of God; in wintry days of 
darkness, contentment with the Divine allotments ; in seasons of sunshine, humility ; 
and in all seasons diligent seeking and faithful serving of God. 

IV. God'b punishment of tTOFAiTHFTONESS. 1. Shameful treatment of GoeTi $er- 
vants. These wicked husbandmen went from bad to worse. They were determined 
that God should get no fruit from his vineyard ; and accordingly they maltreated, in 
the most scandalous and barbarous manner, the servants sent by the proprietor to 
demand his due portion of the produce. Their conduct shows a gradation of wicked- 
ness — they beat, they wound, they kill. T%e word ^Ke<^aAa(aiirai', rendered " wounded in 
the head," is peculiar, and for this, which appears to be its primary sense, there is no 
classical parallel. Where it occurs, it is generally used in the secondary sense of bring- 
ing under one head or sum : hence it has been variously rendered in accordance with 
this signification, some explaining it to reckon with one in a summary manner, paying 
with blows instead of fruit ; others to deal with one summarily ; and others, again, to 
complete and bring to a head their maltreatment ; but the ordinary rendering cf " wound- 
ing in the head " is confirmed by the Syriac and Vulgate, and is commonly accepted. 
More important for us is the historical evidence which the Scriptures of the Old 
Testament afford of this shameful treatment of God's servants. They were threatened 
with death, thrown into dungeons, actually slain, stoned, i-awn asunder, as passages 
that readUy suggest themselves to any careful reader of God's Word abundantly prove. 
The special honour reserved for the Son marks his superior rank, and distinguishes him 
from «11 others, whether designated servants or dignified with the name of lona of God 



m. ML 1—44.] THK GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. MARK. 181 



He is the one Son — the well-beloved — claiming and entitled to peculiar reverence ; th« 
rightful Heir, too, of the inheritance. Thus, as we read in the beginning of the Epistle 
to the Hebrews, "God, having of old time spoken unto the fathers in the prophets by- 
divers portions and in divers manners, bath at the end of these days spoken unto us in 
bis Son, whom he appointed Heir of all things." The Son took upon him " the form of 
a servant " while sojourning in our world. 2. A Bupplementary parable. The parable 
of the vineyard and the wicked husbandmen, with all its fulness of details, omitted— 
necessetily omitted — one or rather two points, which are supplemented by a parabolic 
stattanent from the hundred and eighteenth psalm. Whereas the son and heir ii 
left dead outside the vineyard, as Christ suffered, " without the gate," while the lord of 
the vineyard himself avenges his death, and punishes the husbandmen for their di»- 
bolical conduct ; it was necessary to complete the picture by his revival and return to 
the place of dignity and power, as the Foundation and chief Corner-stone, upbearing 
and binding together the two walls of the sacred edifice. And not only so ; it behoved 
to represent him as revenging in person his wrongs on those who slew him, according 
to the one parable, or who rejected him according to the other ; while this feature is 
more fully exhibited by the first and third evangelists, who tell us that " whosoever 
shall fall on this stone " — that is, stumble and fall over this stumbling-stone of his 
humiliation — " shall be broken " — sorely bruised (ffwBKairBiiaeTttt) — and so receive great 
hurt and grief; "but on whomsoever it shall fall" — in wrath, because of their final 
impenitence — " it shall grind him to powder; " literally, winnow (XiK/i'^<rei) him, just as 
the stone cut out of the mountains without hanrls was seen in prophetic vision to smite 
and shatter the great world-image, and scatter its fragments like chaff before the 
winds of the winter. 3. Improvement of the subject. The primary reference is to the 
Jews as a Church and people. Their own conscience made application of it to them- 
selves ; hence their indignation, but not their improvement. The transference of the 
vineyard was not exactly from the Jews to the Gentiles, but to the faithful who should 
be collected together out of both, and connected by the chief Corner-stone into one. 
(1) The first lesson taught us here is of a national character. The Jews had great 
privileges, but their misuse or abuse of those privileges subjected them at last to fear- 
ful retribution. God had shown much forbearance, sending servant after servant to 
call them to repentance and reformation, and last of all and greatest of all, his own Son ; 
but in vain. They refused to return and repent, crowning their wickedness by crucifying 
the Son of God. At length the cup of their iniquity was full and overflowing ; and, 
forty years after this climax of their enormities, Jerusalem was laid in mini, the 
beautiful house in which their fathers worshipped reduced to ashes, and themselves 
scattered throughout the world. (2) We learn God's mode of dealing with Churches 
or nations that, like the Jews, are highly privileged, and have long enjoyed instructions 
and ordinances and spiritual benefits. As he continues blessing after blessing, so he 
sends call after call, and by his servants summons them to the improvement of those 
blessings. If they refuse compliance — if they neglect to use those blessings in his 
service and to his glory — ruin, and that without remedy, shall be, must be, the sad but 
sure result. The destiny of the Jewish Church was repeated to some extent in that of 
the Oriental Churches, and in that of the African Churches ; and by all these cases the 
Churches of our own land and of every Christian people are solemnly warned against 
the misuse of mercies, and the abuse of privileges, and the iust judgments of God with 
which aportate Churches and sinful nations are visited. (3) Individual units make up 
the aggregate of a nation or the membership of a Church, so in our individual capacity 
we add our quota to the general guilt on the One hand, or to the purity of a Church 
and the righteousness of a nation on the other. Therefore are we bound individually 
to serve Gk)d " in holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life," and 
to intercede for the practice and prevalence of that righteousness in all others, which 
exalts a nation or a peopk, so that the mercies of God may be improved and his judg- 
ments averted. 4. A practical and personal question. Are those fruits which God, as 
we have seen, expects from us, ours ? Are we duly meeting his claims upon us ? Are 
we responding to them gratefully and faithfully? Have we, by the constraining 
mercies of God, and by the constraining love of Christ, and for the love of the Spirit, 
presented ourselves, body, soul, and spirit, " a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is our reasonable service"? Do we appreciate aa we ought all God'i oare «ul 



190 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. ton. xil 1—44, 

kindaess, our privileges and means of instruction and improvement ? Or, like certain 
vines in the land of Palestine, which, as we read in Scripture, produced poisonoua 
berries, are we bearing fruit of similar poisonous quality ? It may be that, instead 
of grapes, good grapes and proper fruit, we may be bearing grapes — wild grapes, not 
only inferior in quality, but poisonous in their nature. Our lips, instead of being 
instruments of righteousness, may he polluted and polluting with falsehood and deceit 
and evil-speaking; with corrupt communication, levity, and profanity. Our life, 
instead of a living epistle, seen and legible to all, may be an exhibition of bitterness 
and wrath and anger; of envy, pride, injustice, and uncharitableness ; of sensuality 
and sinfulness. Our heart, which is the fountain-head and source of all, may, by 
remaining unrenewed and unpurified, continue the wellspring of evil thoughts, vile 
affections, and corrupt desires. If this be the case with any of us — which may Heaven 
forfend ! — how great must be the disappointment of the Lord of the vineyard I how 
base our ingratitude I how awful the doom I how swiftly and suddenly destruction 
may come I 5. Fatal error. Delay is not deliverance. Many flatter themselves, as 
Agag, that the bitterness of death is past, at the very moment that vengeance is on 
the road and ready to overtake them. Some regard warnings as words of course, and 
consequently worthless. Others, like the Jews of old, treat shamefully the messengers 
of Divine mercy ; and neglect, or despise and make light of, or speak evil of, the 
ministers of religion, forgetting the fact that whoso despiseth the messenger despiseth 
the Master that sent him. Thank God but few reach this bad eminence in their enmity 
to God, and the things of God, and the servants of Godl We may neglect ordinances 
and abuse privileges, but, in doing so, we treasure up for ourselves " wrath against the 
day of wiath and revelation of the righteous judgment of God ; " we may despise the 
terrors of the Lord, and turn a deaf ear to the voice of warning ; we may disappoint 
the reasonable expectations of ministers and members of the Church ; we may defraud 
thje great Proprietor of the fruits which his grace was calculated to produce, and which 
he had every reason to expect; and God may not take vengeance on our evil works 
speedily ; yet that vengeance will be aggravated by delay, and more fearful when it 
conies. Those guilty of such sinful neglect and abuse of privileges shall in the day of 
Divine vengeance be swept as with the besom of destruction, or thrown as into a 
furnace seven times heated, and that for ever and ever. Let us beware of the pro- 
gressive nature of sin; for if we forget instruction, that forgetfulness will cause us to 
neglect it ; that neglect, again, will lead us to despise it ; that contempt for instruction 
will beget dislike of our spiritual teachers who impart it ; and this dislike will eii|;ender 
hatred of the truth in general ; and the end, the fearful end, will be destruction irreme- 
diable and terrible from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his power. " And 
thou, Capeniaum, which art exalted unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell." — 
J. J, G. 

Vers. 13 — 17. Parallel passages : Matt. xxii. 15—22 ; Luke xx. 20 — 36. — Queition of 
the tribute money. I. A snaee laid. This tribute money (icrjvvos) was the poll or 
capitation tax payable to the Roman Government, from the time Judaaa became subject 
to the Roman power. Judas of Galilee headed a revolt against thii tax, but perished 
with his followers. If our Lord allowed the lawfulness of paying tribute to Ciesar, it 
would have compromised him with the Jewish nationalists, who would not have been 
slow to charge him with contempt of the Law of Moses for the words of Deut. 
xvii. 15, " Thou mayest not set a stranger over thee," were explained by them as 
forbidding the payment of tribute to a foreign power. If he acknowledged the unlaw- 
fulness of such payment, he came into direct collision with the Roman authorities. In 
the one case, he offended the Judasan patriots and his own Galilean followers ; in the 
other, he incensed the Herodian royalists who acquiesced in Roman rule. On the one 
side, it was treachery to national and patriotic aspirations and Messianic prospects ; 
on the other, it was treason against the Roman Cgesar and Pilate his governor. Such 
was the snare laid for him ; such was the trap they set in order to catch him. Thus 
they thought to entangle him, rather, enmare (rKytieiiruriv) him, in his talk, as a fowler 
ensnares a biri. 

II. The subtlety with which the snabb is laid. 1. They put the question in 
Euch a categorical form as seemed to them to necessitate a simple "jea" or "say; " thus, 



iiH. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. 191 

" la it lawful to give tribute, or not ? Shall we give, or shall we not give?" The double 
question is to emphaBize their earnestness, and to invite a prompt reply, affirmative o( 
negative ; though the first question may refer to the lawfulness of the payment, and 
the second to its expediency or advisability. 2. The motive which actuated them to 
interrogate our Lord so peremptorily was most sinister and insidious. The evangelists, 
viewing their conduct from different standpoints, characterize it differently. This 
difference, which we discover by comparing the parallel passages, is most instructive. 
Their conduct in propounding this ensnaring interrogatory was wickedness (iroyriplea'), 
according to the first evangelist ; it was craftiness [Tofovpyiay), according to the third ; 
while, according to the second, it was hypocrisy (Mxpurw). Their question had • 
close connection with and combined all these three elements ; it was conceived in 
wickedness, cradled in craftiness, and cloaked by hypocrisy. Thus the interrogator* 
acted as spies, or " liers in wait " (iyKoddTovs), as St. Luke calls them, while thej 
feigned themselves just men. Our Lord tore off their mask, exposing them in thefr 
true colours, and addressing them in their real character, when, according to St. Mat- 
thew, he says, " Why tempt ye me, ye hypocrites ? " 3. The object th«y had in view 
was to embroil the Saviour with the royalists, and so compass his destruction. For 
this purpose it is plain they desired a negative answer, as appears suggested by the 
words, " Thou regardest not the person of men," implying such fearlessness as would 
enable him to reject foreign authority as inconsistent with acknowledging God as their 
King. Their ulterior object, as stated by St. Luke, was " that they might take hold of 
his speech, so as to deliver him up to the power and to the authority of the governor;" 
in other words, to deliver him to the Roman power, rule, or magistracy (4pxp)i and to 
the lawful authority or jurisdiction (Jioua-ta) of Pilate, the Roman procurator. 4. Neces- 
sity brings together strange companions. The Pharisees were as mean as they were 
unprincipled, and as untruthful as they were unprincipled and mean. They proved 
their want of principle by the unnatural coalition which they formed with the Hero- 
dians — ^the patriots so called who opposed foreign dominion with the elastic politicians 
who owned the Roman power; the foes with the friends of Csesar; sticklers for the Law 
with the supporters of an authority deemed inimical to the Law. Their meanness was 
manifest in the fulsome flattery with which they addressed our Lord ; while in their 
base untruthfulness they pretended to approach him with a quasi-case of conscience, 
though in reality they were carrying out the counsel for his destruction. 

III. The Saviodb's reply. Had he replied in the affirmative, he would have for- 
feited his popularity ; had he answered in the negative, he would have forfeited his life. 
The latter was the consummation wished for by the members of this unholy alliance of 
superstition with political expediency. To give vividness to the transaction, our Lord 
ordered the production of a Roman penny, or denarius, a small silver coin of the value 
of sevenpence halfpenny, or eightpence halfpenny at most. On that coin was an image, 
the head of the then reigning sovereign, Tiberius, while round it ran the usual superscrip- 
tion or inscription, consisting of the name and titles of the emperor. Our Lord, as if in 
surprise, asks, half in irony and half in indignation, what all this meant, and whose it 
was ? Their unavoidable answer was, " Cassar's ; " and this very answer broke the 
snare, and the bird escaped out of the net of the fowler. Then said our Lord — Give 
back (Air((8oT6) to Csesar what belongs to him ; pay back to Cfesar what you acknow- 
ledge to be his. The coinage proves the king, the currency affords evidence of his 
property ; while, on the other hand, you render to God the things that are his. 

IV. Important peinciple. This principle, so important and far-reaching, though 
plain enough in its general bearing, has been differently understood. Some have 
regarded the two parts of the answer as entirely distinct, as though belonging to dif- 
ferent spheres, or placed on different planes, and so incapable of clashing or even 
eoming in contact ; as though he said, " Pay your taxes, and perform your religious 
duties, but keep the two things apart." More usually they are understood as two 
separate departments of human duty, coexisting and compatible; or as standing to 
each other in the relation of the part to the whole. According to the second of these 
three views, the payment of civil dues and the observance of religious dutiea stand 
side by side together, and as equally obligatory ; that is, render to Csesar, as civil ruler, 
the obedience that belongs to him, and to God, as spiritual Sovereign, the homage of 
the soul stamped with the Divine image, and therefore his due ; or, in * more lUflial 



IM THE OOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xn. 1— 44, 

and narrow sense, according to some, pay the civil taxes to the government of Cassar, 
and the didrachma, or temple-tribute, for the support of the sanctuary and service ol 
God. We understand it in the larger sense of obedience to our earthly sovereign and 
duty to our heavenly King, as co-ordinate and coexistent, perfectly compatible but not 
competitive ; or, accordinsi to the third view, the former may be regarded as part of the 
latter. This great principle, properly understood and acted on, would. have prevented 
many an unseemly collision of Church and State, and many a sinful encroachment of 
one on the domain of the other. It would have prevented the papal power from 
trampling the crown of kings in the dust, as in the reign of John, and it would have 
prevented, on the other hand, the persecution of the Church by the State, as in the days 
of the Puritans. Our Lord intimated by his reply, that so long as the Jews were 
allowed to worslip God according to his own appointment, and enjoyed the protection 
of the Roman power therein, they were under obligations to contribute to the taxes 
that supported that power. But these obligations to civil government were not to 
suspend, or set aside, or in any way interfere with the higher and holier obligations 
which they owed to God. Duty to God must be the regulating principle of duty to 
civil rulers ; the latter is then part of, or rathw part and parcel with, the former. Thus 
our Lord clearly indicated the respective piovinces of civil rulers and of religious 
teachers — the relative positions of secular authority and spiritual power. Thus he 
solved the problem of two kings and two kingdoms in one realm ; thus he taught 
obedience to civil governors in temporal things, while in spiritual their duty to God 
was paramount. So doubt many nice points may present themselTes, and many 
delicate questions may arise in practically carrying out the principle stated ; but we 
are not without light from other parts of Scripture to guide us in the application of this 
principle, even in cases of greatest difficulty.— J. J. G. 

Vers. 18 — 27. Parallel passages : Matt. xxii. 23 — 33; Luke ix. 27 — 40. — Question 
of the Sadducees touching the resurrection. L Importance of the question. Though 
the question propounded in this section was proposed for a captious purpose, and in 
order to entangle, yet, divested of its technicalities, it is a most important one. 
There is no subject more closely connected with the immortal hopes of man than tlmt 
to which the above section refers. The doctrine of the resurrection is implied, or 
directly inculcated, in several passages of the Old Testament. In the New, in whieh 
life and immortality are so clearly brought to light, we find many plain statements in 
regard to it. The whole subject is discussed at large, and fully elaborated in that 
magnificent chapter, the fifteenth of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, while out 
Lord, in the Scripture under consideration, pnts the argument pithily and pointedly in 
reply to a question from the Sadducees. 

II. An assumption. In clearing away the rubbish, with which they overlaid the 
difficulty whereby they thought to ensnare him, the Saviovu- charges them with 
ignoring the mighty power of God, who quickeneth the dead and calleth the things 
which be not as though they were. He taxes them with resting their reasoning on an 
unwarrantable assumption, to the effect that the condition of lile in heaven would be 
the same as here on earth, while, on the contrary, the occupants of that spirit-woild 
are as the angels of God. Having, moreover, affirmed their ignorance of those Scrip- 
tures which they themselves acknowledged, he proceeds to the proof of the doctrine 
impugned. 

III. Immobtalitt of the boul. By his quotation from the third chapter of 
Exodus, he establishefl the immortality of the soul. God is the God of the livmg, for 
the relationship thus indicated is connected with the bestowal of benefits and blessings, 
while the dead are beyond the reaclr of these : but the passage quoted affirms God to be 
the God cf Abraham, Isaac, and Jacoli ; therefore these patriarchal men, whose earthly 
tabernacles, long dissolved, had mouldered and mingled with kindred dust, still lived in 
some sense and state and place. Their souls lived in God's sight and in God's pre- 
sence and to God's praise. The immortality of the soul is thus a clear enough coo- 
clusion, but the proof is not so plain with regard to the resurrection of the body ; and 
yet this is the very point in dispute. It is a well-known fact that several of the 
heathen philosophers who believed in the immortality of the soul, seem never to nave 
dreamt of the resurrection of the body. How, then, does our Lord's plain pioof of the 



OH. xn. 1—44.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIN& TO ST. MARK. 193 

former doctrine serre the purpose of establishing the latter? This Is the difBculty of 
the passage. The following considerations will resolve it : — 

IV. Ground of Sadduoebb' denial of the ebsueeectioh. The chief reasoa of the 
Badducees denying the resurrection of the body was their disbelief in the immortality 
of the soul. They repudiated the last-named doctrine, and on this very ground 
rejected the former. They said the soul does not exist apart from, or after, the msaolu- 
tion of the body. "They gainsay the duration of the soul" is the testimony of 
Josephus to their opinion on this point. From this they inferred that there ii no 
likelihood of^ nor need for, the body to be raised up, as, according to this erroneoas 
opinion of theirs, there was no soul to reanimate, or reinhabit, or be reunited there- 
with. Our Lord meets inference with inference. Having proved, as we have seen, the 
immortality of the soul, he thus prepares the way for the corollary, that the body 
would be raised from the dust of death, and that soul and body would be then and for 
ever reunited. Thiey insisted on the extinction of the soul at the death of the body, or 
its non-existence as distinct from that body, and so wished it to be inferred therefrom 
that the body would not be raised, and no reunion ever take place. The Saviour 
proves the distinct and undying existence of the soul, and leaves the badducees to infer 
the resurrection of the body and its reunion with that soul from which death had for 
a time separated it. In this way he opposed the inferential part of his argument to 
the inferential part of their doctrine, inasmuch as they did not, it would seem, employ 
expanded argument or developed reasoning. Having demolished the main pillar of 
their system, he left the frail fabric erected thereon to fall of itself. Our Lord's 
reasoning, though concise, was nevertheless conclusive. 

V. Confirmation. This view of the subject derives some confirmation from a 
custom of the ancient Egyptians. They embalmed the bodies of their dead, and so 
preserved them for centuries. Their object, as is with strong probability supposed, 
was that the mummy corpse might be prepared for the reception of the returning soul, 
and for reoccupanoy by that former inhabitant. If such were their belief, it was 
doubtless a ray of light derived irom revelation, but distorted as ustial in such cases. 
While they anticipated the glorious fact of a reunion of soul and body, they added 
thereto the fancy that the same body, unaltered and unimproved, would be its recep- 
tacle. Eevelation, however, confirms the one, but corrects the other; for these vile 
bodies shall be raised spiritual bodies, and fashioned like unto Christ's glorious body. 

VI. Otheb explanations. Some, we are aware, understand by resurrection in this 
passage merely a renewal of life, restricting that Ufe to the sotd. In this way they 
remove to some extent the difficulty involved in the reasoning, but destroy at the same 
time the proper meaning of the word, as might easily be shown from other Scriptures. 
Paul, for example, sijeaks of the resurrection in the ordinary and usual sense when he 
asks, " How are the dead raised up ? and with what lody do they come ? " Besides, it is 
to be observed that, in our Lord's quotation, God is not called the God of the souls of 
the patriarchs, but of their compound being, consisting of both soul and body. The 
reference to marriage in the verses preceding also points to the resurrection of the body 
as well as to the life of the soul. Life is thus implied in relation to both the con- 
stituent parts of man — present life for the soul, future life for the body. Others there 
are who, understanding the argument to relate exclusively to those who die the death 
of the righteous, elucidate it in this manner. The Scripture cited by our Lord, in 
which God declares himself the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, involves the Father- 
ship of God and the sonship of believers, as appears from such Scripture statements as 
"I will be to him a God, and he shall be to me a son;" also, "I will be to you a Father, 
and ye shall be to me sons and daughters." Again, our adoption as children of God 
includes the redemption of the body, and consequent recovery from the power of the 
grave, as may be gathered from Rom. viii. 23, " We wait for the adoption, to wit, the 
redemption of the body." Now, though this explanation, it must be admitted, is 
plausible, yet it appears too restricted, and not quite in harmony with our Lord's own 
words in John v. 28, 29, " The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves 
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth ; they that have done good, unto the resurrec- 
tion of life ; and they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of danmation." 

VII. Peaotioal obsbevations. 1. A few practical thou^^hts connect themselves 
with this subject. We learn hence the valiie of an accurate acquaintance with the 

ST. MARK— n. « 



194 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. ml 1—44. 

Scriptures of the Old as well as of the New Testament. Our Lord refuted his adver- 
saries aa he repelled Satan, by an appeal to the Law and to the testimony. He took 
every opportunity of putting honour on, and claiming respect for, the Divine Word. It 
is our safeguard against error. His quotation is from a portion of that Pentateuch 
which has in recent times been the object of repeated and insidious attacks. 2. We 
see how our Master meets his opponents on their own chosen ground, and reasons with 
them after their own favourite mode. They put their objections inferentially ; our 
Lord, who always adapted his discourse, whether sermon, or parable, or argument, to 
his audience, adopts the selfsame method. The Sadducees believed, at least, the five 
books of Moses ; he quotes from an early portion of those books. He denounced their 
error with mildness, and demonstrated it from the very Scriptures to the authority of 
which they themselves defened. He took the ground from under their feet by hard 
arguments, not by hard words. Persuasiveness, not abusiveness, characterizes his 
reasoning. 3. Let us seek grace that we may appreciate as we ought the comfort of 
this doctrine. Our very dust is dear to God. The visible sky above us may pass 
away, but no particle of this dust shall perish. Let us realize the duty of seeking a 
part in the resurrection of the just. Let the doctrine have a practical effect upon our 
lives. With this prospect in view, " what manner of persons ought we to be in all holy 
conversation and godliness " ? 

" Those bodies that corrupted fall 
Shall incorrupted rise, 
And mortal foims shall spring to liftt, 
Immortal in the skies." 

Having this hope within us, let us purify ourselves, and by grace keep the bodily temple 
undefiled. — J. J. G. 

Ters. 28 — 34. Parallel passage: Matt. xxii. 34— 40. — Question about the greatest 
eommandment. I. Puemlitibb of the Phakisees. The Pharisees busied themselvei 
•bout the letter of the Law, but had little practical acquaintance with its true spirit 
The Jews generally divided the commandments of the Law into the preceptive and 
prohibitory — the " Do " and the " Do not ; " nor was there anything amiss in this. But 
the Pharisees, we are told, counted the aflSrmative precepts, and found them as many 
as the members of the body ; they counted the negative, and reckoned them equal in 
number to the days of the year, viz. three hundred and sixty-five ; they then added 
them together, and found that the total made up the exact number of letters in the 
Decalogue. They also divided the commandments into great and small — the more 
important and the less important, or the heavy and the light ; those of greater weight 
being such commandments as related to the sabbath, circumcision, sacrifice, fringes, 
and phylacteries. They did not stop with puerilities of this sort, but descended to 
trifling minutiaa, which we have neither time nor wish to record. Some of their dis- 
tinctions were of a more mischievous kind, such as preferring the ceremonial to the 
moral Law, the oral to the written Law, and the trifles of the scribes to the teachings 
of the prophets. They also taught that obedience to certain commandments atoned 
for the neglect of others ; in some measure like persons in much more recent times, 
who 

" Compound for sins they are inclined to, 
By damning those they have no mind to." 

IL Thb wholb ddtt of man. Our Lord rebuked by his answer those miserable 
trivialities of the Pharisees, who seemed disposed to bring him into conflict with one or 
other of the contending parties, headed respectively by Hillel and Shammai. The 
subject of the question was one about which the schools of these great Jewish school- 
men differed. If he decided in favour of the one, he necessarily offended and lost in 
reputation as a public religious Teacher with the other ; or perhaps they hoped to bring 
him into contradiction with an answer to the same question which he had sanctioned 
with his approval. Our Lord shoved aside their rabbinical quibbles, and passed by 
their hair-splittings and contendings about such petty trifles, to the neglect at onct 
of the spirit and the really weightier matters of the Law. And as " trhosoever shall 



OB. ZH. 1—44*1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 19S 

keep the whole Law, and stumble in one point, he is become guilty of all," our Lord, 
instead of singling out or speafying any particular commandment of the Law, state* 
two comprehensive precepts which embrace the whole Law ; and not only so — he not 
only reduces the ten commandments of the Decalogue to these two precepts, but under- 
lying these two precepts is one single principle into which they are both capable of 
being resolved. He thus simplifies the statement of moral duty into a single principle, 
and that principle itself expressed in the one word " love ; " for " love is the fulfilling of 
the Law." 

III. Thb bupbemaot Of LOYB. It has been conjectured that onr Lord, when 
quoting in reply the passage from Deut. vi. 4 — 9, one of the four Scriptures usually 
inscribed on the parchment slips of the tephilUn, or phylacteries, and called Shema, 
" Hear," from beginning with this word, pointed to the lawyer's tephilUn. This would 
add to the pictorial or graphic nature of the reply ; but nothing could be added to the 
beauty of the words quoted. He cites the preface, teaching the unity of God in oppo- 
sition to polytheism, and then proclaims the love of God as the source, and love to 
man as similar and only second thereto. But whence comes this love ? Not by nature, for 
by nature we are " hateful, and hating one another ; " only, therefore, by the new birth, 
when we partake of a new nature ; for " if any man be in Clirist, he is a new creature, 
old things having passed away, and all things having become new." Once we love him 
who first loved us, we are in the proper position for loving our Father in heaven and our 
fellow-man on earth. The manifestation of this love to man is doing to others as we 
wish others to do to us, and this exercise of the so-called, and properly so-called, golden 
rule, ia loving our fellow-man as a brother, and son of the same heavenly Father; whUa 
our love to that Father is supreme, influencing the affections of the heart, the faculties 
of the mind, the spiritual powers of the soul or life, and employing the whole strength 
of all and each of these. God is worthy of all this — worthy of our best affections, 
worthy of our earliest and strongest love. The practice of this principle would make 
this earth a paradise, restoring it to all the freshness and happiness of its first abd 
early dawn ; rather, would it make a heaven upon earth. — J. J. G. 

Verr 35 — 37. Parallel passages : Matt. xxii. 41 — 46 ; Luke xx. 41 — 44. — The cownter- 
question of our Lord. I. Question of oub Lobd in turn. Our Lord had by this time 
been asked, and had triumphantly answered, the most perplexing, difiicult, and delicate 
questions that the ingenuity of man could devise. His adversaries had been signally 
confuted, and covered with shame. These questions were five in all. One concerned his 
authority ; another was political, about the tribute money ; the third was doctrinal, about 
the resurrection ; the fourth speculative, about the greatest commandment ; and the 
fifth disciplinary, about the adulteress. By his more than masterly reply to the first, he 
defeated the Sanhedrim ; by his reply to the second, he surprised and silenced the Phari- 
sees and Herodians ; by his answer to the third, he confuted, if he did not convince, the 
sceptical Sadducees ; by his reply to the fourth, he satisfied the Pharisaic scribe, learned 
in the Law ; by his answer to the fifth, he settled, if not to the satisfaction of scribes 
and Pharisees, at least to their shame, the question of discipline. It is now time that, 
having passed this ordeal, he should retaliate. 

II. Object of his oountbb-qubstion. Our Lord's design was not so much to show 
them their ignorance, and overwhelm them with confusion, as to instruct them with 
respect to the true character and person of the Christ. Their low views were to be 
elevated, their carnal notions were to be spiritualized, their blind eyes were to b« 
enlightened. Their idea of the person of Messiah was that he would be just a man like 
themselves ; of his position, that he would be a powerful temporal king ; and of his reign, 
that it would extend over a great earthly kingdom. By his question he let light in 
upon their dark minds in reference to all these subjects. With the Scriptures in their 
hands, and all their trifling about the minute things concerning the letter, they had no 
right spiritual apprehension of their kmg-desired and much-respected Messiah. His 
question {Koves to them that Messiah was not only human, but Divine ; not only David's 
Son, but David's Lord ; that before his exaltation he must suffer humiliation. They 
expected a triumphant Messiah, but were not prepared for his lowly condition as a 
sufferer ; they overleaped the cross, expecting all at once and from the first the crown. 
Crucifixion before glonficatioa was what they could not understand ; a spiritual kingdoai I 



IM 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKE. [oh. xm. 1— 3T. 



of righteousness and peace and joy they would not understand, " their wish being father 
to their thoughts." 

ILL Pbaotioal use of the question. " What think ye of Christ ? " was his question, 
as recorded by St. Matthew. We repeat to ourselves and others the same question 
—What think we—" What think ye of Christ? " What think ye of his life— that sin- 
less life, that surprising life, that life which believer and unbeliever alike so much 
admire, and even rival each other in lauding and extolling? What think ye of the 
events of that life — its purity and yet its suffering, its power and yet its sorrows? 
What think ye of his death — so wonderful in many ways, so singular in all its aspects, 
and so efficacious in all respects ? What think ye of his resurrection ? Are ye risen 
with him, to seek the things above? Do ye look to him as the firstfruits of a glorious 
harvest ? and are ye seeking a part in the resurrection of the just ? What thiuK yo of 
his ascension? Are ye satisfied that he has ascended up on high, leading captivity 
captive, and having received gifts, even for rebellious men ? And have ye shared in these 
gifts? What think ye of his intercession ? Do ye feel that he is interceding for you, 
and are ye glad — right glad — of having an Advocate with the Father, even Jesus Christ 
the righteous? By your answers to such 'questions ye may judge your itate, and 
entertain, we trust, " good hope through grace." — J. J. G. 

Yers. 88 — 10. Parallel passages : Matt, xziii. 13 — 39 ; Luke xx. 45— ^7,— Warning 
mgainst the scribes and Pharisees. He warns his disciples against (1) their ambition, 
(2) against their avaricious greed, and (3) against their hypocrisy. We need daily to 
pray for preservation from all these. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 41 — 44. Parallel passage : Luke xxi. 1 — 4. — The widovft mite. L Thb 
TAL0B DTDICATBD. A mite (XeTTTiJr) was something very small ; onr word to represent 
It being from minute, through the French mite. The value of the two was three-fourths 
of an English farthing. But it was her all, and showed her singular self-denial. Ac- 
cordingly, our Lord measured the merit of her liberality not by the amount she gare, 
but by the self-denial which the gift involved. 

n. Chbist sees all THQfQS. Ho saw this poor widow — what she gave and why she 
gave. He sees all we do and all we think, for he knows what is in man. He sees us to 
restrain the evil that we do, overrule it, and punish it ; he sees us to approve of the good 
we do, encourage in the present time and recompense it in the time to come. 

III. Tbuk standard o» liberality. Christ on this occasion did not overlook the 
large gifts of the rich ; but they could spare these out of their abundance, without stinting 
themselves or really pitying the poor. He fixed attention on the widow's mite, for it was 
her all ; and so she could ill spare it, and could only be considered as giving it from 
sympathy with and compassion on the poor. Three things are to be taken into account 
in our estimate of Christian liberality : (1) the motive of giving — it must be the glory 
of God and the good of man ; (2) the manner of giving — not by constraint, but of a 
ready mind, and so God loves the cheerful giver; and (3) the measure, wliich should be 
juat in proportion as God has prosjiered us. — J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Ver. 1. — And as he went forth out of the 
temple, one of his disoiples saith unto him, 
Ulster, behold, what manner of stones and 
what manner of buildings ! This would he 
in the evening. According to St. Luke 
(xxi. 37), our Lord, during the early part of 
this week, passed his nights upon the Mount 
of Olives, taking bis food at Bethany with 
Martha and Mary, and spending his days 
In the temple at Jerusalem, teaching the 
peop'e. It is most probable that he left the 



temple by the golden gate on the easL 
from whence the view of the temple would 
be particularly striking. We learn from 
St. Matthew (xxiv.) that our Lord had just 
been predicting the fall of Jerusalem. It 
was, therefore, natural for the disoiples to 
call his attention at that moment to the 
grandeur and beauty of tlie building and ita 
surroundings. The temple at Jerusalem 
was one of the wonders of the wjrld. 
Josephus says that it wanted nothing that 
the eye and the mind could admire. It 
shone with* fiery splendour; ao th«t wh#o 



CH. XiH 1—3?.] THE GOSPEL AOCOEDlNa TO ST. MAB^ 



19^ 



tha ey« gaied upon It, It turned a^ay ai 
from the rays of the Bun. The size of the 
foundation-stoneB was enormous. Josephus 
speaks of some of the stones as fortv-flTe 
cubits in length, five in height, and six in 
breadth. On© of the foundation-stones, 
meaenred in recent times, proved to be 
aeurly twenty-four feet in length, by four 
feet in depth. But all this magnificence 
had no effect upon onr Lord, who only 
repeated the sentence of its downfall. 

Ver. 2. — There shall not be left here one 
stone upon another, whioh shall not be thrown 
down. The word (SSe) "here" is rightly 
inserted; and the prophecy is justified 
by scientific investigation. The expression 
is not hyperbolic. Modem investigation 
shows that the present wall has been rebuilt, 
probably on the foundation of the older 
one. 

Ver. 3. — ^And as he sat on the monnt of 
Olives over against the temple, Peter and 
James and John and Andrew asked him 
privately. Tell as, when shall these things be 1 
St. Matthew and St. Luke only mention his 
disciples generally. St. Mark, going more 
tbus into detail, gives the names of those who 
aekeil him; namely, Peter and James and 
John, already distinguished, and Andrew, 
who enjoyed the diatinoUon of having been 
the first called. These men appear to have 
been our Lord's inner council; and they 
asked him (/car' iStav) privately , or separately, 
not only from the multitude, but from the 
rest of the disciples. It was a dangerous 
thing to speak of the destruction of the 
temple, or even to inquire about such an 
event, for fear of the scribes and Phari- 
sees. It was this accirsation that led to the 
stoning of Stephen. It is evident from St. 
Matthew (ixiv. 3) that the disciples closely 
associated together the destruction of the 
temple and his final coming at the end of 
the world. They knew from our Lord's 
words that the destruction of Jerusalem was 
near at hand, and therefore they thought 
that the destruction of the world itself, and 
the day of judgment, were also near at hand. 
Hence their questions. 

Vers. 5, 6. — ^Take heed that no man lead 
you astray. The Greek word is vXav'/iari. 
Their first temptation would be of thii 
kind — that many would come in Christ's 
name, saying, " I am he ; " claiming, that is, 
the title whioh belonged to bin) alone. Such 
were Theudas (Acts v. 36) and Simon 
Magus (Acts viii. 10), who, according to 
Jerome, said, " Ego sum Sermo Dei, ego 
speoiOBUS, ego Paraoletus, ego omniputens, 
ego omnia." Such were Menander and 
the Gnostics. 

Yer. 7. — Wars and rumours of wars. 
" Bumoura of wars " are mentioned, because 
they are often worse and more distressing 



than wars themselves ; according to the say- 
ing, " Pejor est bello timor ipse belli." Be 
not troubled; be not troubled, that ia, so as 
to let go yonr faith in me, through fear of 
the enemy, or through despair of any fruit 
of your apostolic labours ; but persevere 
steadfastly to preach faith in me and in my 
gospel. These things must needs come to 
pass ; but the end is not yet. There would 
be a succession of calamities, one leading on 
to another. But they must take courage, 
and prepare themselves for greater evUs, 
not hoping for lasting peace on earth, but 
by patient endurance of evils here, reach 
onwards to a blessed and eternal rest in 
heaven. Our Lord, when his disciples asked 
him, as in one breath, about the destruc- 
tion of their city, replied obscurely and 
ambiguously ; mingling together the two 
events, in order that his disciples and the 
faithful tlirough all times might be pre- 
pared, and never ta:hen by surprise. Borne 
of OUT Lord's predictions, however, clearly 
refer to the generation then living on the 
earth. 

Ver. 10. — ^And the gospel must first be 
preached unto all the nations. St. Matthew 
(xxiv. 14) says it shall be preached " in the 
whole world, for a testimony unto all the 
nations "(^1/ ii\y t^ OLKovfi4vjif eh fiaprvpioy^^ 
This literally took place, as far as the in- 
habited world was concerned at that time, 
before the destruction of Jerusalem. St. 
Paul (Eom. x. 18) reminds us that "their 
sound is gone out into all lands, and their 
words unto the ends of the world ; " and he 
tells the Colossians (i. 6) that the gospel 
was come unto them, and was bearing fruit 
and increasing in all the world. But even 
if we regard these expressions as somewhat 
hyperbolic, it is unquestionable that before 
tlie armies of Titus entered Jerusalem, the 
gospel had been published through the 
principal parts and provinces of the then 
inhabited world (oj/cou,ne'</7;). And it is cer- 
tainly a wonderful fact that witliin fifty 
years after the death of Christ, Christian 
Churches had been planted in almost every 
district of the earth as then known to the 
Eomans. But if we extend these pro- 
phetical sayings so as to reach onwards to 
the end of all things, we must then under- 
stand the expression, " all the nations," in 
its most unrestricted sense; so that the 
prophecy announces the universal proclama- 
tion of the gospel over the whole inhabited 
earth as an event which is to precede the 
time of the end. It is interesting to observe 
the difference in the amount of knowledge 
possessed by us of this earth and its popula- 
tion at the present time, as compared with 
the knowledge which men had of it at the 
time when our Lord delivered this predic- 
tion. It was not until the beginning of Um 



108 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xin. 1—37 



sixteenth centnry, nearly fifteen hundred 
yeara »fter Christ, that Christopher Oolum- 
Dug and Amerigo Vespucci laid open that 
other hemisphere which takes Its name 
from Amerigo ; and there are few facts 
more interesting to a philosophic mind than 
the discovery of this new continent, now so 
important to us in England as the chief 
receptacle, together with Australia, of our 
redundant population. But this new world, 
•s we call it, although there are material 
evidences that portions of it at least were 
occupied in very remote times by men of 
high civilization, was present to the mind 
of our Lord when he said that " the gospel 
must first be preached unto all the nations." 
So that the prophecy expands, as the ages 
roll onwards and the population of this 
earth increases ; and it still demands its ful- 
filment, embracing the vast multitudes now 
dwelling on the face of the earth to the 
number of about 1,450,000,000. Such a con- 
sideration may well lead us to the inference 
that we are now approaching sensibly nearer 
to the end of the world. There are no other 
new worlds like America or Australia now 
to be discovered. The whole face of the 
earth is now laid open to ns ; and there is now 
hardly any part of the world which has not 
at some time or other received the message 
of salvation. 

Ver. 11. — And when they lead yon to 
judgment, and deliver yon up, be not anxiong 
beforehand what ye shall speak. Our Lord 
does not mean by this that they were not to 
premeditate a prudent and wise answer. 
But he means that they were not to be too 
anxious about it. In St. Luke (xxi. 15) he 
says, " I will give you a mouth and wisdom, 
which all your adversaries shall not be able 
to withstand or to gainsay." So here, it is 
not ye that speak, but the Holy Ohost who 
■hall inspire you with wisdom and courage. 
The words "neither do ye premeditate" 
(jiv^i /leKtTaTf) are omitted in the Revised 
Version, as not having sufScient authority. 

Ver. 12. — Our Lord further warns his 
disciples that they would have to suffer 
persecution even from their own relations, 
their brethren, and their fathers, who, forget- 
ful of natural afiection, would persecute the 
faithful even unto death. It is related of 
Woodman, a martyr in Sussex, in Queen 
Mary's time, that he was betrayed and 
taken by his father and his brother, and 
that lie comforted himself with the thought 
that this very text of Scripture was verified 
in him. Bede says that our Lord predicted 
these evils, in order that his disciples, by 
a knowledge of them beforehand, might be 
the better able to bear them when they 
eame. 

Ver. 13. — And ye shall be hated of all men 
for my name's sake (>/*? trivrav). The faith 



and preaching of a crucified Savionr was a 
■new thing. Hence everywhere, the Jews, 
accustomed to their own Law, and the 
Gentiles, to their own idols, set themselves 
against the preachers of the gospel, and 
against those who were converted to it 
" All men " means great numbers, perhaps 
the greater number. Just as, when we say, 
" The majority are doing anything," we say, 
in popular language, " Everybody does it." 
But he that endureth to the end, the same 
shall be saved (d Zk inrofieiyas els reKos), 
What is " the end " here referred to ? Not, I 
imagine, the end of the age, but the end of 
the moral probation of the individual. The 
Greek word for " endureth " is very signi- 
ficant ; it implies " a bearing up, and per- 
severing under great trials." It is not 
enough once and again or a third time to 
have overcome, but, in order to obtain the 
crown, it is necessary to endure and to 
conquer, even to the end. " Be thou faith- 
ful unto death, and I will give thee a crown 
of life." The crown of patience is per- 
severance. 

Ver. 14.— But when ye see the abomination 
of desolation standing where he ought not. 
In the Authorized Version, after the word 
"desolation," the words "spoken of by 
Daniel the prophet," are introduced, but 
without sufBcient authority. They were 
probably interpolated from St. Matthew, 
where there is abundant authority for them; 
and thus their omission by St. Mark does 
not afleot the argument drawn from them 
in favour of the genuineness of the Book of 
Daniel, against those, whether in earlier or 
in later times, who reject this book, or ascribe 
it to some mere recent authorship. The 
" abomination of desolation " is a Hebrew 
idiom, meaning "the abomination that 
maketh desolate." St. Luke (xxi. 20} does 
not use the expression; it would have 
sounded strange to his Gentile readers. He 
says, "When ye see Jerusalem compassed 
with armies, then know that her desolation 
is at hand." This reference to the Bnman 
armies by 8t. Luke has led some com- 
mentators to suppose that " the abomination 
of desolation" meant the Roman eagles. 
But this was a sign from without ; whereas 
" the abomination of desolation " was a sign 
from within, connected with the ceasing of 
the daily sacrifice of the temple. It is 
alluded to by the Prophet Daniel in three 
places, namely, Dan. ix. 27; xi. 31; xli. 11. 
We must seek for its explanation in some- 
thing within the temple, " standing in the 
holy place" (Matt. xxiv. 15) — some profane 
tion of the temple, on account of which 
God's judgments would fall on Jerusalem 
Now, Daniel's prophecy had already received 
one fulfilment (b.o. 168), when we read 
(1 Maoo. L fi4) tbat they set up "tb* 



CH. xm. 1—37.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



199 



abomination of desolation upon the altar." 
Taia was when Antioohns Epiphanes set up 
th statue 3f Jupiter on the great altar of 
bn nt sacrifice. But that " abomination of 
d lolation " was the forerunner of another 
and a worse profanation yet to oome, which 
our lorf, no doubt, had in his mind wlien 
he called the attention of his disciples to 
these piediotiong by Daniel. There is a 
remarkable passage in Josephua (' Wars of 
the Jews,' iv. 6), in which he refers to an 
ancient saying then current, that " Jerusa- 
lem would be taken, and the temple be 
destroyed, when it had been defiled by the 
hands of Jews themselves." Now, this 
literally took place. For while the Goman 
armies were investing Jerusalem, the Jews 
within the city were in fierce conflict 
amongst themselves. And it would seem 
most probable that our Lord had in hie 
mind, in connection with Daniel's propheoy, 
more especially that at ix. 27, the irruption 
ot the army of Zealots and Assassins into the 
temple, filling the holy place with the dead 
bodies of their own fellow-citizens. The 
Jrws bad invited these marauders to defend 
them against the army of the Bomans ; and 
they, by their outrages against God, were 
the special cause of the desolation of Jeru- 
salem. Thus, while St. Luke points to the 
sign from wiK'aout, namely, the Hoiaau 
force* surrounding the city, St. Miitthew 
and 94. Mark refer to the more terrible sign 
from within, the "abomination of desola- 
tion " — the abomination that would fill up 
the measure of their iniquities, and cause 
the avenging power of Eome to come down 
upon them and crush them. It was after 
these two signs — the sign from within and 
the sign from without — that Jerusalem was 
laid prostrate. Therefore our Lord proceeds 
to warn both Jews aad Christians alike, 
that when they saw these signs they should 
flee unto the mountains — ^not to the mountains 
of Judaea, for these were already occupied 
by the Roman army (Josephus, lib. iii. cap. 
xii ), but those further off, beyond Judtsa. We 
know from Eusebius (iii. 15) that the Chris- 
tians fled to Pella, on the other side of the 
Jordan. The Jews, on the other hand, as 
they saw the Koman army approaching 
nearer, betook themselves to Jerusalem, as 
to an asylum, thinking that there they 
would be under the special protection of 
Jehovah; but theFe, alas, they were im- 
prisoned and slain. 

Ver. 15.— Let him that is on the house- 
top iirl ToP Sd;;uaTos) not go down, nor enter 
hi, to takt anything out of his house. The 
t ofa of the houses were flat, with frequently 
a little " dome " (Sw^ua) in the centre. The 
people lived very much up'B them; and the 
tiairs were outside, so that a person wishing 
to enter the house must first descend by these 



euter stairs. The words, therefore, meaa 
that he must flee suddenly, if he would 
save his life, even though he might lose 
his goods. He must escape, perhaps by 
crossing over the parapet of his own house- 
top, and so from house-top to house-top, 
until he could find a convenient point for 
flight into the hill country. 

Yer. 16.— And let Mm that ia in the field 
not retnm back to take his oloke (rh luirim 
avTov). This was the outer garment or 
pallium. They who worked in the field 
were accustomed to leave their cloak and 
their tunic at home ; so that, half-stripped, 
they might be more free to labour. There- 
fore our Lord warns them that in this im- 
pending destruction, so suddenly would it 
come, they must be ready to fly just as they 
were. It was the direction given to Lot, 
" Escape for thy life ; look not behind thee." 

Ver. 17. — ^But woe imto them that are with 
ohUd and to them that give suck in those 
days ! Women in this condition would be 
specially objects of pity, for they would be 
more exposed to danger. The words, " Woe 
to them (ouai) 1 " are an exclamation of pity, 
as though it was said, " Alas I for them." 
Josephus (vii. 8) mentions that some 
mothers, constrained by hunger during the 
siege, devoured their own infants I 

Ver. 18. — And pray ye that it be not in the 
wlnt«« Aoeoidukg to the best authorities, 
" your flight " (ri (pvyij vij.aiv) U omitted, but 
the meaning remains very much the same. 
St. Matthew (xxiv. 20) adds, " neither on a 
sabbath." But this would be comparatively 
of little interest to those to whom St. Mark 
was writing. Our Lord thus specifies the 
winter, because at that season, on account 
of the cold and snow, flight would be at- 
tended with special difficulty and hardship, 
and would be almost impossible for the aged 
and infirm. 

Ver. 19. — Tor those days shall be tribula- 
tion, such as there hath not been tiie like 
from the beginning of the creation. These 
expressions are very remarkable. To begin 
with, the tribulation would be so unexampled 
and so severe that the days themselves 
would be called " tribulation." They would 
be known ever after as " the tribulation." 
There never had been anything like them, 
and there never would be again. Neither 
the Deluge, nor the destruction of the cities 
of the plain, nor the drowning of Pharaoh 
and his host in the Bed Sea, nor the 
slaughter of the Canaanites, nor the de- 
struction of Nineveh, or of Babylon, or of 
other great cities and nations, would be so 
violent and dreadful as the overthrow of 
Jerusalem by Titus. AU this is confirmed by 
Josephus, who says, speaking of this over- 
throw, " I do not think that any state ever 
suffered such things, or any nation withia 



soo 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. rm. 1— 3», 



the memory of man." St. Chrysostom 
aBBignB the caQse of all this to the base and 
cruel treatment of the Son of God by the 
Jews. The deitruotion of their city and 
their temple, and their continued desolation 
afterwards, were the lessons by which the 
jewi were to be taught that the Clirist bad 
indeed come, and that this was the Ghiiit 
whom they had cruciSed and slain. 

Ver. 20. — ^And except the lord had short- 
ened the days, no flesh would have been 
saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he 
chose, he shortened the days. St. Matthew's 
record (xxiv. 22) differs from that of St. 
Mark in the omission of the words " the 
Lord," and the clause "whom he chose." 
If the time of the siege of Jerusalem had 
lasted much longer, not one of the nation 
could have survived ; all would have 
perished by war, or famine, or pestilence. 
The Romans raged against the Jews as an 
obstinate and rebellious nation, and would 
have exterminated them. But " the Lord " 
shortened the time of this frightful cata- 
strophe, for the elect's sake, tliat is, partly 
for the sake of the Christians who could 
not escape from Jerusalem, and partly for 
that of the Jews, who, subdued by this 
awful visitation, were converted to Christ 
or would hereafter be converted to him. 
We learn from hence how great is the love 
of God towards his elect, and his care for 
them. For their sakes he spared many 
Jews. For their sakes he created and 
preserves the whole world. Yea, for their 
sakes, Christ the eternal Son was made 
man, and became obedient unto death. 
" All things are yours, and ye are Christ's, 
and Christ is God's " It may be added 
that a number of providential circumstances 
combined to shorten these days of tenor. 
Titus was himself disposed to clemency, and 
friendly towards Josephus. Moreover, he 
was attached to Bernice, a Jewess, the 
sister of Agrippa. All these and other 
circumstances conspired in the providence 
of God to " shorten the days." 

Yen. 21, 22. — And then if any man shall 
say onto yos, Lo, here is the Christ ; or, Lo, 
there, believ* It not; for there shall arise 
folse Christs and false prophets. Josephus 
mentions one Simon of Gerasa, who, pre- 
tending to be a deliverer of the people from 
the Bomans, gathered around him a crowd 
of followers, and gained admission into 
Jerusalem, and harassed the Jews. In like 
manner, Bleazar and John, leaders of the 
Zealots, gained admission into the holy 

Slaoe, under pretence of defending the city, 
nt really that they might plunder it. But 
it seems as though our Lord here looked 
beyond the siege of Jerusalem to the end 
of the world; and he warns us that as 
(he time of Us second advent approaches. 



deceivers will arise, to seduce, if It were 
possible, even the elect. The word " to 
seduce " (AiroTrAoi'Sc) is more properly ren- 
dered, as In the Eevised Version, to lead 
astray. Every age has produced its crop 
of such deceivers ; and it may be expected 
that, as the time of the end draws nearer 
and nearer, their number will increase. 
Sometimes those idiosyncrasies in them 
which show themselves in lying wonders, 
are the result of self-delusion; bnt still 
oftener they are deliberate attempts made 
for the purpose of imposing on the unwary. 
Sometimes they are a combination of both. 
In the oases to which our Lord refers there 
is evidently an intention to letwi astray, 
although it may have had its origin in self- 
deceit. In our day there is a sad tendency 
to lead men astray with regard to the great 
fundamental verities of Christianity. And 
the words of St. Jerome may well be remem- 
bered here : " If any would persuade you 
that Christ is to be found in the wilderness 
of unbelief or sceptical philosophy, or in 
the secret chambers of heresy, believe them 
not." 

Ver. 23. — But take ye heed (S/teTj S^ P\i- 
n-ETs). The "ye" is here emphatic. The 
disciples were around him, hanging upon 
his lips. But his admonition is meant for 
Christians everywhere, even to the end of 
the world. 

Ver. 24. — But in those days, after that 
tribulation, the sun shall be darkened, and 
the moon shall not give her light. St. 
Matthew (xxiv. 29) has the word "imme- 
diately," before the words " after that tribu- 
lation." If this word " immediately " is to 
be understood literally, then the things 
spoken of subsequently must be understood 
in a figurative and spiritual sense. But it 
would seem more natural to understand 
" immedintely " according to the reckoning 
of him with whom " a thousand years are 
as one day." Our Lord now passes away 
from the events connected with the over- 
throw of the Jewish polity, and proceeds to 
speak of things connected with the new 
dispensation. His mind is now turned to 
' ' the last time ' ' — to the whole period between 
his flist and his second advent. 'The things 
towards which he whs now looking, belonged, 
not to the end of the Jewish dispensation, 
but to the end of the present age and the 
present dispensation. Eighteen centuries 
have passed since the destruction of Jeru- 
salem; and more years, it may be, wiU 
come and go before the end. Nevertheless, 
all this time, although it may seem long to 
us who are confined within the narrow 
limits of a short life, is nevertheless, when 
compiired with the eternity of God, but as 
a moment. " The sun shall be darkened." 
The signs here enumerated are mentioned 



m. XVI. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEMNa TO ST. MAEK. 



251 



elsewhere at the signs that would appear 
before the second coming of Christ. (See 
Joel ii. 31 and Luke xil. 25, 26.) St. 
Augustine (Ep. 80, • Ad Hesychium') says, 
" The light of truth shall be obscured ; be- 
cause in tlie great tribulation tliat shall 
come on the world, many will fall from the 
faith, who had seemed to be bright and 
firm, like the sun and the stars." " And 
the moon," that ia, the Church, ** shall not 
give her light." 

Vsr. 25. — And the stars shall be falling 
from heaven {etrovrai 4k tov ovpavov ■jrtTTTOVTes'), 
and the powers that are in the heavens shall 
be shaken. In, the great events of the crea- 
tion recorded in Gen. i. the eun and the moon 
and the stars did not show their light until 
that period which is called the fourth day. 
So in the end of the world, the sua and the 
mooD and the stars are represented as with- 
drawing their light, perhaps figuratively, 
but perhaps also literally, in the course of 
some of the unknown physical changes 
which shall accompany the winding up of 
the present dispensation. To this agree 
the next words, " the powers that are in the 
heavens shall be shaken." The powers 
may here mean those great unseen forces of 
nature by which the universe is now held in 
equipoise. When the Creator wills it, tiiese 
powers shall be shaken. (See Job xxvi. 11, 
"The pillars of heaven tremble and are 
astonished at his reproof;" see also Isa. 
xxxiv. 4, "And all the host of heaven 
shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall 
be rolled together as a scroll.") As the end 
of the world approaches, the elements will 
quiver and tremble. 

Ver. 26. — And then shall they see the Son 
of man coming in clouds with great power 
•md glory. Bt. Matthew (xxiv. 30) intro- 
duces here the words, " And then shall 
appear the sign of the Son of man in 
heaven." Many of the Fathers, as St. 
Chrygostom, Jerome, Bede, and others, think 
that this sign will be the cross. Josephus 
(v. S) says that shortly before the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem, a portent like a sword, 
glittering as a star, appeared in the heavens. 
But surely the sign of the Son of man at 
the end of the world will bo the Son of 
man himself coming in clouds. The clouds, 
covering the troubled heaven and now illu- 
minated by the brightness of his coming, 
will constitute " the sublime drapery of hiis 
presence " (Dr. Morison). 

Ver. 27.— And then shall he send forth 
the angels. This represents the great har- 
vest at the end of the world, when the 
angel-reapers shall be sent forth to separate 
the wicked from the just. The elect will 
be gathered from the four winds (^k rav 
Tsirirdpav ave/j-aiv') ; literally, out of Oie four 
wind*— the winds representing figuratively 



every corner of the world; «, tram. tk« 
uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost 
part of heaven. At its extremities, in the 
horizon, there appears to be the and alike 
of earth and of heaven, as thongh eartb 
and heaven joined, and the heaven termi- 
nated by melting into the earth and be- 
coming one with it. The expression limply 
means, " from horizon to horizon," or from 
every part of the earth. 

Vers. 28, 29. — Now from the flg tree learn 
her parable; that is, her own particular 
teaching. Our Lord makes frequent men- 
tion and use of the fig tree, as we have seen 
already. It is probable that a flg tree may 
have been near to them. When her branch 
is now become tender, and putteth forth iti 
leaves, ye know that the summer is nigh 
The branch {KAdSos) would be the young 
shoot, now benome tender under the quick- 
ening influences of the spring; and this 
was an evident sign that the summer was at 
hand. The Asiatic fig tree requires a con- 
siderable amount of warmth to enable it to 
put forth leaves and fruit. Its rich flavour 
requires a summer heat to mature it. Aris- 
totle says that the flg is the choice food of 
bees, from which they make their richest 
honey. Then the fig tree does not flower 
after the ordinary manner; but produces 
flower and fruit at once from the tree, and 
rapidly matures the fruit. The lesson, 
theiefore, from the fig tree is this — the speed 
with which she ripens her fruit when she 
feels the warmth of summer. In like man- 
ner, as soon as the disciples perceived the 
signs of Christ's coming, they were to leara 
that he was close at hand, as certainly as 
the ripening fruit of the flg tree showed 
that summer was at hand. 

Ver. 30. — This generation shall not pass 
away, until all these things be acoomplished. 
This is one of those prophecies which admit 
of a growing fulfilment. If the word 
" generation " (yevea) be understood (aa it 
may undoubtedly be understood) to mean 
the sum total of those living at any time on 
the earth, the prediction would hold true 
as far as the destruction of Jerusalem 
was concerned. The destruction of Jeru- 
salem took place within the limits of the 
generation living in our Lord's time ; and 
there might be some of those whom he was 
then addressing who would live to see the 
event. His prediction amounted, in fact, 
to this, that the destruction of Jerusalem 
would take place within forty years of the 
time when he was speaking. But it may 
have a wider meaning. It may mean the 
Jewish people. Their city would be de- 
stroyed — their power overthrown. They 
wou Id be '' peeled and scattered." But they 
would still remain a distinct and separaU 
nation to the end of the world. An J theri 



S02 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. iin. 1—37, 



are other prophecies which show that with 
their national couversion to Christianity 
will be associated all that ie most glorious 
in the future Church of God. 

Yer. 31. — Heaven and earth shall pass 
away: but my words shall not pass away. 
Here is a distinct prediction that the present 
structure of the universe will pass away; 
that is, that it will be changed, that it 
will perish, as far as its present state and 
condition are concerned; but only that 
It may be refashioned in a more beauti- 
ful form. " We look for new heavens and 
a new earth, wherein dwelleth righteous- 
ness" (2 Pet. iii. 13). With this declara- 
tion of onr blessed Lord all the discoveries 
of science coincide. Astronomy and geo- 
logy alike concur in the conclusion that 
the whole system of tlie universe is moving 
onwards to its change. Our blessed Lord 
did but affirm that which is demonstrated 
by science. But my words shall not pass 
away ; not merely the words which with 
his full self-consciousness he had just 
uttered respecting Jerusalem, but aU his 
other words — all the revelation of God, all 
the words of him who is the Truth. 

Ver. 32. — But of that day or that hour 
knoweth no one, not even the angels in 
heaven, neither the Son, hut the Father. He 
who from all eternity lias decreed the time 
when this day is to come, is pleased to liide it 
in the hidden depths of his own counsels. 
But the eternal Son, and tl:e Holy Spirit, 
both alike one with the FatLier, are of his 
counsels. They are not excluded from this 
knowledge ; they, equally with the Father, 
know the day and the hour of the end, since 
they are of the same substance, power, and 
majesty. Why, then, does St. Mark here 
add, '-neither the Son"? The answer is 
surely to be found in the great truth of the 



hypostatic union. The eternal Sun, aa 
God, by his omniscience, and m man, by 
knowledge imparted to him, knows per- 
fectly the day and the hour of the future 
judgment. But Christ as man, and as the 
Messenger from Ood to men, did not so 
know it as to be able to reveal it to men. 
The ambassador, if he is asked concerning 
the secret counsels of his sovereign, may 
truly answer that he knows them not so as 
to communicate them to others. For as an 
ambassador he only communicates those 
things which are committed to him by his 
sovereign to deliver, and not those things 
which he is bidden to keep secret. 

Vers. 33 — 37. — These exhortations, which 
gather up in a succinct i'onu the practical 
bearing of the parallel passages and parables 
in St. Matthew, must not be understood as 
implying that our Lord's coming in judg- 
ment would be during the lifetime of his 
disciples. The preceding words would 
teach tbem plainly enough that the actual 
time of this coming was hidden from them. 
But the intention was that, while by the 
certainty of the event their faith and hope 
would be quickened, by the uncertainty of 
the time they might be left in a continual 
state of watchfulness and prayer. Accord- 
ing to the Jewish reckoning, there were 
only three watehes — namely, the first watch, 
from sunset to 10 p.m. j the second watnh, 
from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m. ; and the third watcu, 
from 2 a.m. to sunrise. But after the es- 
tablishment of the Boman power in Judsea, 
these watches were divided into four ; and 
were either described as the first, second, 
third, and fourth respectively ; or, as here, 
by the terms even, beginning at six and 
ending at nine ; midnight, endingat twelve ; 
cookcrowing, ending at three ; and morning, 
ending at six. 



HOMILETICa 

Vers. 1, 2. — The downfall of the temple. Our Lord's ministry in the temple was 
now over. Within those precincts he had taught the teachable, he bad rebuked the 
selfish and profane, he had received the homage of the children, he had healed the 
afflicted, and he had denounced and warned the unfaithful and the hypocritical. How 
strange the lontrast between the early days, when Jesus had taken his place in the 
midst of the rabbis, " both heaving them, and asking tbem questionB," and these 
later days, when the same edifice witnessed his keen and trucdess conflicts with tlie 
leaders of the nation, whose errors he exposed and whose vengeance he incurred I It 
was as Jesus left the gorgeous and consecrated building that his disciples, with national 
pride and afifection, pointed out to his eyes the magnificence of the temple, the 
stupendous stones of which it was composed, and the costly gifts with which it was 
adorned. Upon this suggestion, Jesus uttered the prediction, which he could not have 
uttered without emotions of disappointment and distress, " Seest thou these great 
buildings ? there shall not be left here one stone upon another, which sfaall not be 
thrown down." 

. L NVTHUra EAKTHLT AND HUMAN, HOWEVER STATELT AND BAURKD, IS mTEKIBBABUh 



OH. xm. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO BT. MARK. 208 



It was, no doubt, a splendid spectacle to which his disciples directed the gaze o( 
Jesus. " They stopped to cast upon it one last lingering gaze, and one of them wag 
eager to call his attention to its goodly stones and splendid offerings — those nine gates 
overlaid with gold and silver, and the one of solid Corinthian brass yet more precious ; 
those graceful and towering porches; those bevelled blocks of marble, forty cubits 
long and ten cubits high, testifying to the toil and munificence of so many generations; 
those double cloisters and stately pillars ; that lavish adornment of sculpture and 
arabesque ; those alternate blocks of red and white marble, recalling the crest and 
hollow of the sea-waves ; those vast clusters of golden grapes, each cluster as large as 
a man, which twined their splendid luxuriance over the golden doors. They would 
have him gaze with them on the rising terraces of courts — the court of the Gentiles, with 
its monolithic columns and rich mosaic ; above this, the flight of fourteen steps which 
led to the court of the women ; then the flight of fifteen steps which led np to the 
court of the priests; then, once more, the twelve steps which led to the final platform, 
crowned by the actual holy, and holy of holies, which the rabbis fondly compared 
tor its shape to a couchant lion, and which, with its marble whiteness and gilded roofs, 
looked like a glorious mountain whose snowy summit was gilded by the sun " (Farrar). 
Majestic, however, as was the edifice, sacred as were its purposes, ennobling as were its 
associations, the temple at Jerusalem was not indestructible. All things finding their 
foundation upon this changing earth, all things reared and fashioned by human hands, 
are transitory and perishing. Nothing continueth in one stay. " The solemn temples," 
like " the great globe itself," are destined to decay and destruction. The material 
perishes, and that wliich is spiritual alone abides. 

II. An unfaithful nation's glory is, in the providencb or God, hade the 
SYMBOL OF its bhame. There was nothing which the Jews so valued and reverenced 
as their temple and all the paraphernalia of the temple-worship. The national life 
seemed to flow from that sacred spot as from a beating heart. Not only was it, in its 
situation, its structure, its services, priesthoods, and sacrifices, itself most majestic and 
imposing ; but to the Hebrew mind it was the expression of the peculiar interest and 
favour of the Supreme. How could the Israelite think, without a shudder of horror 
and dismay, of the time when the noble building should be laid in the dust; when 
the chants should be silenced, the altars be overturned, the priests be slain, and the 
services and offerings be no more? Yet this was the doom which the last and greatest 
Prophet now foretold — a doom which they might have averted by timely repentance 
and by cordial faith, but which their rejection of the Christ of God made certain and 
irrevocable. Thus was Israel smitten in the most vulnerable, the most sensitive point; 
thus was the rule of the righteous Lord awfully and sublimely vindicated ; thus was 
a lesson of Bivine government and human subjection thereto published for the benefit 
of all geneiations to come. 

III. All that is material in bbligion ib destdtbd to vaniuh aitd wsappeab. 
The temple at Jerusalem was the temple of the Lord ; yet it served » temporary 
purpose, and when this purpose was accomplished it was superseded by the temple of 
the Lord's Body, and by the imperishable temple constituted by consecrated spiritual 
natures, and inhabited by the Holy Spirit of God. Human nature is such that men 
are prone to lay stress upon the outward, the visible, the tangible, the material. 
Even the truly religious are in danger of regarding the vestment of religion rather 
than the form it clothes, of hallowing places, observances, ofiices, and institutions. 
But Christ's whole teaching is a protest against this natural error and folly. The 
temple of Jerusalem disappeared ; but its disappearance, so far from ruining the 
prospects and crippling the power of religion, was, in reality, the occasion of placing 
religion upon a sounder basis, and giving to religion a world-wide and an everlasting 
sway. Let not men cling too closely to the form } it is the spirit which quickeneth ; it 
is the spirit which endures. 

IV. SFtBlTUAL TEMPLES ALONE ENDURE FOB MVEB. Eveu the destruction of Jeru- 
salem and its sacred buildings did not involve a universal ruin. What was good in 
Judaism, what was vital and hopeful in Israel, still survived. There were truths 
which outlasted the forms in which they had been embodied. There were pme and 
faithful souls which outlived the institutions amidst which and by means of which 
Huej bad been called to virtue, t» piety, to God. A new Israel arose, as it were, out ot 



$04 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [oh. xm. i-4v. 

the asheg of the old. A temple statelier and suhliraer, based upon a more enduring 
loundatlon, and rising to loftier spiritual heights, sprang into glorious being, as the 
armies of Titus levelled the glory of Moriah with Ihe ground. The living stones of 
which this heaven-born fabric is composed can never crumble, and the services of this 
sanctuary shall never cease. Time and space are spurned ; earthly forces are power- 
less ; this temple groweth "an holy temple unto the Lord." It is imperishable, because 
it is spiritual ; it is eternal, because it is Divine. 

Vers, 3— 13.— 2^e witness of the persecuted. It was natural enough that the disciples, 
when the Lord foretold the destruction of the temple, should wish to know when an 
event so stupendous and awful should occur On their way to Bethany at eventide, 
the little party, composed of Jesus and his four most intimate friends, paused upon 
the crown of Olivet, and looked back upon the glorious but guilty city, and upon that 
edifice which was its proudest ornament and boast. The anxious, awed disciples took 
this opportunity of asking at what time the disaster foretold by the Lord should take 
place, and by what signs they might be led to expect its approach. Jesus did not 
state the exact date of the impending catastrophe, but he did mention certain signs by 
which his disciples might be Ibrewarned ; and he took occasion to forearm them against 
the troubles which were at hand. His words may not have gratified their curiosity, 
but they must have established their confidence in their Master, and they must have 
prepared them for the tribulation and the trial now so near. The great lesson is that 
Jesus would have his people prepared, especially in times and amid circumstances of 
affliction and probation, to bear a firm and faithful witness to himself. Our Lord, in 
this language, enjoins upon his disciples — 

I. Fidelity amid temptation and apostasy. Days of trial were at hand ; 
impostors should appear, professing that the Messiah had only now arrived ; and by 
such deceits and pretences many should be led astray from their allegiance to Jesus. 
Then should the faithfulness of the disciples be tested. It is always so. Eivals come 
forward at all periods in history, asserting claims which they cannot substantiate, 
but by which they impose upon the excitable and unstable. Teachers, leaders, 
systems, philosophies, are ever seeking to displace the Divine Christ from the throne 
of the human heart, of human society. Let every Christian, when exposed to such 
assaults, when staggered by the success with which these are too often directed against 
the professed followei's of Jesus, be upcm his guard, and listen to the voice of the 
rightful and authoritative Lord sounding across the ages, "Let no man lead you 
astray 1 " 

II. Feaob of mind amid wars and calamities. The troubles and conflicts which 
befell the nations during the period which elapsed between the crucifixion of Christ and 
the fall of Jerusalem, are well known from the records of history. It could have been 
no easy thing for the Christians to have preseiTed a quiet mind amidst such constant 
alarms ; nor can we suppose that our Lord intended to forbid or blame the natural and 
proper sympathy and solicitude which such circumstances must have induced. But he 
warned them that these events must precede the end, and must not be allowed to fill the 
mind with dismay, to weaken faith in Divine providence, or to deter from the fulfilment 
of an appointed ministry. In every age there occur events which, taken and considered 
alone, might appal the stoutest, bravest heart. But it is for -the follower of Christ to 
bear in mind that light and darkness will contend until the victory of the Redeemer is 
complete, that the Lord reigneth, and that the convulsions of the nations are the birth- 
throes of the kingdom of the Christ. It is he who admonishes us, " Be not troubled I " 

in. Steadfastness amid the hostility of foes. The first followers of Christ 
were forewarned that they should incur the enmity of authorities, both civil and 
ecclesiastical. Before councils and in synagogues, at the bar of governors and in the 
presence of kings, they should be arraigned upon charges true or false, but always 
with a temper of enmity and with purposes of malice. How were they to demean 
themseires in circumstances of peril? They were to remember that they were but 
treated as their Master had been treated before them, that they were honoured by 
being summoned to act as his witnesses, that they were the spokesmen, so to speak, of 
the very Spirit of God. Amidst trials so severe, they were directed to take heed how 
they eompotted themselTea — never to yield to fear, to dismiss all anxiety, and to trurt 



«H. xm. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. MB 

to a heavenly inspiration for their defence. And there is no age in which Mnranta of 
Christ are not exposed to some of the attacks of the foe, and in which there is not 
need for watchfulness, fortitude, and courage. Let the persecuted rememher that the 
eye of the Divine Lord is upon them ; and let them hear themselves as those who 
would honour their Leader and maintain hia cause — quit them like men, and be strong. 
IV. Ensubakce amid the tbbachebt and dbsebtion of fbiendb. Th« great 
Prophet foretold that discords should reveal themselves among families and social 
communities ; that one should rise up against another. In this way was fulfilled his 
saying, " I am not come to send peace, hut a sword." To most hearts, treason within 
the camp is more painful and more trying than hostility without. Yet even against 
this our Lord would have us proo£ It is a trial to which most faithful and consistent 
servants of the Lord Jesus are at some time exposed j it is a trial which shakes the 
faith and damps the zeal of not a few. Christ calls his people, when so tried, to 
exercise the grace of perseverance. Whoever forsake Jesus, let their desertion only 
drive us closer to him we love 1 

Y. NoTWITBSTANDINa OPPOSITION, THE GOSPEL UUST Bl FBSAOBED. It ia not 

enough to be steadfast ourselves ; we have to think of and to care for others. The 
glad tidings the followers of Jesus have themselves freely received, it is for them 
freely to communicate to their neighbours. How devotedly and valiantly the first 
disciples fulfilled this trust we well know. Kot only the twelve, but even more 
notably others who were raised up in the first age, preached the gospel to all nations 
whom they were able by any toil and hardship to reach. The light streamed upon 
many a dark, benighted land, and brought hope and peace, joy and life, to many a 
wretched heart. The labour of the apostles and their companions was not in vain is 
the Lord. Far from being deterred by opposition, this seemed to act as a stimulus to 
new exertions and to new daring. Nor is this function of the Church peculiar to the 
first age. So long as there are nations unvisited by the news of salvatioci, so long is 
there a summons to engage in missionary enterprise. If this can ccjy be dene in 
certain cases at the risk of safety, liberty, and life, so much the more do present 
circumstances correspond with the predictions of our Lord. " The more danger, the 
more honour." There is a crown to be gained by following Christ and his apostles in 
theperils of the holy war. 

Vl. Patience tjnto salvation. It is well known that, whilst multitudes of Jews 
perished in the siege and the destruction of Jerusalem, the Christians escaped. Faithful 
to the instructions of their Lord, they were delivered from the ruin and the death 
which were the fate of their fellow-countrymen. Enduring in constancy and obedience 
to the end, they were saved. And their exemption from disaster and death was a 
symbol of the salvation of all those who retain their faith and allegiance amidst the 
temptations and the trials of this earthly life. Endure! endure unto the end! and 
the unfailing promise of your Divine Lord shall be fulfilled in your experience. You 
shall be savMf I 

Vers. 14 — 23. — Warningi. Very clearly did our Lord foresee, and very plainly did 
he foretell, the consequences which the Jews were bringing upon themselves by their 
rejection of God's Messiah. The language here recorded is in itself sufficient to convince 
a candid mind of the justice of the claims of the Lord Jesus to be the Prophet and the 
Son of the Most High. He sets us an example here of the propriety of uttering truthful 
warnings, even though they may be painful to the speaker and unwelcome to the 
hearer. 

I. Affliotioks are foretold. The severity and variety of these afflictions render 
this prediction one of the most awful to be met with in the whole compass of Scripture. 
1. National disaster. It was upon the whole nation, and especially upon the inhabitants of 
Jerusalem, the upper and ruling classes, that the retribution fell. 2. Temple dtaeeration. 
This is probably what is designated " the abomination of desolation." The faiiatical 
pollution of the temple by the Zealots was doubtless one of the most distressing 
accompaniments of the awful siege. 3. Religions imposture. In times of general 
excitement, enthusiastic pretenders are sure to make their appearance. It was so 
during the uttermost calamity of Israel. And there is no age when the warnings 
ef vers. %\, 22, are not timely and appropriate. 4. Jndividwfl tvfferin^t. fitTeolj 



206 THE GOSPEL AUGOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiu. 1— 37. 

circumstancM here predicted, especially the distress in which miserable mothers should 
be involved (ver. 17), serve to deepen and darken the tone of this picture of calamity. 

II. CJouNBBLS ABE IMPARTED. Chrfst was not a mere Prophet of evil. He exhibited 
the approaching dangers, but he provided for the safety and deliverance of those who, 
amidst general unfaithfulness, should be faithful to him. 1. He directed flight from 
the icene of distress. As Noah had been sent into the ark, as Lot had been hurried 
out of Sodom, so the primitive Christians were directed, when Jerusalem should be 
besieged, to forsake the guilty city and to take refuge in the mountains. There ar« 
times when flight is prudence, when life may be preserved lor future service. 2. He 
advised disregard of impostors. To hold to Christ is a sufficient motive for rejecting 
antichrist. It is condemnation enough of any pretender that he professes to be what 
we know the Son of God alone can be. 3. He counselled general preparation and 
watchfulness. " Take ye heed I " Christians are to use their own powers of observation, 
to exercise vigilance, to meet all circumstances with preparation and discretion. Ko 
piety, no attachment to the Saviour, can absolve us from the duty of using our own 
facdties, of being upon the alert. " Watch and pray I " Theie are admonitions which 
are never obsolete ; for the need of them U Beyer, whilst we are upon earth, left 
behind. 

Vers. 24 — 32. — The second coming. It is very difficult exactly to discriminate 
between some words of Christ which refer to the destruction of Jerusalem, and utheri 
which refer to our Lord's coming to judge all mankind. There seenif to be a designed 
blending of the references to these events. We are thus taught to remember that 
we are called to be as men that wait for their Lord. 

I. The obbtaintt op Chbibt'b coming. If his words are to be accepted, this great 
event of the future is not to be denied or questioned. In the fulfilment of the special 
prediction regarding the downfall of Jerusalem in the lifetime of the generation then 
living, we have the pledge of the ultimate accomplishment of the larger prophecy. At 
his trial Jesus repeated the assurance ; and his inspired apostles have foretold that he 
shall come again the " second time without sin unto salvation." 

II. The uncertainty of the time of Christ's coMiNa. The words in ver. 32 
are very distinct. The date of our Lord's return is known only to the Father. If 
neither the angels nor the Son himself could communicate this knowledge, bow 
ridiculous and presumptuous is the conduct of those who, treating the Scriptures as a 
riddle, profess to have discovered the secret, and put forth their own fancies and follies 
as the declarations of the oracles of God 1 It is wisely hidden from us, and we show 
our wisdom by contented acquiescence in ignorance. 

III. The signs of Christ's coming. Changes on earth and in heaven are indica- 
tions of the approaching day. As the leaves of the fig tree tell that summer is nigh, so 
events will occur which to the understanding mind will herald the Lord's return. Yet 
even these events do not tell us when our Saviour shall appear ; but, since they remind 
us that he is at hand, they answer the purpose, for they put us upon our guard, and 
admonish us to be prepared, 

IV. The preparation fob Christ's coming. 1. Heedfulness and observation. 
2. Watchfulness. 3. Prayer. 

Vers. 33 — 37. — " Watch 1 " There can be no doubt as to the impression made by these 
aud similar instructions and admonitions, uttered by the Lord Jesus towards the close 
of his ministry. It was understood by all his disciples that the Master, in leaving the 
world, retained his hold upon the world's heart and conscience. It was currently 
believed in the early Church, as it has been believed ever since by all Christians, that 
the Lord will come again, and will take account of his servants, and especially will 
inquire into the way in which they have acted as his representatives and ministers 
among men. Hence the stress which has always been laid upon the duty to watch. 
The apostles not only obeyed, they repeated the commandment of their Lord. Peter 
admonished his readers, " Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer ; " John said, 
" Blessed is he that watcheth ; " and Paul exhorted thus, " Watch ye, stand fast in 
your faith, be strong I " The very names which the early Christians gava to themselrei 
and their children may be taken as an indication of the prevailing toju of feeling. 



OH. xm. 1— 37J THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 207 

•^ — > 

Gregory among the Greeks, and Yigilantius among tlie Latins, both signify Bimply 
" The Watcher." 

L Watch! fob this is the ohabob of Christ in thb past. L We are to 
consider /roOT whom this charge proceeds. It is the word of the All- wise, and of One 
of unique authority. Coming from Christ, this is not counsel, it is command. The 
general has the right to station a guard, a sentry, and to expect vigilance and fidelity. 
2. The occasion of the charge gives it a peculiar power and sacredness. It was when 
the Lord Jesus was leaving his house— to use the figurative language of the text — to 
■ojourn in another country. "While I was with them," were his words in prayer, 
" I kept them in Thy Name. . . . Now come I to Thee." How can we do otherwise 
than attach an especial force of obligation to what our Master said when he was about 
to leave this world, for the salvation of whose inhabitants he had lived, and was about 
to die? 3. Look into the charge itself. He gives to each one his work. All his 
people are his servants ; all have a task to accomplish, a service to render, an office to 
fill. And every one has his own work, for which he is individually qualified, and which 
is committed to him and to no other. It is a practical, an elevating view of (;he 
Christian life, this which is here unfolded to us. AH whom Jesus saves and redeems, 
he commissions and consecrates. And so long as we live here we have a trust to 
fulfil, a work to do. He invests each one with authority. There must be in every 
community a source of power, a ruling mind ; the father in a family, the magistrate or the 
king in a state. In the Church of the Lord Jesus, he himself is the Head, the Lawgiver, 
the Fountain of honour, the Judge. Yet he gives authority; not making an order of 
men lords over his heritage, but authorizing every servant to fulfil his own special 
duties. The bishop rules, the teacher teaches, the evangelist preaches the gospel, nay,, 
every member of every congregation fulfils his duties, at the bidding and by the 
authority of the Lord. This conviction should give dignity and devotedness to our 
daily toil. We are where the Lord has placed us ; we are doing what he commands. 
And he requires each one to watch. Working and watching go together ; for Christians 
are like the Jews in the time of Nehemiah, who built the walls of Jerusalem, whilst 
they were armed and on their guard against the foe. Our Master has left us in the 
midst of dangers, not to depress our courage, but to quicken our vigilance. This duty 
devolves especially upon the porter, the janitor. The house contains precious treasures, 
and it must not be allowed to every stranger to enter, lest the Master's property should 
be stolen, and the careless keepers dispossessed, and the house occupied by foes. All 
must watch, that at the Lord's return it may appear that his charge has been kept, and 
his possessions have been faithfully guarded. 

II. Watch! fob there is a prospect of Christ's revelation in the future. 
Whilst we look back to the Lord's departure, and his solemn injunctions and his 
sacred trust, we look forward to his return, according to his promise. 1. This is ai. 
assured fact. Our Loid's second coming has been declared by him under many figures, 
each having its own shade of spiritual meaning and practical profit. He is a House- 
holder, who will come to take account of his servants ; a Proprietor, who will come to 
learn how his agents have traded and what they have gained ; a King, who will come 
to make inquiry into the conduct of his citizens and great officers of state ; a Judge, 
who will come to summon the people before his tribunal. 2. At the same time, the 
period of the Lord's return is hidden from us, and we are informed that to the unpre- 
pared it will be sudden and unexpected. Men have been presumptuous enough to 
foretell, with foolish confidence, what neither the angels nor the very Son of God would 
communicate. And again and again, in the course of history, there have been out- 
breaks of millennial fanaticism. But it is easy to see why the close of the age should 
be reserved as a secret in the Father's mind. Had the Church been told that the 
advent wa^ near. Christians would have been unfitted for the sober discharge of the 
duties of life ; had the Church been assured that it was remote, such an assurance 
would have prompted sloth and negligence. 3. Yet we may all live under a sense of 
the nearness of the Lord's return. The personal interest to us of that return lies in 
the glory of Christ's kingdom, and in the acknowledgment of our own faithfulneu. 
This life we know is short, and the day of our account is not far off. And Christ 
would have us live as though he had but gone from uti for a seasoc, and were about 
again to come to us. 



XOe THE GOSPEL ACOOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xui. 1—37. 

"And well I know 
That onto him who works, and feels he worki^ 
This same iprand year if ever at the doon." 

ni. Watoh! fob this' is the plain duty of the pbesbnt. We have ipoken 
of the past and of the future ; of the charge given by our Lord whilst jet on earth, 
and of the prospect of our Lord's return from heaven. But both these aspects af our 
religion bear upon the life and duty of to-day. 

" Trust no future, howe'er pleasant; 
Let the dend past bury its dead : 
Think, act, in the living present- 
Heart withia, and God o'erhead I * 

1. Work I " Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might." Now, whilst 
strength of body and mind are continued, labour for the Lord who lived and died foe 
you. Now, whilst you have control of your property, use it as stewards for God. 
Now, whilst you have influence over your domestic and social circle, use that influence 
for Christ. Ministers of the gospel, parents and teachers of youth, ofScers of congre- 
gations, followers of Jesus in every position of life, — be it yours to work for the Lord 
you love and honour I To-day is yours; to-morrow may be too late. 2. Pray I 
This you will do, if you realize your dependence for spiritual impulse and power upon 
the great Source of spiritual grace and blessing. So far from there being any incon- 
sistency between work and prayer, the two blend in perfect harmony. Prayer without 
work is mockery, and work without prayer is mechanical and powerless. 3. Watch ) 
That is, keep guard over yourself and your trust ; cherish an attitude of expectation 
and a feeling of responsibility. Oh for grace to live " as ever in the great Taskmaster's 
eye " I " Ye know not when the time is." Watch 1 " lest coming suddenly he find you 
sleeping I" 

" Watch, for the night is long ; 

Watch, for the foe is strong ; 

Watch, for the treasure's dear; 

Watch, for the Lord ia near I " 

" Happy is that servant, whom his Lord when he cometh shall find so doing I* 



HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — Tempie admiration. In the case of the Jews a natural and venial &ultt 
if not carried to excess. Esteemed the type and pattern of architectural excellence, and 
one of the wonders of the world. Herod's rebuilding was on a scale of magnificence 
unknown to their ancestors. The essential features of the temple of Solomon were 
restoied, but these were " surrounded by an inner enclosure of great strength and mag- 
nificence, measuring, as nearly as can be made out, one hundred and eighty cubits by 
two hundred and forty, and adorned by porches and ten gateways of great magnificence ; 
and beyond this, again, was an outer enclosure, measuring externally four hundred 
cubits each way, which was adorned with porticoes of greater splendour than any we 
know of attached to any temple of the ancient world ; all shtiwing how strongly Roman 




height eight, in breadth about twelve ; " and in the ' Wars,' v. 5, 6, of " some of the 
stones as forty-five cubits in length, five in height, and six in breadth." Many of these 
were of sculptured n)arble. The reply of Jesus may be read either affirmatively or 
interrogatively, or with a mixture of both assertion and question.. The apodosis is, 
" There shall not be left here stone upon stone," etc. Thus their lingering gaze is 
quietly but grandly rebuked, and their thoughts directed with solemn, practical 
earnestness to the Divine future in which n\\ that pomp of masonry and d^oratiop 
was to have no pls^ce, 



OB. XHL 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK, 209 

I. The natubal mind is most impbbsskd by what is gkeat and bbautifui. im 
OUTWARD APPBABANCE. The simple Galilean peasants were carried away with enthu- 
siastic admiration of the princely buildings, so unparalleled in their experience. To 
such an extent was this the case that they were in danger of being ensnared. 1. Sen$U(ms 
admiration it easily confownded with spiritual attachment. The mind, in order to 
correct this error, must dwell on the spiritual truths of which external objects are but 
the symbols, and realize that, whilst the latter shall pass away, the former must endure 
for ever. 2. The world, in its sensuous totality, is similarly pregnant with temptation 
to the soul that has not learnt to look through the visible into the invisible and eternal. 

II. That which fails or its Divine idea, ob opposes the Divine pueposb, shall 
BE DESTROYED. The Splendid building upon which they were gazing had ceased to 
minister to the higher spiritual life of the people, and had, through its officers and 
Tepreseutatives, rejected the Son of God. It had thereby sealed the warrant of its own 
extinction : not one stone should stand upon another. So is it with the individual, 
institution, or nation which fails to realize its chief end. 1. This is penal. There was 
ao process of natural decay, no growing beautiful with age — the sensuous slowly 
merging into the spiritual ; no succession of normal changes ensuring expansion, adap- 
tation, and continuity; but sudden, awful destruction, accompanied by unheard-of 
misery. God must witness to his righteousness even in judgment. The soul that sins 
shall die. 2. It is in order to give place to a worthier realization of the Divine will. 
The " house not made with hands " was nearer when this external sanctuary, which 
had been defiled, was removed. " The hour cometh, when neither in this mountain, 
nor in Jerusalem, shall ye worship the Father. . . . God is a Spirit : and they that 
iforship him must worship in spirit and truth" (John iv. 21 — 24). Not until the 
temple had been destroyed would the temple's Lord make advent to the world. 
Judgment must begin at the house of God (1 Pet. iv. 17). " But on all these points 
the first and great question is not what is to be done, but who is to do it. Is the 
reform of the Church to be consigned entirely to politicians and economists, who only 
look at the goodly stones and gifts of the temple, some with an anxious, others with a 
greedy eye, and care nothing about the service of the sanctuary nor the edification of 
the worshippers? Or wiU any part of the work be put into the hands of sincere and 
zealous and enlightened lovers of the Church? In the latter case we may securely 
hope for the best. In the other, it is to be feared that, if beneficial changes ever take 
place, they will have been purchased by great losses »nd a disastrous experience " 
(Thirlwall, ' Letters," vol L p. 107).— M. 

Vers. 3 — 5 (and the rest of the chapter generally).— 3%e signs of the coming of the 
Son of man. I. There is a oubiosity concebnino the futube which is natubal 
AND legitimate. The disciples were not rebuked when they came with their inquiry. 
It was not so when Peter asked, "Lord, and wliat shall this man do?" (John xxi. 21). 
Some inquiries concerning the future are therefore lawful, others not. How are we to 
distinguish between them ? We may ask concerning things the knowledge of which 
is necessary to the rational direction of spiritual aims and efforts. God has chosen to 
make known the general scheme of redemption in its evolution in the world's history. 
The prophecies of Scripture ought, therefore, to be studied in the light of con- 
temporary events. The teaching of Christ on this occasion was manifestly the germ 
of the Apocalypse. 

II. This cubiositt is geatifibd by oub Savioub fob mobal and spieitual ends. 
4 Vers. 5, 7, 9, 13, 23, 34 — 37.) The great discipline of the disciples was to take place 
after their Master's death, and before the general inauguration of his kingdom. The 
Ihree general directions of Christ are: (1) Take heed unto yourselves] (2) beware; 
(3) watch. " It does not behove us to know time and hour, but to observe the signs 
antecedent to the judgment of God" (Starke). The Holy Spirit is promised, amid all 
trials and difficulties, to them who truly believe. The gospel itself was to receive 
universal pruclamation, notwithstanding the perils and evils that were to take place. 
So that the disciples were assured, whatever might occur in the external life of the 
world, of ultimate glorious realization of all the spiritual ends of God's kingdom. 

III.' Many tempobaby evils webb to foeeshadow, and to pbbpabe fob, a pee- 
HANENT DlvrNK GOOD. 1. The catalogue <jf woes is long, detailed, and specific : spuitual 
BT. MABK — n. ' 



aiO THE GOSPEL ACCbBDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xm. X— 37. 

delusions ; wars, earthquakes, and famines ; persecutions ; pollution and destruction ot 
the temple; political and cosmical revolutions. 2. These are all to pass, in their 
process tempered and modified hy Divine mercy and guidance. 3. And they were t» 
remit in the advent of the Divine kingdom. The gospel was to be proclaimed and the 
universal communion of saints to be realized. The political and natural troubles were 
to be justified by their being made instrumental of moral and spiritual benefits. So in 
the general experience of Christians " all things work together for good." — M. 

Vers. 30, 31. — The fulfllmenta of the kingdom of Ood an evidence of the truth of 
Christianity. I. The whole social, political, and natubal constitution or 

THINGS WAS KFLUENOED BT, AND MADE SUBSERVIENT TO, ITS ACCOMPLISHMENT. Com- 
pare the history of the world from the death of Christ to a.d. 70. A period of 
destruction, calamity, and revolution. Judaism deposed from its spiritual leadership, 
robbed of its prestige, discredited, stunted, and stultified by the very circumstance 
which awakened and intensified the spirit of Christianity, and (in the Roman empire) 
led to its world-wide diffusion. The suffering, uncertainty, and newly discovered 
solidarity of the race tended to prepare mankind for a more spiritual and universal 
religion. Through the Spirit of Christ the Jewish Christians conquered their con- 
querors and overcame the world. Witness the testimony of Tertullian aa to the 
number of Christians in the Roman empire in his time. 

II. This was foretold bt Jesus Christ. It was a marvellous insight and foresight 
which could look through such a series of evils and destructions to the ultimate success 
of his kingdom. And it had not a little to do with the bringing about of the effect 
anticipated. The period can only be adequately explained from the standpoint of 
universal history or the philosophy of history, as one of spiritual evolution conditioned 
and determined by the peculiar doctrines of Christianity. 

III. The VEKiFiOATioN WAS comprised within the limits op individual expe- 
rience. " This generation shall not pass away, until all these things be accomplished.'' 
If the destruction of Jerusalem be the terminal point of the various series of events 
foretold in this chapter, then " this generation " must be literally understood as referring 
to the persons alive at the time Christ spoke. And, allowing for poetic hyperbole (as 
in the figurative expressions, " heaven and earth," " sun," " moon," and " stars," " earth- 
quakes," etc.) and the general style of prophetic imagery, the careful student must 
believe that in the destruction of Jerusalem the great, imminent coming of the Son of 
man was actually effected, as history proves that circumstances that might fittingly 
be described by the words of Christ took place and in the order he announced. — M. 

Ver. 31. — 2%e words of Christ and the world-revolution with which they were 
associated. I. A prediction of it. The date of these utterances and their authorship 
beyond all reasonable question. A daring forecast, identifying the fortunes of Chris- 
tianity with vast cosmical movements. Insight such as this more than human • 
dependent upon perception of unseen principles and absolute faith in Gtxi. The 
immediate effect of the changes predicted is acknowledged to be adverse to the outward 
circumstances of his followers ; yet inwardly and ultimately the result is regarded as 
beyond question, and declared with unfaltering authority. This predictive element in 
the gospel not accidental, but essential; its entire credibility as a word of God to 
man being made to depend upon its fulfilment as a prophecy. 

IL A sustaininq principle through it. The faith of Christians is fostered : 1. By 
the fact that all things were foretold : " I have told you all things beforehand." 
2. By their intelligent perception of the signs, the method, and the outline of God's 
working. 3. By their experience of special Divine grace — (1) in guidance and indwelling 
of the Holy Ghost ; (2) in experience of special Divine favours, e.g. the shortening of 
the days of tribulation ; and (3) in the inward spiritual comfort and edification of the 
precepts and promises of the gospel. 

ni. A cause of it. As representing the eternal moral principles which underlie 
and determine the historic evolution of the race. An exciting cause of the hatred to 
Divine things which was the motive of so much that was done. A directive influenc* 
in shaping the destinies of tlie new institutions and morements which were evolved 
Lorn the cluuM of the old world. 



tH. xm. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL AULiOEDING TO ST. MAEK. 211 

ly. A 8UBVIVAL FROM IT. Not OH* hts passed away. The gceU doctrines ol 
Christendom have slowly but surely formulated themselves in sjrmpathetic relation to 
the experience and progress with which they have been associated. As a syttem 
of truth, they can be more comprehensively grasped now than at any previous time. 
The fulfilment of its predictions did not exhaust the moral fulness and depth of Chris- 
tian truth, or its applicability to the extant problems of future ages. The gospel is 
thus seen to be, not only for a time, but for all time, the central principle of progress 
and destiny for the human race. — ^M. 

Vers. 32^37. — The element of uncertainty in the Christian revelation, L To what 
IT BELATEB. " That day or that hour." Proximately and very evidently these words 
refer to the precise date of the inauguration of Christ's kingdom, through the destruc- 
tion of Jerusalem (a.d. 70), about forty years subsequent to their utterance. Through 
that period it was possible for any of those addressed to continue alive, and conse- 
quently they were all admonished with respect to it. But, secondarily, tjie absolute, 
final coming of the Son of man is referred to adumbratively, and so also all inter- 
mediate advents connective of these two terms of the progress of his coming. That the 
attention of the hearers was specially or particularly addressed to this secondary coming 
does not appear. There were other words which more clearly indicated it 

II. Waou IT AFFECTED. That it should affect helievere could be understood, 
although at first to them it must have been an occasion of perplexity ; that angeh 
should not know might be explicable on the ground that it was an earthly evolution of 
events, and that although in a state of blessedness and spiritual illumination their 
nature is finite ; but that the " Son " should be ignorant is a great mystery. Yet there 
are considerations which throw some light even upon this. " The Father's absolute 
omniscience, and his consequent absolute prescience, is assumed by the Saviour, even 
although the object of the prescience is chronologically conditional on niillions of inter- 
vening free acts on the part of millions of free agents. When absolute prescience, 
however, is denied by the Son on the part of himself, he is, of course, referring to him- 
self as Son, begotten on a certain day (Ps. ii. 7 ; Acts xiii. 33) in the Virgin's womb 
(Luke i. 35). He is, in other words, referring to himself, as he was self-realized in his 
finite nature, to be for ever distinguished from that infinite essence in which he made 
the worlds (John i. 3), sustains them (Col. i. 17), sees the end from the beginning 
(John vi. 64), and ' knows all things ' (John xxi. 17). ... It is only when we proceed 
on a ' monophysist ' hypothesis, and assume that our Saviour's divinity was his only 
mind, and the soul of his humanity, that overwhelming diBBculty is encountered" 
(Morison). Apart from this, although intimately connected with it, there were moral 
reasons for Christ's remaining ignorant. As " Christ's not knowing rests upon his 
knowing rightly (in a natural manner), or upon the holy extension of his range of 
vision" (Lange), it follows that this ignorance, referring to a subject of such tran- 
scendent consequence in relation to his own work amongst men, must have formed an 
important element and condition of his moral and spiritual subjection to the Father. 
He rose through weakness, limitation of knowledge of Divine counsels (although not of 

, Divine principles), and finitude of nature, to the full comprehension of the mind of God, 
and realization of the perfection of the DiTine-human personality, beyond the cross. To 
the spiritual and perfect Christ, therefore, belongs all power ; for he was made perfect 
through suffering and subjection. His obedience was perfect, and his gradual moral 
development in act and consciousness because of this limitation of knowledge. 

III. How IT IS TO BE BEGARDED BY BBLIBVEB8. The paraboUc form of Christ's 
teaching here is very beautiful and striking. Vers. 34, 35 should be translated thiu : 
" As a man away from home, having (or, who has) left his house, and given the 
authority to his servants, and to each his work, also commanded the porter to watch — 
' Watch, therefore ' (t.e. so say I, ' Watch,' etc.), ' for ye know not when the Master of 
the house cometh,' " etc. (1) With watchfulness ; that is, sleepless vigilance, which 
comprehends and leads to (2) prayer and (3) diligence. And these duties are of 
universal obligation (ver. 37). — M. 

Ver. 34. — " To every man his work." The circumstances under which these words 
were uttered imparted to them peculiar solemnity. Our Lord had left the temple for 



J12 THK GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAKK. [ch. xm. 1—37, 

the lait time, and in the waning light was walking home to Bethany, when he sa* 
himself down to gaze with lingering love on Jerusalem. The evening sun was still 
glonfying her palaces ; but the light was fading, darkness was coming ; and he talked 
with his disciples of darker shadows about to fall, which would leave her bereft of the 
light of God. But he looked beyond that — to the time when he would return from the 
"far country," and, gathering his servants around him, would give each one recompens* 
according as his work should be. During his absence he has given " to every man hii 
work." This clause suggests several thoughts concerning Christian service. 

I. The unitebsality of Christian service. It is appointed for " every man " who 
is in the Lord's household. God works in us in order that we may will and do of his 
good pleasure. He gives us love to others, and understanding of his Word, an expe- 
rienco of his faithfulness, mental and spiritual faculties, in order to fit us for serving hiiu. 
Scienca teaches us that natural agents are so closely related that they are mutually 
convertible. Motion passes into heat, heat into electricity, electricity into magnetinm, 
magnetism into animal force, and so on in an endless circle. In the sphere of nature 
God arouses no force which does not arouse another ; and though the primal energy 
passes on into many manifestations, it does not return to him void. So is it in the 
spiritual realm. He excites in your heart love to Christ, and that arouses thought 
about him, speech concerning him, activity for him ; and these go forth like advancing 
waves of influence into the lives of others, and none can foresee the end. The Church 
is not meant to be like the phantom ship of which the poet sings, manned by a dead 
crew ; but is likened to a living " household," in which all the servants are eager, 
watchful, and diligent ; for their Lord has given " to every man his work." (Show the 
variety of capacities distributed amongst the old and young, the rich and poor, and the 
diverse forms of Christian service to which these point.) 

n. QuAUFioATioNB FOR CHRISTIAN SEBvioE. 1. Eomestnesi. Too often this is 
fitftiL It passes from us uselessly when in contact with the worldly, just as electricity 
passes off when insulation has been neglected. We want insulation of spiritual force. 
A modern Christian, surrounded by symbols of idolatry, would not always have " his 
spirit stirred " within him as Paul did at Athens. The present age is enlightened 
rather than enthusiastic; self-complacent rather than self-sacrificing. 2. Love to Christ 
and love to souls is the true inspiration of succ«asful Christian service. It is gained at 
the foot of the cross. 

" A life of self-ienoonoing lov* 
Is a life of liberty." 

8. Oonftcmeg. Such as Paul had, who, amid temptations to Indolence, and amid perae- 
ralioiui which might have made him falter, pressed forward steadfastly. " This one 
thing I do"was the motto of his life. Is it ours? 4. Watchfulness. A special exhorta- 
tion to this lies in the passage before us. Let us watch (1) for opportunities of service 
(2) for results of work, and (3) for the coming of the Lord. ' 

UL Ths recompense op Christian bervice. 1. There is blessing to le founi in 
doing it. On the inactive mind and irresolute will doubts will gather, as limpets do on a 
motionless rook. Powers fairly exercised, whether they be physical, mental, or spiritual 
develop by use. 2. There is Uessing awaiting us when we have done it. It was not 
without reason that our Lord spoke (ver. 28) of the signs of his coming as being like the 
indications that " summer is nigh." His advent will be to his people not a winter but 
a summer, from which gloom and death will be banished, and in which there will be 
fruit-gathering after toil, and manifestation of beauty and glory arising from the disci- 
pline of the past. That summer is nigh 1 The world is ripening for it. Our work ii 
preparing for it. Then shall the faithful reap fruit unto life eternal A. B. 

Vers. 1—&7.— Watching. This chapter relates almost exclusively to the inhabitants 
of Jemialem. Yet in its testimony to the Divine power of foretelling future events it 
has its evidential value to all students of the person of our Lord ; while its central and 
simple lesson, " Watch 1 the day of your Lord's coming ye know not," may be pro- 
fitaUy reiterated with frequency in the ears of all. One of the disciples, on passinij out 
of the tem^e, drew the attention of the Master to the massiveness and grandeur of its 
building How great I how stable ! how wondrous ! In this, as in w many instances, 



ea. jtttt 1-41.} THE GOSPEL ACCOttDma TO St. MA&K. ^13 



he saw what they saw not ; and his thoughts were not as thelts. It must have heen tc 
their great surprise that he declared, " There shall not he left one stone upon another, 
that shall not he thrown down." Sad and doleful words follow, as strikingly in contrast 
to the expectationn of his questioners as were the former. The eager desire to know 
" when shall these things be," was met by threats of deception, war, earthquakes, and 
famines, the mere presages of trouble, to he followed by personal afflictions, persecutioni, 
hatreds, and deaths, mingled with the uttermost national and religious confusion. The 
dire symbols were, " the sun shall be darkened," " the moon shall not give her light," 
" the stars shall be falling from heaven." We who read these words with the picture oi 
Jerusalem's de.struction before us, and in the light of modern Jewish history, see a 
depth of meaning in them which, the words being words of prophecy, the disciples 
failed to see. Pitifully do our hearts move towards Israel according to the flesh, and 
pray for the lifting; up of the veil that is upon their eyes, that they in a true sense 
may " see and believe." The lesson is found!ed upon this prediction of judgment. la 
interpreting it in its application to ourselves we must see that it teaches — 

I. The extreme PEBILOTTBNESS of HINDEBINa THE SEVELOFMENT OF THB KXNaDOlI 

OP HEAVEN BY UNFAITHFULNESS. The Jew was favovued as was no other nation under 
heaven. Fidelity to the great trust reposed in that people would have heen attended 
with unmeasured Divine blessing ; while unfaithfulness resulted in the direst calamity 
and judgment. Who shall describe the bitterness to Israel of those dread days? A 
free and wider diffusion of the spiritual kingdom followed. But Israel, in giving birth 
to a gospel of blessing to the nations, suffered throes of travail " such aa there hath not 
been the like from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, and," 
happily, " never shall be." 

II. In cub ignobanob of the times of great and sudden changes m thb 

rBTELOPMBNT OF THB KINGDOM OP HEAVEN, OUE HIGHEST WISDOM IB A DILIGENT 

ATTENTION TO THE DUTY OP THE HOUE. The hour is always uncertain when the Lord 
Cometh to judgment. The indolent spirit that is deluded into neglect because there is 
no sign of his coming, will be inevitably found " sleeping." How often has the Church 
been luUed thus to slumber ! How often have the most responsible trusts been 
unfaithfully held! Times of judgment awake the sleepers often to find their work 
neglected or undone. The watching spirit that momentarily devotes itself to the 
doing of the Lord's will is the only safe spirit. Such a spirit is never Surprised, never 
taken unawares. It matters not when " the lord of the house cometh," whether " at 
even, or at midnight, or at cockcrowing, or in the morning." The watching servant 
hails and rejoices in his lord's approach. 

III. The certainty op the FOTAL recognition op HUMBLB, faithful, CONTINUOUi 

SERVICE. 1. The gracious words of warning stimulate to effort. 2. The help of the 
Divine Spirit is comfortingly promised to the suffering. " It is not ye that speak, but 
the Holy Ghost." 3. The perseveringly patient one shall reap in due time. " He that 
endureth to the end, the same shall be saved." 4. The scattered ones whom cruel 
persecution has driven into all lands shall finally he restored, and the felicitiei of the 
heavenly life compensate for the sufferings of earth. " He shall gather together his 
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the uttermost part of 
heaven." The Lord's one command, holding all within itself, is " Watchl" " Blessed 
is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so doing." — G. 

Vers. 1 — 13. — Prophetic adumbrations. L "Matkbial tbmplbb, FOLLOnD bt 
men's sinb, must perish." 

II. " The temple of human hinds, pdedtbd bt the Divinb Sfibit, wnx abidb 

FOB EVER " (Godwin). .mt ni • 

III, The education op Olusions. (See P. W. Robertson's sermon on The lllusive- 
ness of Lifel') God in history is God in disguise. To detect his presence is not 
always easy. Surface and show are constantly taken for truth and reality. 

iv. Vagus troubles precede great changes. We live in restless times. " Some^- 
thing is in the air." We know not what is meant ; but something is meant. The 
beginning of a process must not be mistaken for the end. 

V. A mobal PEiNoiPLE AND PURPOSE LIES IN ALL CHANGE. This is the Secret leaven 
which occasions all the ferment. Deep was the truth expressed by the philosophei 



214 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiii. 1—37. 

when he said, " War is the father of all things." Or in the myth, conflict and love ara 
close companions. In convulsed times, be sure Divine love is profoundly working. 
Persecution represents the expiring struggles of error and its fellow, passion. 

VI. The constant heart need fear no evil. Nothing can bring us peace but 
l.iyalty to principle. Nothing can exempt us from unmanning fears but the sense that 
truth is on our side. The only secret of eloquence lies here. There is no salvation for 
the coward, the untrue, and the disloyal. For the true heart there is salvation from 
every possible danger.— -J. 

Vers. 14 — 31. — Dmrh sayingi. I. Sacred litekatubb, like natdm, ib ruu. o» 
HINTED TRUTH. " Truths in nature darkly join." So in Scripture. The mystic ele- 
ment in Daniel and Scripture generally was fully recognized by Christ. 

II. Prddbnob nr men is the reflection of providence in God. It is the light 
within us. In unsettled times we must be more than usually on our guard. Keen love 
of truth will make the mind critical and sceptical of the talk that goes on. Let us not 
have to say, surprised by calamity, " We might have known this before." 

III. There is a method and a selection in the ways of Providenck. When the 
observer of physical nature finds a principle of " natural selection," he finds only 
the visible counterpart of a law in the kingdom of God. God, through all changes, 
" gathers his chosen " from the end of the land to the end of the sky. 

IV. Changes in the spiritual kingdom are natural, and those that abb 
KATUBAL HAVE A SPIRITUAL SIGNIFICANCE. Changes In plants visibly show forth 
changes in institutions. Below both is truth, is life. And as Christ is one with 
life and truth, his words abide. There is a moral conservation of force through all 
evolutions. — J. 

Vers. 32 — 87. — Indefinable truth. I. An element of uitoeetaintt mingles with 
ALL THAT IS MOST CERTAIN. We know that Certain things must happen, certain forces 
exert themselves, certain laws be executed in the course of things. But where, when, 
how? "The rest is silence." And this is spiritually profitable. Imagination and 
faith live and thrive in the clear-obscure of thought. 

II. There were things unknowable even to Jesus. It is but a small portion of 
truth that can be rendered into definite conceptions and expressed in words. " Truth 
in closest words must faU." But Jesus " received from the Father all desirable know- 
ledge " (Godwin). 

III. The hood amd habit of mind is more important than dbfinitb know- 
ledge. Living is better than any theory of life. Being ready for any emergency is 
better than being certain about when this or that emergency will arise. " We should 
be ready every day for what may come any day." 

IV. A BRIGHT AND QUICK INTELLIGENCE IS ABOVE ALL NECESSARY FOR THE CONDUCT 

OF LIFE. We must not dare to " fall behind the times." We must be punctual. It 
was said of one that he was always " a day too late." Sleepy men and institutions 
will certainly be shocked out of their lethargy. Christ's warning has been unheeded. 
Ecclesiastical Christianity has always been a day too late ; has risen later than science, 
than business energy, than private zeal. We lean on one another too much. It is as if 
each sentinel should go to sleep, trusting to the vigilance of his comrade. Every 
Christian worker and watcher should act as if the fate of the host depended on him 
alone. — J, 

Vers. 1 — 18. Parallel passages : Matt. xxiv. 1 — 14; Luke xxl. 5 — 19. — Unexpected 
events. I. Prophecies. 1. Distribution of prophetic intimations. Great diversity of 
opinion prevails in regard to the predictions contained in this chapter. About one part of 
it, however, there is unanimity ; the early portion contains, as all admit, a prophecy about 
the destruction of the temple which was literally and actually fulfilled within forty years 
after it had been uttered. The remainder of the chapter is understood by the majority 
of interpreters to refer to the destruction of Jerusalem, and the end of the world or 
present dispensation. In relation to this second part there are many divergent theories, 
but these in the main are reducible to two : (1) that which regards these two subjects 
ts separately and successiyely exhibited ; and (2) that which maintains their coexist- 



CH. im. 1— 37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 21 ij 

t ^__ 

ence throughout, and according to which they" are bo blended and intermingled that 
separation ia all but impossible. 2. Practical observations. There is (1) the duty of 
diligently studying prophecy, as a very important and deeply interesting portion of the 
Divine Word ; thus St. Peter says, " We have the Word of prophecy made more sure ; 
^hereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a lamp shining in a dark place " (Revised 
Version). But while the study of prophecy is a pleasing duty, we may not forget that it is 
attended|with special diflBculties arising from the very nature of the subject. It is evident 
that the design of prophecy would be frustrated if it were fully understood beforehand ; 
in such a case men would be found desirous, some of antedating, others of defeating, the 
predicted events. (2) In the study of prophecy we must not strive to be wise above 
what is written, nor lean too much to our own understanding. We are to have in 
recollection that " the secret things belong unto the Lord : but those things which are 
revealed belono; unto us and our children for ever." In our attempts at the interpreta- 
tion of unfulfilled prophecy, in addition to diligent comparison of Scripture under the 
teaching of the Holy Spirit, we are to pursue the study as far as possible along the 
lines of prophecies already fulfilled. (3) Two uses of fulfilled prophecy are obvious. 
One is the corroboration of the truth of God's Word, and so a strong confirmation of 
our faith in that Word ; the second is a guarantee for the future from the past. The 
predictions which have been already and actually fulfilled warrant the expectation 
that such as still wait for fulfilment shall one day be most certainly aooomplished ; 
and then shall the light shed by Divine providence shine so brightly on those portions 
of the Divine Word now mysterious, that they shall appear plain and clear as noonday. 

3. Gha/racter of tht disciples' observation. The object which the disciples had in view, 
when they called the attention of their Master to the great stones of the temple, is not 
quite clear. We may consider their remark a casual one, called forth by the sight of 
such huge structures — such immense stones, measuring, according to Josephus, some of 
them twenty-five cubits in length, eight in height, and twelve in breadth ; others 
forty-five cubits in length, five in height, and sii in breadth. Or perhaps the numerals in 
case of the cubits, in both the passages of Josephus, should be the same, namely, twenty- 
five. The sight of stones of such vast dimensions, of enormous marble blocks, of the 
gorgeousness and grandeur of the buildings, would justify their remark ; still the sight 
of all these would not vindicate it from being somewhat superficial and commonplace, 
natural enough to Galilean peasants, and such as might be made by very unsophisti- 
cated persons. We may perhaps be warranted, therefore, in reading a deeper meaning 
into their observation. Might it not be that the thought occurred to them that an 
edifice of such splendour and magnificence would be no way unsuitable to, nor 
unworthy of, Messiah's reign and of the temporal kingdom which they still clung to? 

4. The point of time at which the observation wai made. Jesns was leaving the temple, 
and leaving it for the last time. What solemn thoughts must have occupied his mind 
as he bade farewell to that beautiful sanctuary ! How different they must have been 
from those of his disciples, in whatever way their words are to be understood I He is 
now turning his back for ever on the national temple, long the centre of Jewish 
worship, with its august shrine, where the Shechinah glory had appeared above the 
cherubim, where the Divine presence in visible symbol had been manifested, where 
the most solemn acts of religious service had been performed, and where the one living 
and true God had been worshipped, while polytheism had prevailed in the nations all 
around. Now, however, the spirit of the theocracy was gone, Judaism had fallen into 
decrepitude, the national temple still stood in all its splendour; but the great 
Inhabitant was about to take his departure. The Messenger of the covenant had come 
suddenly to his temple ; but with his rejection and death already determined on, life 
and light and liberty were on the eve of departing for ever, and the kingdom about to 
pass into other and more worthy hands. The disciples, who, like other Jews, still 
indulged the daydream of a worldly kingdom and political independence in conneotiom 
with Messiah, must have been more than surprised by our Lord's reply. Their pleasant 
fancies are dispelled; to their fondest aspirations a rude shock is given. They are 
startled, stunned, and silenced. Stone not left upon stone that shall not be loosened 
from its place and thrown to the ground 1 and all this afiirmed with the utmost 
positiveness of assertion! What can it mean? They roll the matter over in their 
Jhoughts ; they reflect, but cannot persuade themselves that the words are to be under- 



216 THE GOSPEL ACCOSDIKG tO ST. MAbK. [oh. xm. 1— 3t. 

■toad in their strict, unflgurative sense. The statement is past their comprehension. 
5. Their inquiry. And now they have left the temple courts, descended the side of 
Moriah, crossed the Kedron, and are seated on a slope of Olivet. What a lovely pros- 
pect is there presented to their gaze ! Right opposite and full in view was the temple, 
with its white marble, its roof and pinnacles overlaid with gold, the prodigious stone 
■nbstructures already the objects of such admiration, all sparkling in the clear light oi 
»n Eastern sky. Here was a sight of such surpassing splendour that it was esteemed 
equal to one of the wonders of the world ; a spectacle of such beauty that once »een it 
remained ever after a part of sight. Here was a prospect corresponding to the eloquent 
and withal exact words of Milman, when he says, " At a distance the whole temple 
looked literally like a mount of enow, fretted with golden pinnacles." And was the 
glory of all this, like ordinary mundane things, to pass so soon away 1 The disciples 
naturally desire more information on this stujieudous subject ; they have by this time 
recovered somewhat from their surprise. They break silence by trying to ascertain with 
certainty and preciseness some particulars in regard to the wonderful event predicted, 
and its consequences, immediate and remote, implied in the expression, "these things" 
— an expression erroneously referred by some to the world itself, and by others to the 
buildings of the temple. They are at once curious and anxious to be informed of the 
time when what was foretold would be fulfilled ; of the tign of the Saviour's coming 
for the performance of what he had thus predicted ; and further, as we are informed by 
St. Matthew, of the end of the world. 6. Minuteness in details. As usual, St. Marl 
is most minute in his record of particulars, such as an eye-witness, or one writing the 
words of an eye-witness, would be most likely to take note of. He tells us here the 
exact position of our Lord and his disciples — on a knoU of Olivet, right over against 
(Kmrivavri, the koto being intensive) the temple. He also informs us that the disciples 
who were closest to our Saviour on the occasion, or who were most earnest and urgent 
in their inquiries which they probably repeated (Ixijpc^ToiK, imperfect), were Peter and 
James and John and Andrew. These were the persons who spoke in their own name 
and that of their brethren — acting at once for themselves and the other disciples. 
There was in this an evident appropriateness. These four disciples, consisting of two 
pairs of brothers, were the first who had enrolled themselves in the list of discipleship ; 
they were the first of the apostolic band. They had been longest with our Lord, and, 
it would seem, on the most familiar terms with him ; and now they are nearest to him 
in position, and, on the ground of their close intimacy, ventjje to put questions from 
which perhaps the others shrank. Three of these, moreover, had been specially privi- 
leged — already on two, as subsequently on another and third occasion — to accompauy 
our Lord. Long attendance on the Master, as the consequence of early and faithful 
discipleship, would thus appear to have peculiar advantages, and to elevate, not by 
merit but by grace, to higher piivileges. How important, then, for the young to join 
themselves early to the ranks of Christ's disciples, remembering their Creator in the 
days of their youth, and coming in early childhood to the Saviour! 7. Peculiarity 
in and fulfilment of the prophecy. We may not overlook, or lose sight of, the 
prediction that led to the inquiries of the disciples, and of these special favourites 
who represented the wishes of their brethren, as well as their own, on this occasion. 
The prediction in question is one of the most remarkable on record, if we consider 
all the circumstances. There was scarcely anything more unlikely at that time 
than the overthrow of such a stable fabric, where the buildings and substructures 
were so massive that Titus himself attributed his triumph to the hand of God. The 
original temple had been built by Solomon, and having stood for four centuries, 
was destroyed, after the lapse of that period, by Nebuzaradan, commander-in-cMef of 
the forces of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon. It was rebuilt by Zerubbabel, »t the 
head of the restored Jews, somewhat more than five centuries before Christ. Thi» was 
the second temple ; and though it was renewed by Herod the Great, and had several 
magnificent additions made to it by that king, such as a porch with white marble slabs, 
towers, and so on, it was still known, not as the third, but second temple. The work of 
renovation commenced by Herod had continued six and forty years, as we learn from 
the Fourth Gospel (ii. 20), where we read, " Then said the Jews, Forty and six years was 
thi« temple in building.'' It was still much more improbable even if, contrary to all 
sjpeotation and all reasonable calculation of chances, it ghould be destroyed, that that 



itt. »in, 1-91.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING tO ST. MARK. Ill' 

des-tniction would be carried to such an extreme of demolition that no ruins shouU b« 
left — no, not so much as one stone upon another. Other temples have btem Aestroyed 
by hostile attack, or fallen into decay and yielded to the corroding tooth of time ; tut 
their ruins at least remain, while the magnificence of those ruins attract! the visitor, 
and excites his admiration or astonishment. Witness the far-famed Parthenon or 
temple of Minerva at Athens, or the temple of Baalbek, or Eamak, or Luxor. But though 
the Roman general did his utmost to save the temple, it was destroyed by fire ; and sub- 
sequently the work of demolition was carried out so thoroughly by the tenth legion, 
under Terentius Eufus, that the temple area and precincts were dug up. The great 
peculiarity of the prophecy was its uncommon clearness, distinctness, and definiteness 
at a time when all the probabilities were against it ; while the exactness of its fulfil- 
ment has so puzzled infidels, that they hare tried to make themselves and others 
believe that the prediction was post eventum; and, finding that impossible and 
incredible, others have resorted to luch miserable shifts as coincidences, lucky guesses, 
or skilful prognostications. All in vain ; for it remains, and must remain, an irrefra- 
gable testimony to the truth of God. There was, besides, the fulfilment of an older 
prophecy by Micah : " Zion shall be ploughed like a field, and Jerusalem shall become 
heaps." 8. The perspective of prophecy. There is a very general agreement that in 
the predictions contained in this chapter of St. Mark and the corresponding chapters of 
the other synoptists, the two events of Christ's coming at the fall of Jerusalem, and of 
his coming at the end of the world or present dispensation, are combined. While 
some explain this according to the theory of two applications, one primary and another 
secondary ; and others by the typical theory, one event being typical of another, 
so that the one description covers both ; others again prefer that theory of prophecy 
according to which it exhibits events without regard to the periods of time or portions 
of space that intervene between them and separate them from each other ; just as in 
the landscape hill rises above hill, while to the spectator at a distance the valleys 
that lie between, or the interspaces that separate them, are not seen nor observed, and 
it is only when the summit of each hill is reached that the interval between it and 
the next is discernible. So we may conceive it to be with respect to the close of the 
ttliiy which was marked by the fall of Jerusalem, and the completion, or riXot, of the 
present dispensation or current age. 

II. The signs specified. 1. Enumeration. There is some slight difference in the 
enumeration of the signs ; they are also divided by some into negative and positive. 
We prefer dividing them into the immediate and more remote, and enumerate them as 
follows : — (1) False prophets or pretended Messiahs ; (2) wars and rumours of wars, that is, 
wars actually declared or commenced, and wars threatened or reported as imminent. St. 
Luke employs, instead of "rumours," the somewhat different expression of "commotions," 
or " unsettlements " (4T0KOTa<rTo<r{oi) ; these are the more remote premonitions, for it is 
added by St. Matthew and St. Mark, " The end is not yet," while St. Luke has, " The end 
is not immediately." (3) Wars on a larger scale, implied in nation rising against nation 
and kingdom against kingdom. After these political agitations come physical, as (4) 
earthquakes ; then other providential events, as (5) famines, and troubles, the latter 
word being omitted in some manuscripts and in the Eevised Version ; also (6) pesti- 
lenoes. That all these signs preceded the fall of Jerusalem at a greater or less distance 
from that event, and that, on a still wider area and a still grander scale, they shall 
precede the winding up of the present dispensation, appears to be the teaching of this 
portion of Scripture. The intermingling of the predictions relating to the two great 
events may in some measure be accounted for by the circumstance that the Jews 
would regard the overthrow of the Jewish state as the signal of, and coincident with, 
the end of all present things. Other signs of a less general and more personal kind are 
subjoined, so that we have (7) persecutions befalling the disciples both in and outside 
of Judffia ; and (8) sad apostasies and the evils consequent on such defections, as we 
learn from the first evangelist ; also (9) the proclamation of the gospel proceeding from 
Jerusalem and Judsea, and its diffusion among all nations, as a witness everywhere to 
Chrut and his salvation. 2. VvrificcUion. Scripture itself bears witness to the fulfil- 
ment of the first sign ; for St. John says, " Even now are there many antichrists, 
whereby we know that it is the last time ; " while Josephus acquaints us with the fact 
that " the land was overrun with magicians, seducers, and Impostors, who drew the 



818 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiii. 1—37. 



people «fter them in multitudes into solitudes and deserts, to see the iiigns and 
miracles which they promised to show by the power of God." Several names, more- 
over, are expressly mentioned, of such persons as Dositheus, Simon Magus, Theudas, 
Barchochab ; but it is objected that some of these were too early, and others too late, 
in point of time. In like manner it may be objected to the statement of the Apostle 
John, that, while it is so distinct in relation to the fact, it is indefinite with respect to 
the element of time. But if some were too early and others too late, it is not likely 
that the intervening period had the good fortune of being freed from their presence ; 
while, from the statements of St. John on the one hand and Josephus on the other, we 
may rightly conclude a succession of pretenders, and quite a number of them all along, 
as true coin is seldom for long without its counterfeits. The second sign had its 
verification in the violent deaths of no less than four Boman emperors — Nero, Galba, 
Otho, and Vitellius — within a year and a half, and the scenes of tumult and bloodshed 
consequent thereon ; while the Jews were assailed with three threats of wars by Cali- 
gula, Claudius, and Nero respectively. There were other rumours of wars, in consequence 
of Bardanes, and subsequently Volageses, declaring, but not carrying out, war against 
the Jews ; as also by Vitellius, Governor of Syria, declaring war against the Arabian 
king, Aretas. These two signs were among the more remote, for, as we have seen, it 
is added, " The end is not yet ; " that is, the end of the Jewish polity at the destruction 
of Jerusalem was not to follow immediately. This caution was subjoined to prevent 
that state of excitement and alarm which the Apostle Paul, at a subsequent period, 
found it necessary to allay among the Thessalonians. The third sign may be illustrated 
by the general character of the period, which the Eoman historian Tacitus describes as 
" rich in calamities, horrible with battles, rent with seditions, savage even in peace 
itself;" as also by particular catastrophes, as the conflict between the Syrians and Jews 
at Caasarea, in which twenty thousand of the latter perished ; another at Seleucia, in which 
fifty thousand Jews lost their lives ; with others similar at Joppa, Scythopolis, Ascalon, 
and Tyre, recorded by Josephus in his ' Wars of the Jews,' a title of itself significant 
of the state of the times ; while Fhilo makes mention of a serious outbreak between 
Jews and Greeks in Alexandria, though at a much earlier period. The fourth Mgn 
consisted of tremors of the earth, by which towns and cities were often shaken and 
ruined. Uliese earthquakes were to occur in divers places. Never perhaps, in an equal 
period of time in the history of our earth, did so many of these fearful convulsions occur, 
as in the interval between the Crucifixion and fall of Jerusalem. Seneca, in a lome- 
what rhetorical passage in one of his Epistles, mentions a surprising number of such 
casualties having occurred in many difierent quarters, and with the usual disastrous 
results ; in his list of places where earthquakes had taken place are proconsular Asia, 
Achaia, Syria, Macedonia, Cyprus, and Paphus. Tacitus makes mention of several in 
different localities — ^in Crete; in Italy, one at Bome and another in Campania; in 
Phrygia, at Apamea, and Laodicea. Josephus speaks of one in Judsea ; and several 
others are recorded about the same time. Of the fifth sign, or famines, we have the 
record in the Acts (xi. 28), where Agabus foretold " that there should be great dearth 
throughout all the world : which came to pass in the days of Claudius Csesar ; " and 
the testimony of Tacitus, Suetonius, and Josephus to similar effect. The whole time 
cf the reign of Claudius appears to have been one of scarcity ; that in the ninth year of 
his reign appears to have been particularly severe. Three other famines occurred in 
his reign. Daring this period, Bome, Syria, and Greece suffered most painfully. From 
the famines we might naturally infer the existence of the $iiKth sign, or pestilences, even 
if we had no historical record of their occurrence, according to the old proverb, that 
" after famine comes pestilence," so neatly expressed in the Greek /icrck Aijukr X*iiiis. 
And yet disasters of this kind are recorded — one in Babylonia, by Josephus ; on* in 
Bome, which swept away thirty thousand persons in one autumn, by Tacitus and 
Suetonius. The New Testament itself furnishes proof enough, and more than enough, 
of the persecutions which were the seventh sign. In Acts iv. 3 — 7 we read of the 
Apostles Peter and John being arrested, thrown into prison, and brought before the 
Sanhedrim ; in Acts v. 18 we read that they " laid their hands on the apostles, and put 
them in the common prison," and at the twenty-seventh verse of the same chapter that 
they " brought them and set them before the council ; " in Acts xvi. 23, 24, that they 
" lud many stripes upon them [Paul and Silas], and cast them into prison," where thi 



OH. xm. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. 219 

jailor "thmst them into the inner prison, and made their feet fast in the stocks ; "ia Acts 
xviiL 12 of Paul being brought to the judgment, and in xxiii. 1 of his appearing beforo 
the council and being smitten on the mouth, by command of the high priest Ananias. 
One of the duties of the Ghazzan, a minister of the synagogue, was to exercise discipline, 
and of this Paul bad his share, when, as he tells us, "Of the Jews fire times received 1 forty 
stripes save one ; " and again, " Thrice was I beaten with rods." The tit before " syna- 
gogues" is pregnant, implying that they were previously brought into the synagogues and 
then beaten therein. The distinction that makes th refer to the persons present before 
whose eyes the punishment was inflicted, while iv only indicates the place, ii more 
than doubtfuL Again, St. Paul affords an exemplification of the succeeding statement 
that they should " be brought before rulers and kings," having appeared before Felix, 
Festus, and Agrippa in succession, as recorded in Acts xxiv. — xxvi. ; also before Nero, 
as we may infer from 2 Tim. iv. 16, 17, where he speaks of his first answer, and of being 
delivered out of the mouth of the lion. Of apostasies, the eighth sign, we have both 
direct and indirect evidence. The latter is found in the many and earnest warnings 
which the Epistle to the Hebrews contains against such, while evidence of the former 
kind is supplied by the heathen historian Tacitus. The rapid progress which the 
preaching of the gospel had made, notwithstanding all the opposition and hindrances, 
and cruel persecutions, and sad apostasies, is perhaps the most surprising fact of all ; 
while of this we have such incidental notices as the following : — " Your faith is spoken 
of throughout the whole world," writes St. Paul to the Romans ; to the Galatiang he 
writes of hia own circuit to Arabia, back to Damascus, and then to the head-quarters in 
Jerusalem ; to the Golossians he says of " the Word of the truth of the gospel, which is 
come unto you, as it is in all the world; and bringetJi forth fruit, as it doth also in 
you ; " and again, in the same chapter (Col. i. 23), he speaks of the hope of the gospel, 
and adds, " which ye have heard, and which was preached to every creature which is 
under heaven." Thus was verified the ninth sign. 

III. Tbe mobal lgssonb intebspebsbd. 1, JPractical directions. With the impor- 
tant predictions of this section, and indeed of the whole chapter, practical directions of 
greatest consequence are blended. Similarly, in the writings of the apostles, we usually 
find along with exposition of doctrine the enforcement of duty. The principal practical 
directions of our Lord in this portion of Scripture are mostly of the nature of moral 
lessons, and are the following : — Eeed/ulnesi, which is several times repeated in the 
course of the chapter ; needfulness of perseverance ; prayerfulness ; and watchfulness. 
Other lessons of great practical importance, though expressed rather as categorical 
statements or predictions than in the form of directions like those enumerated, are 
contained is it. 2. The first of these great moral lessons. The first of these lessons 
occun in the fifth verse, in the words, " Take heed lest any man deceive you." The 
same^ though slightly altered, and in a somewhat different connection, occurs in the 
ninth verse, in the words, " But take heed to yourselves ; " again, in the twenty-third 
verse, we read, " But take ye heed ; " and once more, in the thirty-third verse, it is set as 
a preface or introduction to other duties : " Take ye heed, watch and pray." In its first 
occurrence, it warns the disciples against being deceived by others ; in the second, it 
cautions them in reference to their own deportment ; in its third occurrence, it calls on 
them to do their duty, as the Saviour had done his by them in full predictions and 
directions; while, in its last occurrence in the chapter, its repetition seems designed to 
add emphasis to the injunctions immediately coming after. This first lesson is as 
elastic in its application as practical in its nature, which is manifest from the varying 
context with which it is connected. In its first context in this chapter, it puts us on 
our guard i^inst deception. As originally applied, it warned the disciples against pre- 
tenders to Messiahship— competitive claimants to that dignity, or rather personators of 
Christ himself, alleging they were himself returned again, according to the promise of 
his second advent. But in principle and spirit it applies to ourselves, and is needed by 
Christians at all times. Li a world like this, where so many things axe not what they 
•eem, we are required to be upon our guard. Satan is watching to impose on us with 
his lies, and deceive us t» oar destruction ; we must beware of him. Sinners are waiting 
to deceive us by their enticement ; we must beware of them, and when they entice ua 
not yield consent. Sin itself contains the very essence of deception. It promises piea- 
lurea ; but the pleasures of sin last only for a season, and that season is a short onoi while 



22d THE GKDSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEg. [ch. Xiti. 1—37 



during that season, short as it is, they do not satisfy. Often instead of pleasure it brings 
us pain ; and it is always pain in the end. In the second of its occurrences, as aboTe 
speoifled, the warning related to the deportment of the disciples themselves, in the 
extremely trying circumstances in which they would often find themselves placed. 
Other perils and other unsettling circumstances were of a general nature ; their attention 
is now claimed for those more immiient and more immediately affecting themselyes 
When arraigned before councils or shamefully maltreated in synagogues, when scourged 
or scorned, amid indignities and insults and injuries, it behoved t'lem, after their Master's 
example, to bear themselves bravely ; when they suffered, to forbear threatening ; 
when evil entreated, to bear up with patience and meekness as well as fortitude. When 
brought before rulers and kings, magistrates of the lowest and highest rank, they are 
reminded of the duty then especially incumbent on them — to be valiant for the truth. 
They were to take heed to themselves, that no unfaithfulness on their part should mar 
their message which they had for men, high or low, rich or poor, foes or friends, or 
induce them to keep back aught of the testimony they had to bear. Nay, more, 
they were to take heed to themselves lest they should esteem Christ's yoke a weariness, 
or duty to him a drudgery ; but, on the contrary, to consider it a privilege to have an 
opportunity to testify to his cause and claims, however perilous or painful the position. 
In like manner, whenever opportunity is fairly afforded us to present Christ's t'.aims, or 
plead his cause, or testify to the truth of his religion, it is incumbent on us joyfully to 
avail ourselves of it, faithfully to declare the whole counsel of God, to stand up bravely 
for the truth, and to " contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints." 3, 
The second great moral lesson. The second of these lessons is, as already intimated, 
the necessity of perseverance. " He that shall' endure unto the end, the same shall he 
saved." This, in the first instance, was applicable to the apostles, and peculiarly appro- 
priate In their case ; but it has a wider scope and more general bearing. It warns against 
that fickleness which enters on the path of duty with eagerness and seeming earnest- 
ness, it may be, but speedily turns aside, as did the Galatians, of whom the apostle had 
reason to complain, " Ye did run well, but something hindered you." It cautions us 
against putting our hand to the plough and then turning back, as many do when they 
realize the arduous nature of the work, or when some discouragement comes in their 
way, or some formidable obstacle has to be encountered. It urges us to endurance 
amid the toils, the trials, the troubles, the many perplexities, the sore sufferings, and 
manifold afflictions which the Christian has to endure during this mortal life and strife. 
It exhorts us to patunce, withal ; we are to endure patiently, that is to say, unmur- 
muringly. Some endure, indeed, but their endurance loses half its virtue through the 
complaining and frettings that accompany it. Further, it encourages us to perseverance 
— a manful holding out to the last, and to a brave persistence in the way and work of 
God, however arduous our task may be, and however difficult or dangerous the path we 
have to travel. In a word, we are to " stand fast in the faith, quit us like men, and ha 
strong." The path of duty here, as elsewhere and often, shall prove the way of safety. 
If we suffer with him, we shall reign with him ; if we bear the cross, we iball wear the 
crown. 

*Xhen steadfast let us still remain. 

Though dangers rise around. 
And in the work prescribed by God 

Yet more and more abound ; 
Assured that, though we labour now, 

We labour not in vain ; 
But, through the grace of heaven's great Lord, 
Th' eternal crown shall gain." 

J. J. G. 

Vers. 14—23. Parallel passages: Matt. xiiv. 16 — 28; Luke xxi. 20—24. — Thi 
end imminent. I. Immediately proximate signs. Hitherto we have had the signs, 
more or less remote, of Christ's coming at the fall of Jerusalem, and so an answer to the 
second part of the question contained in ver. 4. Here, however, we have the imme- 
diately proximate sign, or rather an answer to the first part of the question of that 
same verse, namely, "When shall these things be?" Along with the sign here 
intimated, we have instructions about the ways and means «f e8«af«, Sut with 



«H. XIII. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDmG TO ST. MARK. 22] 

respect to the immediately proximate sign or time of the destruction of Jerusalem, w« 
read that it is " the abomination of desolation " foretold by Daniel. The expression ii 
regarded as relating to the Roman army, that brought desolation on the holy city; but 
•whether the actual reference be to the besieging host itself, or to their standaidi, the 
eagles, as objects of idolatry, or to the outrages of the Zealots in the sacred courts, is 
not so certain. The parallel expression in Luke xxi. 20, " When ye shall see Jerusalem 
compassed with armies, then know that the desolation thereof is nigh," is deemed by 
some conclusive lor the reference being to the Uoman armies; most commentator* 
understand the expression of the Boman eagles planted in a holy place, that is, 
round Jerusalem, first by Cestius Gallus a.d. 66, then by Vespasian two yean after, 
and two years later still by Titus ; while a third explanation refers the sign to the 
atrocities of the Zealots at this time. In this way the sign was twofold — internal and 
external ; the latter consisting of the Roman legions now drawn round the city, the 
former of the abominations of the Zealots, causing the cup of Jewish iniquity to over- 
flow, and thus directly leading to the desolation that immediately ensued. Two 
circumstances seem to favour this last view of the matter : the holy place is properly 
referable to the temple, and the sign of the Boman eagles would be rather indefinite, as 
they had been seen in Palestine for a considerable period previously. Inward desecration 
caused by sin in some way issued in outward desolation. 

II. Pbeoautions suggested. It is not the duty of Christians more than of non- 
Christians to rush vmnecessarily into peril any more than into temptation ; we are not 
to endanger life and limb recklessly and negligently. Our first duty is self-tireservation 
when no principle is compromised and no matter of spiritual moment is at stake j wo 
are required to use all legitimate means for the preservation of our own lives and the 
lives of others. Confessors, indeed, have taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and 
martyrs have cheerfully shed their blood, rather than surrender a jot of truth or 
renounce their allegiance to the Saviour ; but there are special occasions and particular 
circumstances when our duty is to escape from, not court, danger. The disciples, when 
persecuted in one city, were to flee to another. Our Lord himself, passing tlirough the 
midst of the wicked jNazarenes, went his way, when they had led him to the brow of 
the hill whereon their city was built, and would have cast him down headlong. And 
now he gives directions beforehand for his followers not to imperil their lives needlessly 
and uselessly, when, by signs of which he forewarns them, they should know that the 
ruin of Jerusalem was imminent and inevitable, and when the wrath of God was about 
to be poured out on their unbelieving countrymen. The methods of escape were 
yarious. Those who found themselves in Judaaa were to flee to the mountains. These, 
with caves and rocky fastnesses, were favourite places of refuge in time of danger in the 
land of Palestine ; thus, Lot was urgently pressed by the angel to flee to the mountain : 
" Escape for thy life ; look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain ; escape 
to the mountain, lest thou be consumed ; " David was hunted by Saul as " a partridge 
in the mountains." Such as were already on the house-top, or could readily reach it 
by the steps outside, were not to return into the house to carry off with them any 
article of property, however prized or valuable, but to hasten their flight with all speed 
along the flat roofs of the houses till they reached the city walls, and thence make good 
their escape. Persons engaged in field labour, at which the outer garment QiUrtov) was 
usually stripped off and laid aside, were not to act so indiscreetly as to run the risk of life 
itself by returning for the sake of saving an article of raiment probably of no great value. 
III. The thied great mobal lesson. This, as we have already stated, is prayer- 
fulness. Our Lord, after the particular directions enumerated, bethought himself of 
other cases to which those directions were inapplicable owing to the inability of the 
pei'sons concerned to comply with them. With tender females in such circumstances 
of delicacy as precluded the possibility of flight, and with nursing mothers whose 
womanly afliections forbade the thought of abandoning their offspring — with persons 
thus unfitted for flight, so encumbered as to retard it except through an impossible 
sacrifice — our Lord expresses the deepest sympathy and tenderest compassion. If, 
however, we may trace the sequence of thought in the mind of the Saviour as in the 
human mind in general, the thought of weakness by the law of contrast suggests 
a power which the weakest can wield and the strongest cannot dispensa with, and 
which i» the most untoward circumstances commands success. " And pray ye," sayi 



222 THE GOSPEL AOCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiii. 1-37. 

our blessed Lord, " that your flight be not in the winter. " St. Matthew adds, " neither 
on the sabbath day." The same God who has appointed the end has appointed the 
means that conduce to that end. One great means is prayer. The end and means ar« 
connected as links of the same chain. Other means of escape had been prescribed, and 
even mged on such as could employ those means; some there would be who, from 
circumstances already indicated, would be precluded from availing themselves of those 
means ; besides, both these classes must, in the dark outlook into the future, anticipate 
circumstances over which they could have no possible control, such as the season of the 
year, or the day of the week when the predicted calamities might suddenly burst over 
them. What, then,' was the course to be pursued ? Where means were available, 
prayer was a leverage which imparted to the means a potency multiplied manifold ; 
where the means were not available, prayer was the only element of power that could 
be employed; while in both cases there were certain obstacles which human power 
could not overcome, and certain circumstances with which it was incompetent to 
grapple. It was only by prayer that difficulties of this sort could be vanquished. The 
suhject-matter of the prayers our Lord graciously condescends to suggest. They were 
to pray for the avoidance of the winter, when its cold and inclemency would greatly 
aggravate the general distress, or when its heavy rains, swollen streams, and winter 
torrents might render flight or escape impossible. They were to pray that they might 
not 1)6 necessitated to infringe the sanctity of the sabbath, on which a lawful journey 
did not exceed a mile ; and when, the city gates being closed, would either shut them 
in or shut them out, and in either case cut them off from a place of safety ; or when 
they might expose themselves to punishment from the cruelty of fanatics for a breach 
of the sabbath law. Our Lord suggested to them such topics of supplication, putting 
desires into their hearts and words on their lips. 

IV. God's goodness to his chosen. "I'ur the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, 
he hath shortened the days." His elect are his chosen — oliosen to salvation through 
sanctifiioation of the Spirit and belief of the truth, chosen in Christ before the foundation 
of the world, chosen of God and precious, a chosen generation, called, chosen, and 
faithful. The privileges of God's people are very many and very great. God avenges 
his own elect ; nothing shall be laid to the' charge of God's elect ; he will gather them at 
last from the four winds ; while here we learn that those days of direst disasters and 
unspeakable horrors were shortened for their sake. How great the blessedness of being 
children of God ! The psalmist had aflBrmed the blessedness of such centuries before ; 
he had afiSrmed it on the highest authority and for the best of reasons. " Blessed," he 
said, " is the man whom thou ohoosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may 
dwell in thy courts. ... By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, 
God of our salvation." 

V. God's peovidential dealings with his pboplb. The dispensations of God's 
providence prove, while they illustrate, his goodness to his people. In the present 
instance the Saviour warned his followers ; this was the first link in the chain of his 
love. Acting on this warning, they fled ; and God, in his mercy, favoured their flight 
and facilitated it. In answer to the petitions previously taught them and presented, 
we may be sure, by them, their flight was not in winter, or at least needed not to be 
60, for the siege commenced in the October of 66 a.d. ; the final siege began in the 
April or May of the year of our Lord 70. Thus they bad the opportunity of flight 
before or at the beginning of the siege, and consequently before the rigours of winter 
had set in; or, if perchance any delayed their flight and lingered on till near the 
concluding catastrophe, they in like manner avoided the winter. The consequence 
was that the Christian Jews effected their escape to Pella, now Tabathat Fahkil, near 
the Eorthern border of Perssa, among the hills of Gilead, on the other side of Jordan, 
and a hundred miles from the besieged city. The merciful dealings of Divine providence 
were also manifested by the curtailment (iKoK6fiuae) of the period of distress. In the 
midst of wrath he remembered mercy, and for his elect's sake he so overruled matter* 
that the siege was brought to a speedy termination. So terrible was the time that, in 
the words of the evangelist, "except the Lord harl shortened the days, no flesh would 
■^ave been saved." The Scripture statement is fully confirmed by the historical details 
of JosephuB, who makes it abundantly evident that the wretchedness of men and the 
wickedness of men had then culminated. Unprecedented before, they have remained 



BH. XDI.1— 37.] THE aOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MAEK. 



without parallel since. It was Passover time, and multitudes thronged the ciiy. What 
from this state of matters inside the city and the siege outside, famine ensued ; its usual 
attendant, pestilence, followed. Men and women seemed to have divested themselves 
of the instincts of humanity j nameless barbarities were perpetrated. The city was torn 
by sedition within — three factions being in constant conflict with each other ; war raged 
without, hundreds of Jewish prisoners being crucified in sight of their friendi. More 
than a million Jews perished in the siege, and ninety-seven thousand were taken 
captive — some of them sold into slavery, some sent to Egyptian mines, and others 
reserved for the gladiatorial games. " Those days shall be affliction," according to the 
correct rendering ; and never was prediction fulfilled with more terrible literality. But 
two circumstances, under Providence, abridged this reign of terrors : one was the terrible 
energy of the besieger, who pressed the siege and at last stormed the city ; and the 
other was the fearful infatuation of the besieged. The city, which had withstood 
Nebuchadnezzar more than a year and a quarter, fell before the power of the Roman 
general in less than five mouths. Had things continued much longer, Judaea itself 
would have been desolated, and its inhabitants, including, no doubt, many sincere 
Christians, would have perished. But God, for his people's sake, shortened those days 
of shocking suffering and unspeakable sadness. The Saviour again, and for the third 
time, repeats his eihortation to heedfulness against those who at such a crisis deceived, 
either consciously or unconsciously, themselves, and who should deceive others by 
holding forth hopes of deliverance by the coming of the Christ. — J. J. O. 

Vers. 24—31. Parallel passages: Matt. xiiv. 29—35; Luke xii. 25 — S3. — The 
second advent. I. The greatness op the event. Whether our Lord's coming shall 
be pre-millennial or post-millennial we stay not to inquire. The great importance 
attaches to the fact of the second coming of the Son of man, which this section 
describes and which all Christians believe. The future coming of the Son of man 
naturally leads us back in thought to his first coming. The world had waited long for 
that blessed day. Patriarchs had looked forward to it, but it was in faith ; prophets 
saw it, but it was in vision ; saints sighed for its approach, but it was still a great 
way off — they hoped for its arrival, but they died before the promise was fulfilled ; 
servants of God longed for its coming, and when it at length arrived they felt so 
satisfied that there seemed nothing further for them to desire — the language of Simeon 
expressed their thoughts, "Now, Lord, lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, 
according to thy word : for mine eyes have seen thy salvation." Angels celebrated 
it on the plains of Bethlehem, and sang in heavenly carol, " Glory to God in the 
highest, peace on earth, and good will to men." The people of God look forward with 
equal longing and equal eagerness to the day of Christ's second coming. They look 
and long for it as the period of complete redemption ; they expect it as the time of 
home-gathering of all their brethren in the Lord ; in anticipation of that great deliver- 
ance and of that blessed reunion they cry, " Even so. Lord Jesus, come quickly." 

IF. Thb globt of his coming. He will come, we are taught to believe, personally, 
visibly, and gloriously. He will come " in the clouds." The clouds of heaven serve 
many important purposes ; they screen from the heat of the sun by day, and moderate 
the radiation of the earth by night. Sometimes they supply from their contents 
moisture to plants, and bring gladness to the thirsty ground ; sometimes they pour 
down the water that originates springs or swells rivers ; sometimes they cover with 
snow the polar regions. Those cloud-masses, as they float in the atmosphere, now 
approach within a mile of the earth, again ascend to the distance of five or six miles 
above its surface. Sometimes they curl in thin, parallel, silvery streaks ; sometimes 
they form dense conical or convex heaps ; sometimes, at the approach of night, they 
spread out in wide low-lying horizontal sheets ; sometimes, fraught with storm, they 
move like a dark canopy overhead; again they unite and form various combinations. 
At all times they claim our attention, and commend themselves to our admiration by 
their fantastic forms, their changing colours, their varying density, and their strange 
combinations. The views of a kaleidoscope are nothing compared with the manifold 
aspects of the clouds. The clouds of heaven, then, are objects of great beauty, 
grandeur, and glory. The ancient heathens had a just appreciation of the magniflMnce 
of the oiouds, and accordingly associated them with their highest conception* oJ 



824 THB GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. [oh. xni. 1—87, 

majetiy. They represented their deities as clothed with clouds, or seated on clouds, or 
surrounded with clouds, as if to hide from mortal gaze their excessive splendour. In 
Scripture, also, the true God is represented as making the clouds his chariot, and 
walking upon the wings of the wind ; and, again, we read that " his pavilion round 
about him were dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies." When Isaiah predicts 
the destruction of Egypt and the confusion of its idols from the hand of the Lord, he 
uses the sublime representation, " Behold, the Lord rideth upon a swift cloud, and shall 
come into Egypt." Daniel employs similar language in relation to the Son of man : 
" Behold, one like the Son of man came with the cluuds of heaven, and came to the 
Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. Aad there was given him 
dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should 
serve him." The representation before us here is in accordance also with our Lord's 
reply, when, in answer to his question about his Messiahship, he directed their attention 
from the humility of his first to the honour of his second coming, saying, "Ye shall 
see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of 
heaven." So also, when he was going to part from his disciples, when he was going to 
leave our world, when his feet last stood on Olivet, when he was about to ascend to bis 
Father and our Father, to his God and our God, the cloud became his vehicle, and 
coming under him received (birixa^ev) him out of the disciples' sight; and in that 
car of cloud he rose onward, and mounted upward to the right hand of the Father 
everlasting. Thence he shall come again with glorious majesty, according to the 
promise, " This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in 
like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." Further, in the Apocalypse, the 
Apostle John's representation of Christ's coming with clouds is designed and calcu- 
lated to signify the grandeur and the glory, the solemnity and the sublimity of his 
second advent : " Behold, he cometh with clouds ; and every eye shall see him, and 
they also which pierced him : and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because of him. 
Even so. Amen." 

ni. The gloet ahd power with which he comeb. Every manifestation of glory 
shall attend him ; every symbol of unspeakable splendour shall accompany him ; every 
token of dignity shall signalize him ; every adjunct of might and magnificence shall 
mark his advent. The Son of man shall come with great power and glory ; all the 
holy angels shall swell his train. The dead in Christ shall rise first, and swell that 
assemblage ; they that are still alive, and remain till that dread day, shall be caught 
up together with them in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air. Can anything be 
grander than this ? Can anything be more august ? Can anything be more solemn ? 
Can anything be more awe-inspiring? Is there anything more calculated to over- 
whelm with consternation the wicked ? Is there anything more fitted to create deep 
and universal alarm among the ungodly ? What, on the other hand, can be more 
inspii'iting to the believer? What more encouraging and comforting to the child of 
God? What more suitable to nerve to high effort and holy purpose than the prospect 
of being presented faultless in that day, and amid that assembly, and betore the 
presence at hia glory, with exceeding joy ? 

"A hope so peat and so Divine 
May trials well endure, 
And purge the soul from seme and sijl. 
As Christ himself is pure." 

IT. Thb object of hib coming. We may now reflect for a moment on the great 
purposes for which Christ shall come the second time. At first he came in weakness, 
but at his next coming he will take to him his great power and reign. At first he 
came in dishonour, born in a stable, cradled in a manger, being " despised and rejected 
of men ; " but then he shall come in dignity, and so that " every eye shall see him," 
every tongue confess him, and every knee bow before him. At first he came in a 
servile, suffering state ; but then in awful majesty and glory everlasting — in his own 
glory, and in the glory of his Father. At first he came to call sinners to repentance ; 
but then to summon each to his reward, be it recompense or retribution, and " to give 
every man according as his work shall be." It is true that the coming of the Son of 
nun described in the verses immediately before us has for its specific object the grand 



OH. xm. 1—37.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 224 

assemblage of his saints to meet lum ; the accessories of the resurrection, the trans- 
formation of the living, and the general judgment are left out of sight. From the 
tribulation connected with the fall of Jerusalem the Saviour had looked far forward into 
other days, when great changes, whether literal and cosmical, or figurative and political, 
shall precede and serve as precursors of the second coming of the Son of man. If the 
language is understood figuratively, the darkening of the sun may denote the eclipse of 
ecclesiastical authority ; that of the moon, the collapse of civil polity ; while the stars 
or potentates shall be falling or waning (the form of the future made up of substantive 
verb and participle, implying a more durable effect than the simple future). In the 
oarable of the fig tree, however, he reverts to the precursors of the dissolution of the 
Jewish state and the destruction of its capital ; and afiirnis that, as the tender leaf-buda 
of the fig tree signified the near approach of harvest-time (fltpos), so the signs already 
specified in an early part of this chapter indicated the fast-appniaching destruction of 
the sanctuary and city of Jerusalem. If, then, the statement of ver. 30, " that this 
generation shall not jiass, till all these things be done," be referred to the end of the 
Jewish state, the word •yei-eo retains its ordinary sense of generation or contemporary 
race, which some insist on. If, on the other hand, the end of the age or world be 
referred to, whether the coming of the Son of man be for the purpose of ushering in the 
millennium, that is, pre-millennial, or for the final winding up of all tnings, the word 
7e>'6ei must be understood as equivalent to yivos, race, that is, the people or nation of 
the Jews, or, according to some, the race of men in general, more especially the 
generation of the faithful. 

V. The diffbbbnt rBBLraos with which his coming is keoabded. The visit of 
some distinsuibhed person to our neighbourhood or to our habitation may, according 
to circumstances, awaken emotions of a very different or even diverse character. Our 
feelings in view of the expected visit will be either pleasant or painful, according to 
the character of the visitor or the object of his coming. If he comes as a friend to 
further our interests, to favour our fondly cherished hopes, and to confer on us certain 
benefits, we naturally hail his coming with delight and rejoice at the prospect of his 
speedy advent. If, on the contrary, we have reason to believe that his intentions are 
hostile, that he means to oppose our plans, that he has some unpleasant measure to 
enforce or some punishment to inflict, we just as naturally dread his arrival and recoil 
from his approach. With similarly opposite views and feelings, saints and sinners, 
believers and unbelievers, look forward to the coming of him to whom this passage 
referi. — J. J. G. 

Vers. 32 — 37. Parallel passages: Matt. xxiv. 36—51; Luke xxi. 34 — 36. — Pre- 
pirationfor Christ's coming. I. Transition from thb destruction of Jerusalem 
TO THB DAT OF JUDGMENT. Again our Lord passes from the typical event to the anti- 
typical consummation of all things — from the destruction of the holy city to the 
dissolution of things visible. The limitation of our Lord's knowledge with respect to 
" that day and that hour " must be understood of his human nature as the Son of man, 
in which he was subject to such other sinless conditions of humanity as increasing in 
wisdom, growing in stature, feeling hunger, thirst, lassitude, and the like ; or it did 
not come within the sphere of his prophetic office to reveal it, as it belonged to " the 
times or the seasons which the Father hath set within his own authority." Our Lord, 
according to Meyer, knew this /corck ler^a-ti/, i.e. with respect to possession, of which, 
however, in his humiliation he had divested himself; not Karh xpv<riy, in regard to 
use, viz. for revelation. 

n. The great events consequent on his coming. One of these events shall be 
the returrection of the dead. " Now," says the apostle, " is Christ risen from the 
dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept ; " but then shall be this world's 
great harvest-day. Then shall a shout be heard, so loud, so piercing, that it will reach 
the dull, cold ear of death ; the voice of the archangel shall re-echo through the dismal 
recesses of the tomb, and call to life the buried dead ; the trump of God shall resound 
through the caverns of earth and the caves of ocean, till earth and sea shall give up 
the dead that are in them. Then shall be fulfilled the saying of our Lord elsewhere 
rectrded, that " the hour is coming, in the which all that are in their graves shall 
hear the voice of the Son of God, and come forth ; they that have done good, to the 

%% ^lAItR— i^ Q 



m THE QOSFEL ACCUBDIKO TO ST. MARK. [oB. xm. 1-^7. 

Tesurrection of life; and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of condemnstimi.'' 
Further, on his coming at the day or hour here spoken of, the Son of man shall fudg« 
the world in righteousness. The dead, small and great, shall stand before him ; the 
judgment shall be set, and the books opened. All nations, and kindreds, and tongues, 
aud peoples shall be assembled at that bar of God ; " we must all appear before that 
judgment-seat of Christ, to give an account of the deeds done in the body, whether 
they be good or evil." The decisions of that day shall be final, allowing no alteration, 
no appeal, and no reversal. Not only so ; based on the unvarying principles of justice 
and equity, righteousness and truth, they shall commend themselves to the consciences 
of all concerned. The condemned and justified alike shall acquiesce in them ; sinners 
shall assent to them as just ; saints shall approve of them as gracious ; angels shall 
applaud them as worthy of the Judge; and all intelligences shall acknowledge them 
tu be as impartial as irreversible. 

III. The foueth PEACTicAii dirbction. The fourth great moral lesson of the 
chapter is watchfulness. This lesson our Lord insists on, repeating it with great 
earnestness, and conjoining with it the duty of prayerfulness : "Take ye he«d, 
watch and pray ; " " Watch ye therefore ; " and again, " Watch." The two duties of 
watchfulness and prayerfulness are frequently associated ; thus, " Watch and pray, lest 
ye enter into temptation." Both together represent Divine and human strength in 
co-operation with each other. If we watch without prayer, we depend on human strength, 
and dispense with Divine aid; if we pray without watching, we depend on Divine 
strength alone, and despise the human means of help which God himself has commanded 
us to employ. They are the two strong arms of defence against the evil one ; and we 
may not, we cannot, without serious dereliction of duty and gravest danger, part with 
either of them. This duty of watchfulness is enforced by a beautiful parabolic illustra- 
tion ; though it is not a formal parable, as the words supplied in the Common Version 
make it. Those words, " For the Son of man is," should be struck out ; equally 
unnatural is it to supply the words, " The kingdom of heaven is ; " neither is Kuinoel's 
mode of supplying the ellipsis by ttoiS any better ; while Euthymius, who seems to refer 
the words to Christ and to understand the future of the substantive verb, as though it 
were, " I shall be as a man setting out on a far journey," is even less satisfactory. In 
addition to this, aviSriiios, said of one " already abroad, or an absentee from his people," 
is confounded with inroSiniiiv, which signifies " going abroad." Fritzsche rightly explain! 
as follows : — " Ees ita habet ut — die Sache verhalt sich so wie," and compares therewith 
the Horatian use of ut si in the words, " Ut tibi si sit opus liquid! non amplius uma." 
So also the Revised Version, correcting both the errors of the Common Version, renders 
correctly : " Itis as when a man, sojourning in another country, having left his house, 
and given authority to his servants, to each one his work, commanded also the porter to 
watch." This translation helps us much in the right understanding of the illustration. 
The man is already abroad ; but before he went abroad, he, as a matter of course, left his 
house, having previously to leaving given authority to his servants in general to manage 
matters for him in his absence, and having appointed to each in particular his special 
work ; and when on the threshold, as it were, he gave a charge to the porter also to 
watch, and so be prepared for his return. 

IV. Kbasons for the watchfulness enjoined. Though there is no express appli- 
cation of the illustration, a circumstance which adds much to the ease and grace of 
the narrative, we are at no loss for, and find no difficulty in making, that application. 
The Master of the house is our Lord ; his disciples, in the first place, are the domestics 
whom he entrusted with the management of the household when he himself took his 
departure to the goodly land afar oflF, appointing each believer his own sphere of 
labour and the special duty he was bound to perform, and leaving a strict charge of 
watchfulness with the porter who kept the door; that is, either the ministry in general 
who are watchmen on the walls of Zion, or Peter in particular, to whom had been 
entrusted the power of the keys in opening the door of faith to Jew and Gentile. Nor 

do we thereby concede anything to the Romanist in reference to Peter's suprernacy 

■ rank which the apostle himself never claimed. Be this as it may, however, the duty 
of watchfulness is enjoined on all, (1) because the time of the Master's coming back ie 
mnknown. We know neither the day nor the hour of our Lord's return. No fellow- 
treature «»& tell ua; no minister nor man <mu inform us; uo angel c»u give u« aay 



m. xm. 1—37.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAli^. 227 

intimation ; no messenger from either world can bring us word. " Of that day and of 
that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of God." Now, though the coming of 
tlie Son of man is not to be confounded with death — for the two events are quite 
distinct — yet for all practical purposes, and as far as our personal interests are concerned, 
death is the coming of the Son of man to us individually ; for whether he come to us or 
he call us to him, it is virtually the same thing for us, as then our destiny is finally 
and for ever fixed. We are urged to watchfulness (2) because this event, which, though 
not the coming of the Son of man to the Church in its universality, is tantamount 
to his coming to the Christian in his individuality, is uncertain as to time. This great 
event may be near at hand while we least expect it. This day may be our last on earth, 
and our first in the spirit-world ; on this very night the soul may be required. This 
very day our lamp may lose its oil and go out in darkness ; this very day our taber- 
nacle may totter and tumble into dust ; this very day our wondrous harp, with its 
thousand strings, may go out of tune and lose its melody. " What is your life ? It is 
even a vapour, that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away." What is 
your lease of life ? It is the breath in your nostrils, and at any moment that breath 
may be withdrawn. In any case — 

• Determined are the days that fly 
Successive o'er thy head ; 
The uumber'd hour is on the winy 
That lays thee with the dead." 

Further, watchfulness is indispensable, because (3) at his coming he will deal with us 
separately and singly. We shall be assembled in the aggregate, but dealt with in 
detail. The great fact is as prominently stated, as it is positively sure, that we must 
each stand in his lot at the end of the days. You, reader, and I and all must soon 
give an account of our stewardship — ^must soon be reckoned with for the talents, 
whether ten, or five, or one, that God gave us ; whether we have buried them in the earth, 
or brought them forth employed, improved, and augmented ; whether we have wasted o\a 
Lord's goods, or used them in his service and for his glory ; whether we have occupied 
till the time of his coming, or loitered out our day of life. We arie required to be 
watchful, for (4) in the last great day each and all — the one and the many — shall stand 
face to face with the Judge of all the earth. If we pause and ponder the vastness of 
that crowd, we are almost overwhelmed by the thought. Let us think of all the people 
of a single nation being brought together ; what a crowd they would make I Let us 
think of all the subjects of a great empire being assembled at one place and at one 
time ; what an assembly that would be I Let us then think of all the iohabitants of 
one of the quarters of the globe being congregated ; what an immense mass-meeting 
would be thus formed I Yet the thought of the great congregation at the coming of the 
Son of man far outgoes all that. The assemblage which it implies, and which shall one 
day take place, shall consist, not only of the inhabitants of a province, or a nation, or 
an empire, or even a quarter of the globe, but shall comprehend the inliabitants of ail 
provinces, nations, empires, and quarters of the globe, down along the ages and throughout 
all the centuries of time. And yet not one in all that crowd shall be hidden from the eye 
of him that cometh in that day ; not one shall be able to evade his presence, not one 
escape his sentence, not one shall be so remote as to be unable to c*tch a glance of him, 
not one on whom his eye shall not rest. " Every eye shall see him 1 " — the eye that con- 
templated his goodness and his grace ; the eye that " beheld his glory, as of the only 
begotten of the Father, fuU of grace and truth ; " the eye that looked and longed for his 
appearing ; the eye, on the contrary, that looked only on the objects of sense and sin, 
the pomps and vanities of the world, and the follies of life ; the eye that never gazed 
upon the cross, or never cast more than a passing glance thereat, and then turned away 
in coldness or carelessness, or perhaps contempt ; the eye of Mend and follower ; the 
eye of foe and false professor. Oh, what a sight to the unpardoned sinner, to the god- 
less transgressor, to the swearer, to the sabbath-breaker, to the slanderer, to the 
adulterer, to the murderer, to the drunkard, to the liar, to the lewd and licentious, to 
the unholy and the unjust, to the impure and impenitent I Gladly would the wicked 
shut their eyes on that sight ; gladly would they sink into the bowels of the earth or 
fVe depths of ocean to escape the glance of that searching eyel Earnestly will they 



228 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xm. 1—37. 



pray, who never prayed before, for the mountains and rocks to fall on them and hide 
them from the face of the Judge. But no, that cannot be ; for it is added in another 
Bcripture, " They also that pierced him," We all, whether ministers or members of the 
Church of Christ, are bound to watchfulness — " What I say unto you I say unto all. 
Watch 1" — and that lest (5) we should be found among those that pierced him. This 
refers to his actual murderers in the first instance — the Jews that condemned him, the 
Bomans that crucified him, the scribes aad Pharisees that plotted against him, the 
priests and people that persecuted him, the passers-by that wagged the head, '.he men 
that scoffed him, and those that scourged him, and they that spat upon him; the fierce 
mob that cried, " Away with him 1 away with him I " the judge that condemned him, 
the disciple that betrayed him— all that imbrued their hands in his precious blood 
or had aught to do with his death. But we may sot stop here. Others have pierced 
him, too ; for we read of those who " crucify Christ afresh, and put him to an open 
shame." Ah I U there any of ourselves included in that number? Is there any of us 
who have pierced his heart by our sin, by our disobedience, by our ingratitude, by our 
backsliding, by our coldness, and by our carelessness? Ah! is there none of us to 
whom he can say, " See, here are the wounds with which I was wounded in the house 
of my friends " ? " Watch ye therefore I " is repeated once and again and a third time. 
While one of the terms used signifies to keep awake and remain sleepless, the other 
means to awake or arouse from sleepiness; and thus the sense seems to be, if the 
distinction is admitted, to guard against sleep overtaking us at the post of duty; or, if 
unhappily we have been overtaken by drowsiness, to rouse ourselves at once from our 
slumber and repent of our sinful somnolence. And all the more as we are left Ln such 
entire uncertainty and ignorance of the hour when the Master shall come and reckon 
with us in our individual capacity, and, if we are found culpable, condemn us with 
ihe wicked. That hour may be at any of the four watches of the night — nine o'clock, 
or twelve, or three, or six in the morning. So important is this lesson that our Lord, 
m St. Matthew's Gospel, enforces it by two parables — that of the virgins and that of 
the talents ; the former inculcating watchfulness over the spirit, and probably implied 
in ver. 36 of the present chapter; the latter quickening faithfulness in duty, and 
seemingly epitomized in the two preceding verses of thii same chapter. 

V. Other lessonb of the chapter. 1. The truth of Scripture. Besides the 
lessons already noticed, there are others to which we can only advert. The lessons 
scattered through this chajiter are like flowers in a summer field, Another of these is 
the truth of Scripture. " Heaven and earth shall pass away." The frame of nature, 
stable as it now seems, has in it the elements of change. There are changes in the 
geological strata of the earth beneath us, in the sky above us, in the natural world 
around us. Great changes have already taken place in earth and sea and sky ; great 
physical changes are daily going on ; still greater changes may be expected to occur in 
time to come. The surest inductions of science point to such changes and collapses. 
" But my words," said our Lord, " shall not pass away." His words have passed into 
the spiritual fibre of his people, living in their lives, exhibited in their conduct, illus- 
trated by their character, and consoling them in the hour of dissolution. Statesmen 
have been guided by them, lawgivers have framed laws by them, philosophers have 
made more use of them in building up their systems than they have been willing to 
acknowledge to others, or have even been conscious of, themselves. The words of 
Christ have for eighteen hundred years or more blended with the inspirations of tha 
poet ; they have almost moved in the marble of the statuary, and spoken from the 
canvas of the painter. Time has not exhausted their fulness ; no taint has touched 
their freshness, nor has aught of their fragrance decayed. B'urther, the inspiration of 
Scripture is safely inferred from the statement in ver. 11, " It is not ye that speak, but 
the Holy Ghost," compared with St. Luke's parallel statement, " I will give you a 
mouth,** the expression, " and wisdom," the matter to be expressed. 2. The publicaiitm 
of the gospel among all nations. The gospel must first be published. Here was tha 
great end to be attained. We have seen how this was virtually accomplished before 
the fall of Jerusalem ; but the world has widened its boundaries since then. Con- 
tinents and islands have been added to it; navigation and travel have enlarged 
geography, and geography has added to the dimensions of the globe, or at least has 
reT«»l«i ttose before unknown. And still the gospel is prewhed, and shftll be, 



. XIV. 1— ?2.1 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIKG tO ST. MAKlL 



'm 



"Jesus shall reign where'er the sun 
Doth his successive journeys run ; 
His kingdom stretch from shore to shore. 
Till Boons shall wax and wane no moi«.' 

3. Wateh/ulneu the lesson of the ages. Scenes similar to those that preeedMl Ckrist's 
coming at the fall of Jerusalem may be repeated, and repeated over a wider area and 
on a grander scale. Then, as before, there may be wars — some actual, others rumoured — 
great international conflicts, and fatal internecine strife ; then, as before, there may be 
physical catastrophes, providential visitations, as the travail-throes of greater events — 
the travail-pangs in the genesis of the new order of things ; then, as before, there may 
be persecutions, prolonged and repeated, and the severance of the nearest ties of 
kinship, with universal hatred for the Saviour's sake. Yet, through all, men must 
possess their souls in patience, or rather, according to the correcter reading, gain their 
souls, their real life, by patience— patient endurance, not violent resistance. Men may 
be worn with watching, pining for peace, and aweary for rest; still the same lesson hai 
to be repeated, the same duty practised: "What I say unto you I say unto all, 
W»t«h I " Watchfulness is still the duty of the Chtirch and of the Christian. 

"Tet saints their watch are keeping; 
Their cry goes up, 'How long?' 
And soon the night of weeping 
Shall be the mom of song." 

9.J.Q. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTEB XIV. 



V«r. 1. — Kow after two days was the feast 
of the pasBOver and the nnleavened bread; 
literally, the passover and the unleavened (ji 
iriffxa Kal ra &(vfj.a). It was one and the 
same festival. The killing of the Paschal 
lamb took place on the first of the seven 
days during which the festival lasted, and 
during the whole of which they used un- 
leavened bread. Josephus describes it as 
" the festival of the unleavened, called 
Phaska by the Jews." The chief priests and 
the scribes. St. Matthew (xxvi. 3) says, " The 
chief priests and the elders of the people." 
The two clfiBses in the Sanhedrim who 
actually combined to put our Lord to death 
were those here mentioned by St. Mark. 
They sought how they might take him with 
subtlety (ev S6K<f), and kill him. It is, 
literally, they VMire seeking (JiSiTovv). The 
verb with its tense implies continuous and 
eager desire. They uspd subtlety, because 
they feared lest he should escape out of their 
hands. Moreover they feared the people, 
leot they should fight for him, and not 
sufEei him to be taken. 

V«r. 2. — For they said (iXfyov yitf)~ 
literiJIy, for they were saying — Not during 
the feast, lest haply there shall be a tumult 
of the people. The same cause induced 
them to avoid the time of the feast. The 
feast brou^t a great multitude of Jews to 
Jemealem, amongst whom would be many 
who had received bodily or spiritual benefits 
jbom C^ist, and who therefore, at least, 



worshipped him as a Prophet; and the 
rulers of the people feared lest these should 
rise in his defence. Their first intention, 
therefore, was not to destroy him until after 
the close of the Paschal feast; but they 
were overruled by the course of events, all 
ordered by God's never-failing providence. 
The sudden betrayal of our Lord by Judas 
led them to change their minds. For when 
they found that he was actually in their 
hands, they resolved to crucify him forth- 
with. And thus the Divine purpose was 
fulfilled that Christ should suffer at that 
particular time, and so the type be satisfied. 
For the lamb slain at the Passover was a 
type of the very Paschal Lamb to be sacri- 
ficed at that particular time, in the pre- 
determined purpose of God ; and to be lifted 
up upon the cross for the redemption of the 
world. St. Matthew (xxvi. 3) tells us that 
they were gathered together " unto the court 
of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas." 
It was necessary to state his name, because 
the high priests were now frequently 
changed by the Roman power. 

Ver. 3. — And while he was in Bethany, in 
the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at 
meat, there came a woman having an ala- 
baster onise {a\(i0a<rrfioy) — literally, an tda- 
haster; as we say, "a glass," of a vessel 
made of glass — of ointment of spikenard 
very costly {jxipov vipSov tkttkc^i to\v- 
Te?u)vs) ; and die brake the omse, and poured 
it over his head. This anointing of our 
Lord appears to have taken piaae on ths 
Satoiday befoM Pain Sn&day (••• Jobi^ 



taii adstEii AOCoftDIKG To ST. maM. [ck. tiv. i-?2. 



xii 1), The anointing mentioned by St. 
Luke (vii. 36) eyidently has reference to 
■ome previous occasion. The narrative here 
and in St. Matthew and St. John would 
lead UB to the conclusion that this was a 
feast given by Simon — perhaps in grateful 
acknowledgment of the miracle which had 
been wrought upon Lazarus. He is called 
" Simon the leper." probably because he had 
been a leper, and had been healed by Christ, 
although he still retained the name of 
"leper," to distinguish him from others 
named Simon, or Simeon, a common name 
amongst the Jews. There came a woman. 
This woman, we learn from St. John (lii. 
2, 3), was Mary, the sister of Martha and 
Lazarus. The vessel, or cruse, which she 
had with her was made of alabaster, a kind 
of soft, smooth marble, which could easily 
be scooped out so as to form a receptacle for 
ointment, which, according to Pliny (' Nat. 
Hist.,' ziii. 3), was best preserved in vessels 
njade of alabaster. The vessel would pro- 
bably be formed with a long narrow neck, 
which could easily be broken, or crushed 
(the word in the original is avpTpitfiaaa) so 
as to allow of a free escape for the unguent. 
The ointment was made of spikenard {vdpSov 
irHTTiKijs). The Vulgate has nardi spicati. 
If this is the true interpretation of the 
word mo-TiK^s, it would mean that this oint- 
ment was made from a bearded plant men- 
tioned by Pliny ('Nat. Hist.,' xii. 12), who 
says that the ointment made from this plant 
was most precious. The plant was called 
by Galen "nardi spica." Hence irio-TiK^i' 
would mean " genuine" ointment — ointment 
made from the flowers of the choicest kind 
of plant. Pliny (' Nat. Hist ,' xii. 26) says 
that there was an inferior article in circula- 
tion, which he calls " pseudo-nard." The 
Syriao Peshito Version uses an expression 
which means the principal, or best kind of 
ointment. The anointing of the head would 
be the more usual mark of honour. It 
would seem most probable that Mary first 
wiped the feet of Jesus, wetting them with 
her tears, and ^hen wiping off the dust, and 
then anointing them; and that she then 
proceeded to break the neck of the cruse, 
and to pour its whole conteuts on his head. 

Ver. 4. — But there were some that had 
indignation — the word in the original ii 
i.jttvaKToSi'Tes, ached with vexation — among 
themselves. St. Mark says, " there were 
some;" avoiding any more particular men- 
tion of them. St. Matthew (xxvi. 8) says 
that the disciples generally had indigna- 
tion. The murmuring seems to have been 
general. At length it found a definite ex- 
pression in Judas Iscariot (see John xii. 4), 

Ver. 5. — For this ointment might have 
been sold for above three hundred pence, and 
g^veu to the poor. Three hundred pence 



would amount to about £10 12s. 6d. of Eng. 
lish money. It appears from St. John (xiii. 
29) that the wants of the poor were carefully 
attended to by our Lord and his disciples. 
And they murmured against her {iveppt/iavra 
airri) ; another very expressive verb in the 
original, they growled at her; rebuked her 



Ver. 6. — It appears from St. John (xii. 7) 
that our Lord here addressed himself 
pointedly to Judas in the words, Let her 
alone ; . . . she hath wrought a good work on 
me, a work worthy of all praise and honour. 
"What," says Cornelius k Lapide, "what 
more noble, than to anoint the feet of him 
who is both God and man ? Who would not 
count himself happy, if it were permitted to 
him to touch the feet of Jesus and to kiss 
them?" 

Ver. 7. — ^For ye have the poor always with 
yon, and whensoever ye will ye can (SivaaBe) 
do them good ; but me ye have not always. 
The little clause, " whensoever ye will ye 
can do them good," occurs only in St. Mark. 
It is as though our Lord said, " The world 
always abounds with poor; therefore you 
always have it in your power to help them ; 
but within a week I shall have gone from 
you, after which you will be unable to per- 
form any service like this for me ; yea, no 
more to see, to hear, to touch me. Suffer, 
then, this woman to perform this ministry 
now for me, which after six days she will 
have no other opportunity of doing." • 

Ver. 8. — She hath done what &e oould. 
She seized the opportunity, which might 
not occur again, of doing honour to her 
Lord by anointing him with her very best. 
Our Lord might have excused this action, 
and have praised it as a practical evidence 
of her gratitude, her humility, and her love 
for him. But instead of dwelling on these 
things, he said, She hath anointed my body 
aforehand for the burying. Our Lord here, 
of course, alludes to the spices and oint- 
ments with which the Jews wrapped up the 
bodies of their dead before their burial. 
Not that this was what Mary intended. 
She could hardly have dreamed of Ids death 
and burial so near at hand. But she was 
moved by the Holy Spirit to do this, at this 
particular time, as though in anticipation o( 
his death and burial. 

Ver. 9. — Wheresoever the gospel shall be 
preached throughout the whole world, that 
also which this woman hath done shall be 
spoken of for a memorial of her (cis hv7iii6(tv 
vov aiirris). " Mnemosyn^ was the mother 
of the Muses, and so called because, before 
the invention of writing, a retentive memory 
was of the utmost value in every effort of 
literary genius " (Dr. Morison on St. Mark). 
When our Lord delivered this prediction, 
none of the GtospeU had been written f wit 



to. Xiv. 1—72.] Tnfi GOSPEL ACOORDINCJ TO ST. MARK. 



231 



had the gospel teen preached at this time 
throughout the then kno-vrn world. Now It 
has been published for more than eighteen 
centuries ; and wherever it ia proclaimed, 
this deed of Mary's is published with it, in 
continual memory of her, and to her last- 
ing honour. 

Ver. 10. — And Judaa Isearlot, he that was 
one of the twelve {d els rav StSSeKa), went 
away unto the chief priests, that he might 
deliver him unto them. The betrayal fol- 
lows immediately after the anointing by 
Mary. We may suppose that the other dis- 
ciples who had murmured on account of this 
waste of the ointment, were brought to their 
senses by our Lord's rebuke, and felt its 
force. But with Judas the case was very 
different. The rebuke, which had a salu- 
tary effect on them, only served to harden 
him. He had lost one opportunity of gain ; 
he would seek another. In his cupidity and 
wickedness he resolves to betray his Master, 
and sell him to the Jews, go while the 
chief priests were plotting how they might 
destroy him, they found an apt and unex- 
pected instrument for their purpose in one 
of his own disciples. Judas came to them, 
and the vile and hateful birgain was con- 
cluded. It marks the tremendous iniquity 
of the transaction that it was " one of the 
twelve " who betrayed him — not one of the 
seventy, but one of those who were in the 
closest intimacy and nearness to him. 

Ver. 11. — And they, when they heard it, 
were glad, and promised to give him money. 
And he sought (ef^rci) — lie was seeking ; 
he made it his business to arrange how the 
infamous plot might be managed — ^how he 
might conveniently deliver him unto them 
(ttSis evKalpas airhv irapaS^) ; literally, how 
at a convenient season he might betray him. 
And they, when they heard it, were glad; glad, 
because they saw the prospect of the ac- 
complishment of their wishes ; glad, because 
it was " one of the twelve " who covenanted 
to betray him. They promised to give him 
money. St. Matthew (xxvi. 15) tells us the 
amount, namely, thirty pieces of silver, ac- 
cording to the prophecy of Zeohariah (xi. 
12), to which St. Matthew evidently refers. 
These pieces of silver were sliekels of the 
sanctuary, worth about three shillings each. 
This would make the whole amount about 
£4 10s. of our money ; less than half the 
value of the precious ointment with which 
Mary had anointed him. Some commen- 
tators, however, think that this was ordy au 
instalment of what they promised him if 
he completed his treasonable design. How 
he might conveniently deliver him unto them. 
St. Luke (xxii. 6) explains this by saying, 
" in the absence of the multitude ; " that 
ia, when the people were not about him, 
»nd wbes he was in privtte with bia dis- 



ciples. And 80 he betrayed him at night, 
when he was alone with hia disciples in tha 
Garden of Orethsernane. 

Ver. 12. — And on tha first day of un- 
leavened bread, when they sacrificed the 
pasBover, his disciples said unto him, Where 
wilt thou that we go and make ready that 
thou mayest eat the passover t The flrat day 
of unleavened bread would begin on the 
evening of the Thursday (the 14th day ot 
the month Nisan). Where wilt thou that we 
prepare t They do not inquire in what city 
or town. The Passover could not be sacri- 
ficed anywhere but in Jerusalem. Tlie 
question was in what house it was to be 
prepared. 

Ver. 13. — And ha sendeth two of his dis- 
ciples. St. Luke (xxii. 8) informs us that 
these two were Peter and John. It is chii- 
racteristio of St. Mark's Gospel throughout 
that Peter is never mentioned ofteuer than 
is necessary. Go into the city, and there 
shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher 
of water. The bearing of the pitcher of 
water was not without its meaning. It was 
a solemn religious act preparatory to the 
Passover. This man bearing a pitcher of 
water was not the master or owner of the 
house. The owner is dist;inguished after- 
wards by the name oiKoSeViroTrjs, or " good- 
man of the house." The owner must, there- 
fore, have been a man of some substance, 
and probably a friend if not a disciple of 
our Lord. Tradition says that this was tho 
house of John whose surname was Mark ; 
and that it was in this house that the dis- 
ciples were assembled on the evening of 
our Lord's resurrection, and where, also, 
they received the miraculous gifts of the 
Holy Spirit, on the day of Pentecost. It 
was to this house that Peter betook himself 
when he was delivered by the angel out of 
prison. Hence it was known, as one of the 
earliest places of Christian worship, by the 
name of " Cosnaoulum Sion ; " and here was 
built a church, called the Church of Sion. 
It was the oldest church in Jerusalem, and 
was called by St. Cyril, "the upper church 
of the apostles." (See Joseph Mode, p. 322.) 
Ver. 14. — The Master saith. Where is my 
guest-chamber (/canJA-u/ta /joC) ; literally, my 
lodging. 

Ver. 15. — And he will himself show you 
a large upper room furnished and ready. Ha 
himself, that is, the goodman of the house ; 
perhaps John Mark. This upper room was 
furnished and ready {iaTpafiivov eTot/ioii); 
furnished, that is, with table and concha* 
and tapestry, and in all respects ready far 
the purpose. 

Ver. 10. — And they made ready the pass- 
over. This would consist in obtaining tho 
Paschal lamb, and taking it to the temple 
W be aaorifioed by tke priests. It woh14 



m 



TSE gospel ACCOftblNG TO St. MAEK. [oh. xiv. 1— f 2. 



tken be bronght to the house to be cooked ; 
tnd the unleavened bread, the bitter herbs, 
and the wine would have to be provided, and 
the water for purification. After all these 
preparations had been made, the two dis- 
oiples would return to tlieir Master. 

Ver. 17. — And when it was evening ho 
eometh with the twelve. It was in the 
evening that the lamb was to be eaten. 
Peter and John having returned from their 
preparation, the twelve (including Judas 
Iscariot) all went back with their Master to 
Jerusalem. 

Ver. 18. — Verily I say unto you, One of 
you shall betray me, even he that eateth 
with me (d iaBiay ner' ifiov). Much had 
doubtless happened before our Lord said 
this; but St. Mark only records the im- 
portant circumstances. These words of our 
Lord were uttered with great solemnity. 
The presence of the traitor was a burden 
upon his spirit, and cast a gloom over thii 
usually joyous festival. A question here 
arises whether Judas remained to partake 
of the Holy Communion when our Lord 
instituted it. The greater number of the 
Fathers, and amongst them Origen, St. Cyril, 
St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and Bcde, 
ccasider that he was present ; and Diony- 
siuB says that our Lord's words to him, 
" That thou doest,do quickly," were intended 
to separate him from the rest of the twelve 
as one who had partaken unworthily ; and 
that then it was that Satan entered into 
him, and impelled him onwards to thia 
terrible sin. 

Ver. 19. — They began to he sorrowful, and 
to say unto him one by cue, Is it I ? The 
disciples were naturally disposed to be joy- 
ful at this great festival. But their Master's 
sorrow and his words, and the solemnity 
with which they were uttered, cast a sliadow 
over the whole company ; and the disciples 
began to be sorrowful. The words, " And 
another said. Is it I ? " are omitted by the 
best authorities. 

Ver. 20. — And he said unto them, It is one 
of the twelve, he that dippeth with me in 
the dish. St. Mark here uses the present 
participle (6 4ii.paTrT6ij.(ms), bringing the 
action close to the time when he was speak- 
ing. St. Matthew (xxvi. 23) has (4 4fiPcaf/as') 
" he that dipped his hand," using the aorist 
form. St. Mark's form is the more graphic. 
The dish probably contained a sauce culled 
eharoteth, into which they dipped their food 
before eating it. The following appears to 
have been the order of the events : — First, 
our Lord, before he instituted the Holy 
Saoiamentof the Eucharist, foretold that he 
would be betrayed by one of his disciples ; 
but only in general terms. Then came the 
eager question from them, " Is it I ? " Then 
Quilt answered that the traitor was he who 



should dip his hand together vrith him in 
the dish. But this did not bring it home 
to the individual, because several who sat 
near to him were able to dip with him in 
the dish. So that our Lord had as yet only 
obscurely and indefinitely pointed out the 
traitor. Then he proceeded to institute 
" the Lord's Supper ; " after which he again 
intimated (Luke xxii. 21) that "the hand of 
him that betrayed him was with him on the 
table." Upon this, St. Peter hinted to St. 
John, who was "reclining in Jesus' bosom," 
that he should ask him to say definitely 
and by name who it was that should betray 
him. Our Lord then said to St. John, " He 
it is, for whom I shall dip the sop, and givo 
it him" (John xiii. 26). Our Lord thea 
dipped the sop, and gave it to Judas Iscariot. 
Then it was that our Lord eaid to Judas, 
"That thou doest, do quickly" (8 iroielj, 
■noiriaov Tixiov) (John xiii. 27). Then Judaa 
went straightway to the house of Caiaphaa, 
and procured the band of men and officen 
for the completion of his horrible design. 

Ver. 21. — For the Son of man goeth 
(67ra76i)— goeth, departeth from this mortal 
scene: the reference is, of course, to his 
death — even as it is written of him ; as, for 
example, in Ps. xxii. and Isa. xli. It was 
foreordained by God that he was to suffer 
as a victim for the sins of the whole world. 
But this predestined purpose of God did 
not make the guilt any the less of those 
who brought the Saviour to his cross. 
Good were it for that man if he had not 
been bom. The Greek is Ka\hv %v airS, 4 
ovK iyevvfiOr] & &v6pwTTos eKeivos ', literally, 
good were it for him, if that man had not 
been born. Better not to have lived at all 
than to have lived and died ill. Existence 
is no blessing, but a curse, to him who con- 
sciously and wilfully defiats the purpose of 
his existence, St. Matthew (xxvL 25) here 
introduces Jndas as asking the question, 
" Is it I, Kabbi ? " And our Lord answers 
him affirmatively, " Thou hast said." This 
was probably said in a low voice. Had it 
been said so as to be heard by oDiers, such 
as Peter and John, they might have risen at 
onoe to inflict summary vengeance upon the 
apostate traitor. 

Ver. 22. — The last clause of this verse 
should be read thus : Take ye : this is my body 
(AajSere' Tovr6 iari T^ aw^ fiov). The in- 
stitution of this Holy Sacrament took place 
at the close of the Paschal supper, but while 
they were yet at the table. The bread which 
our Lord took would most likely be un- 
leavened bread. But this does not surtly 
constitute a reason why unleavened bread 
should be used ordinarily in the celebration 
of the Holy Communion. The direction ot 
the Prayer-book of the English Church ia 
wise and practical, " It shall suffice that Um 



6to.xrr.l— 12.] THi! GOSPEt ACCOEDIlTO TO St. HaSK. 



m 



Broad be Buch as is uanal to be eaten." 
This M my body ; that is, sacramentally. St. 
Augustine (' Sermo.,' 272) says, " How is the 
bread hi» body f and the cup, op that which 
the cup eontains, how is that his blood? 
These are, therefore, called sacraments, be- 
cause in them one thing is seen while 
another thing is understood" (quoted by Dr. 
Morison, p. 392). 

Yer. 23.— And he took a oup. There is 
no definite article either here or in St. 
Matthew. 

Ver. 24. — ^This is my blood of the oove- 
nant. There is not sufficient authority for 
the retaining of the word " new " (icaivris) 
in the text. 

Ver. 25. — I will no more drink {ouk4ti 
•u fiii irlu) of the fruit of the vine, until that 
day when I drink it new in the kingdom 
ef God. It is observable that our Lord 
here calls the wine " the fruit (yhvnfia) of 
the Tine," after he ha« spoken of it as 
■acramentally his blood. Our Lord here 
refers to the time of the regeneration of all 
things, when the heavenly kingdom shall 
appear in the fulness of its glory; and when 
his disciples, wlio now feed upon him sacra- 
mentally and by faith, shall then eat at his 
table in his kingdom, and driuk of the 
river of his pleasures for ever. 

Ver. 26. — And when they had sung a 
hymn, they went out unto the mount of 
Olives. Some suppose that this was one 

E articular hymn out of the Jewish service- 
ooks appointed for use at the close of the 
Paschal supper. The word in the Greek is 
simply v/iv^jtravTes. What they sang was 
more probably the Hallel, consisting of six 
jisalius, from Ps. cxiii. to Ps. cxviii. in- 
clusive. They went out unto the Mount of 
Olives. It was our Lord's custom, in these 
last ilays vi his earthly life, to go daily to 
Jerusalem, and teach in the temple, and in 
the evening to return to Bethany and sup ; 
and then after supper to retire to the Mount 
of Olives, and there to spend the night in 
prayer (Luke ixi. 37). But on this occa- 
sion he did not return to Bethany. He had 
supped in Jerusalem. Besides, he knew 
that liis hour was come. So he voluntarily 
put himself into the way oi the traitor 
(John xviil. 2). 

Ver. 27.— All ye shall be offended. The 
words which follow in the Authorized Ver- 
sion, " because of me this night," are not to 
be found in the best manuscripts and ver- 
sions. They appear to have been imported 
from St. Matthew. Shall be offended {(TKav 
Sa\uTe^cre<rBe); literally, ihall be caused to 
$tumble. Our Lord was to prove "a stone 
of stumbling" to many, not excluding his 
own disciples. Evefl they, under the in- 
fluence of terror, would for a time lose con- 
tldeuoe and hope in him For it it written, 



I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered abroad. This is a quota- 
tion firom Zechariah (xiii. 7), " Awake, O 
sword, against my Shepherd, and against 
the man that is my Fellow, saith the Lord of 
hosts : smite the Shepherd." This passage 
brings out in a remarkable manner the 
Divine agency in the death of Christ. The 
iheep shall be scattered abroad. The dis- 
ciples all forsook him and fled, when they 
saw him actually in the hands of his enemies. 
They felt doubtful for tlie moment whether 
he was indeed the Son of God. "They 
trusted that it was he who should redeem 
Israel;" but now their hopes gave way to 
fear and doubt. They fled hither and 
thither llks frightened sheep. But God 
gathered them together again so that when 
our Lord rose from the dead, he found them 
all in the same place ; and then he revived 
their faith and courage. Our Lord and his 
disciples had no settled home or friends in 
Jerusalem ; so they had no other place to 
flee to than that upper cliamber, where, not 
long before, Christ had kept the Passover 
with them. The owner of that house was 
a friend ; so thither they went, and there 
Christ appeared to them after his resurreo- 
tion. 

Ver. 28. — Howbeit, after I am raised up, 
I wiU go before you into Galilee. This our 
Lord said to reassure them. Galilee was 
more like home to them than Jerusalem, and 
they would there be less afraid of the un- 
believing Jews. 

Ver. 29. — But Peter said unto him, Al- 
though all shall be offended, yet will not I. 
Our Lord had just distinctly stated that 
they would all be offended, and therefore 
these words of St. Peter were very pre- 
sumptuous. Conscious ot his own infirmi- 
ties, he ought to have said, " I know that 
through my own infirmity this may easily 
happen. Nevertheless, I trust to thy mercy 
and goodness to save me." Just such is the 
Christian's daily experience. We often thiak 
that we are strong in the faith, strong in 
purity, strong in patience. But when temp- 
tation arises, we falter and fall. The true 
remedy against temptation is the conscious- 
ness of our own weakness, and supplication 
for Divine strength. 

Ver. 30. — Venly I say unto thee, that thou 
to-day, eveu this night, before the cock crow 
twice, Shalt deny me thrice. The day had 
begun. It began at six in the evening. It 
was already advanced. This second crowing 
of the cock is mentioned by St. Mark only ; 
and it forms an additional aggravation of 
Peter's sin. The " cookcrowing " was a 
term used for one of the divisions of tl.e 
night (see ch. xiir. 35). But it appears that 
there were three times at which the cock- 
crowing might be expected — namely, (1) 



m 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [cH. Xtv. 1— ?2. 



early in the night, between eleven and 
twelve; (2) betwein one and two; and (3) 
between five and six. The two cockcrow- 
iugs here referred to would be the two last 
of the three here mentioned. It would 
probably be about 2 a.m., when the first 
trial of our Lord took place in the house of 
Caiaphas. 

Ver. 81. — But he spake exceeding Tebe- 
mently (^fK-repuraSis ixd\ei). If I must die 
with thee (Hv /ie Sep), I will not deny thee. 
The right reading (_ix<i\(i, imperfect) im- 
plies tliat he kept asserting over and over 
again. He was, no doubt, sincere in all this, 
but he had yet to learn his own weakness. 
St. Hilary says on this, "Peter was so 
carried away by the fervour of his zeal and 
love for Christ, that he regarded neither the 
weakness of his own flesh nor the truth of 
his Master's word." 

Ver. 32. — And they come (cpxovTai) — here 
again St. Mark's present gives force to the 
narrative— unto a place which was named 
Gethsemane. A place (x^P^o") is, literally, 
an enclosed piece of ground, generally with 
a cottage upon it. Josephus tells us that 
these gardens were numerous in the suburbs 
of Jerusalem. St. Jerome says that " Geth- 
semane was at the foot of the Mount of 
Olives." St. John (xviii. 1) calls it a 
garden, or orchard (Kijiror). The word 
" Gethsemane " means literally " the place 
of the oUue-presi" whither the olives which 
abounded on the slopes of the mountain 
were brought, in order that the oil contained 
in them might be pressed out. The exact 
position of Gethsemane is not known ; 
although there is an enclosed spot at the 
foot of the western tlope of the Mount of 
Olives which is called to this day El Jes- 
mdniye. The real Gethsemane cannot be 
far from this spot. Our Lord resorted to 
this place for retirement and prayer, not as 
desiring to escape the death that awaited 
him. It was well known to be his favourite 
resort ; so that he went there, as though to 
put himself in the way of Judas, who would 
naturally seek him there. Sit ye here, 
while I pray. St. Matthew (xxvi. 36) says, 
"While I go yonder and pray." 

Ver. 33. — It appears that our Lord sepa- 
rated liimseli' from all the disciples except 
Peter and James and John, and then the 
bitter agony began. He began to be greatly 
amazed, and sore troubled ^^KdafiPeiireai /cal 
aSrifioveTj/). These two Greek verbs are as 
adequately expressed above as seems possible. 
The first implies "utter, extreme omaze- 
njent ; " if the second has for its root 
K5i)/ios, "not at home," it implies the 
anguish of the soul struggling to free itself 
from the body under the pressure of intense 
mental distress. The three chosen disciples 
were allowed to be witnesses of this awful 



anguish. They had been fortified to en- 
dure the sight by the glories of the trans- 
figuration. It would have been too much for 
the faith of the rest. But these three wit- 
nessed it, that they might learn themselves, 
and be able to teach others, that the way to 
glory is by suffering. 

Ver. 34. — None but he who bore those 
Borrows can know what they were. It was 
not the apprehension of the bodily torments 
and the bitter death that awaite>< him, all 
foreknown by him. It was the inconceiv- 
able agony of the weight of the sins o( 
men. The Lord was thus laying "upon 
him the iniquity of us alL" This, and this 
alone, can explain it. My sonl is exceeding 
sorrowful even unto death. Every word 
carries the emphasis of an overwhelming 
grief. It was then that " the deep waters 
came in," even unto his soul. " What," 
says Cornelius ii Lapide, " must have been 
the voice, the countenance, the expreisieu, 
as he uttered those awful words I " 

Ver. 35. — Our Lord now separated him- 
self, though apparently, as St. Luke (xxii. 
41) says, only " about a stone's cast " from 
the three disciples, and threw himself on 
the ground in mortal agony, and prayed 
that this hour of his supreme mental 
anguish might, if gpssible, pass from him. 

Ver. 36. — And ne said, Abba, Father. 
Some commentators suppose that our Lord 
only used the Hebrew or Aramaic word 
" Abba," and tliat St. Mark adds the Greek 
and Latin synonym (ttot^jp) for the benefit 
of those to whom he was writing. But it is 
far more natural to conclude that St. Mark 
is here taking his narrative from an eye 
and ear witness, St. Peter ; and that both tl}6 
words were uttered by him ; so that he thus, 
in his agony, cried to God in the name of the 
whole human family, the Jew first, and also 
the Gentile. We can quite underotand why 
St. Matthew, writing to Jews, gives only 
the Hebrew word. All things are possible 
unto thee. Speaking absolutely, with God 
nothing is impossible. But the Deity is 
himself bound by his own laws ; and hence 
this was impossible, consistently with his 
purposes of mercy for the redemption of 
the world. The Lord himself knew this. 
Therefore he does not ask for anything con- 
trary to the will of his Fatlier. But it was 
the natural craving of his humanity, which, 
subject to the supreme will of God, desired 
to be delivered from this terrible load, 
Eemove this cup from me. The " cup," both 
in Holy Scripture and in profane writers, is 
taken to signify that lot or portion, whetiiei 
good or evil, which is appointed for us by 
God. Hence St. John is frequently repre- 
sented as holding a cup. Howbeit, not what 
I will, but what thou wilt. Our Lord hai 
no sooner offered his conditional prayer tbav 



ett.xtv.l-t2.] ME GOSPEL AcCOfeWNG *0 St. MAtlft. 



m 



he sutordinates it to the will of God. St. 
Luke (xxii. 42) here says, " Nevertheless 
not my will, but thine, be done." Henee it 
appears that there was not, as the Monothe- 
litestaught,oue will, partly human and partly- 
Divine, in Christ ; but there were two dis- 
tinct wills, one human and the other Divine, 
both residing in the one Christ ; and it was 
by the subjecting of his human will to the 
Divine that he wrqught out our redemption. 

Ver. 37. — And he cometh, and flndeth 
them Bleeping, and saith unto Peter, Simon, 
sleepest thou ? Couldest thou not watch one 
hour f St. Luke says (xxii. 45) that they 
were " sleeping for sorrow." So on the 
Mount of Transfiguration he says (ii. 32) 
that they were " heavy with sleep." This 
rebuke, which St. Mark tells us here was 
pointedly addressed to Peter, seems to 
glance at his earnest protestations of fidelity 
made not long before; And our Lord calls 
him by his old name of Simon. In St. 
Matthew (xxvi. 40) it is less pointed; for 
til ere, while our Lord looks at Peter, he 
addresses them all. " He saith unto Peter, 
What, could not ye watch with me one 
hour?" This is just one of those giaphio 
Jittle incidents which we may suppose St. 
Mark to have received directly from St. 
Peter. 

Ver. 38. — ^Watch and pray, that ye enter 
not into temptation. The great temptation 
of the disciples at that moment was to deny 
Christ under the influence of fear. And so 
our Lord gives here the true remedy against 
temptation of every kind ; namely, watch- 
fulness and prayer — watchfulness, against 
the craft tmd subtlety of the devil or man ; 
and prayer, for the Divine help to over- 
come. The spirit indeed is willing, but the 
flesh is weak. Here our Lord graciously 
finds excuses for them. It is as though he 
said, " I know that in heart and mind you 
are ready to cleave to me, even though the 
Jews should threaten you with death. But 
I know also that your flesh is weak. Pray, 
then, that the weakness of the flesh may not 
overcome the strength of the spirit." Sti 
Jerome says, " In whatever degree we trust 
to the ardour of the spirit, in the same 
degree ought we to fear because of the 
infirmity of the flesh." 

Ver. 39. — Saying the same words. The 
repetition of the same words shows his fixed 
determination to submit to the will of his 
heavenly Father. Although the hiunan 
xiature at first asserted itself in the prayer 
that the cup might pass from him ; yet ulti- 
mately the human will yielded to the 
Divine. He desired to drmk this cup of 
oitterness appointed for him by the will of 
3od ; for his supreme desire was that the 
will of God might be done^ , i , „ 
yer. 10. — And again be came, au4 found 



them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy 
(KaTaPapvi/dfieyoi) ; literally, weighed down. 
They had not deliberately yielded them- 
selves to sleep ; but an oppressive languor, 
the effect of great sorrow, had come over 
them, so that they could not watch as they 
desired to do ; but by an involuntary action 
they ever and anon slumbered. They wist 
not what to answer him. They bad no 
excuse, save that which he himself had 
found for them. 

Ver. 41. — And he cometh the third time, 
and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take 
your rest : it is enough (awex^t) ; the hour is 
come. Some have thought that our Lord 
here uses the language of irony. But it is 
far more consistent with his usual con- 
siderate words to suppose that, sympa- 
thizing with the infirmity of his disciples, 
he simply advised them, noT that his bitter 
agony was over, to take Mme rest during 
the brief interval that remained. It «'< 
enough. Some commentators have thought 
that the somewhat difficult Greek verb 
(aTre'xei) would be better rendered, he is at 
a distance ; as though our Lord meant to 
say, " There is yet time for you to take some 
rest. The betrayer is some distance off." 
Such an interpretation would require a full 
stop between the clause now rendered, " it 
is enough," and the clause, "the hour is 
come ; " so that the passage would read, 
" Sleep on now, and take your rest ; ho 
(that is, Judas) is yet a good way off." 
Then there would be an interval ; and then 
our Lord would rouse them up with the 
words, " The hour is come; behold, the Son 
of man is betrayed into the hands of sin- 
ners." This interpretation all hangs upon 
the true rendering of the word airexc, which, 
although it might be taken to mean " he," 
or "it is distant," is nevertheless quite 
capable of the ordinary interpretation, " it 
Bufliceth." According to the high authority 
of Hesychius, who explains it by the words 
lnr6xpri and iiapKei, it seems safer on the 
whole to accept the ordinary meaning, " It 
is enough." 

Ver. 43.— And straightway, while he yet 
spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve. 
How the stupendous crime is here marked I 
It was BO startling a fact that " one of the 
twelve" should be the betrayer of our Lord, 
that this designation of Judas became 
linked with his name : " Judas, one of the 
twelve." He comes not only u a thief and 
a robber, bat also as a traitor ; the leader ot 
those who were thirsting for Ohiist's blood. 
St. Luke (xxii. 47) says that Judas " went 
before them," in his eagerness to accomplish 
his hateful errand. And with him a multi'' 
tnde (not a great multitude ; the word iroAi/s 
has not sufficient authority). But though 
not a great multitude, they would be • coU' 



m 



TSE GOSPbL according I'O ST. MARK. [oh. xit. 1— ?2. 



Biderable number. There would be a band 
of soldiers ; and there would becivil officers 
lent bT the Sanhedrim. Thus Gentiles and 
i)«WB were united in the daring act of 
amsting the Son of God. St. John (xviii. 
S) says that they .had "lanterns and 
torches;" although the moon was at the 
full. 

Yer. 44. — Now he that betrayed him had 
given them a token, saying, ■Whomsoever I 
shall kiss, that is he ; take him, and lead him 
away safely. Why was Judas so anxious 
that Christ should be secured? Perhaps 
because he feared a rescue, or because he 
feared lest our Lord should hide himself 
by an exercise of his miraculous power ; 
and so Judas might lose the thirty pieces 
of silver. 

Yer. 45. — ^And when he was acme, 
straightway he came to him, and saith, 
Babbi; and kissed him (Kar&plKria-ey aiT6v); 
literally, kisied him much. The kiss was 
an ancient mode of salutation amongst the 
Jews, the Romans, and other nations. It is 
possible that this was the usual mode with 
which the disciples greeted Christ when 
they returned to him after any absence. 
But Judas abused this token of Mendship, 
using it for a base and treacherous purpose. 
6t. Ghrysostum says that he felt assured by 
the gentleness of Christ that he would not 
repel him, or that, if be did, the treacherous 
action would have answered its purpose. 

Yer. 47. — But a certain one of them that 
stood by drew his sword, and smote the ser- 
vant of the high priest, and struck off his 
ear (a<ltf7\ev airov Th arlov). We learn from 
St. John (xviii. 10) that this was Peter. 
St. John also is the only evangelist who 
mentions the name (Malchus) of the high 
priest's servant. Malclius would probably 
be prominent amongst them. St. Luke 
(xxii .^1) is the only evangelist who men- 
tions the healing of the wound by our Lord. 

Yer. 48.— We learn from St. Matthew 
(xxvi. 52) that our Lord rebuked his dis- 
ciples for their resistance ; after which he 
proceeded to rebuke those who were bent 
upon apprehending him. Are ye come out, 
as against a robber (as iirl Kpar^v), with 
swords and staves to seize me 1 The order 
of events in the betrayal appears to have 
been this : First, the kiss of the traitor 
Judas, by which he indicated to those who 
were with him which was Jesus. Then 
follows that remarkable incident mentioned 
only by St. John (xviii. 4—6), "Jesus . . . 
went forth, and eaith unto them. Whom seek 
ye ? They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. 
)mus saith unto them, I am he. And 
Judas also, which betrayed him, was stand- 
ing with them. When therefore he said 
unto them, I am he, they went backward, 
and fell to the groimd." The presence M 



Christ in his serene majesty overpowered 
them. There was something in his looks and 
manner, as he repeated these words, " I am 
he," words often used before by him, that 
caused them to retreat backwaidt^ and to 
prostrate themselves. It was no external 
force that produced this result. The Divine 
majesty flashed &om his countenance and 
overawed them, at least for the moment. 
At all events, it was an emphatic evidence, 
both to his own disciples and to this crowd, 
that it was by his own will that he yielded 
himself up to them. Perhaps this incident 
fired the courage of St. Peter ; and so, as 
they approached to take our Lord, he drew 
his sword and struck oflfthe ear of Malchus 
Then our Lord healed him. And then he 
turned to the multitude and said, " Are ye 
come out as against a robber, with swords 
and staves, to seize me ? " 

Yer. 49. — But this is done that the Scrip- 
tnies might be fulfilled. This, as it stands 
in the original, is an incomplete sentence ; 
in Bt. Matthew (xxvi. 56) the sentence occurs 
in its complete form. In both cases it haa 
been questioned whether the words are thoee 
of our Lord, or whether they are the com- 
ment of the evangelist. On the whole, it 
would seem more probable that they are our 
Lord's words, which seem almost required 
to conclude what he had said before. 

Yer. 60.— And they aU left him, and fled. 
But soon afterwards two of them, Peter and 
John, took courage, and followed him to 
the house of the high priest. 

Yer. 51. — And a certain yoong man fol- 
lowed with him, having a Linen oloth oast 
about him, over his naked body : and they lay 
hold on him. St. Mark is the only evangelist 
who mentions this incident ; and there seems 
good reason for supposing that he here de- 
scribes what happened to himself. Such is 
the mode in which St. John refers to himself 
in his Gospel, and where there can be no 
doubt that he ia speaking of himself. If 
the conclusion in an earlier part of this com- 
mentary be correct, that it was at the house 
to which John Mark belonged that our Lord 
celebrated the Passover, and from whence 
he went out to the Mount of Olives ; what 
more probable than that Mark had been with 
him on that occasion, and had perhaps a 
presentiment that something was about to 
happen to him ? What more likely than that 
the crowd who took Jesus may have passed 
by this house, and that Mark may have been 
roused from his bed (it was now a late hour) 
by the tumult. Having a linen clo(h{a^ii/S6va) 
cast about his naked body. The sindon was 
a fine linen oloth, indicating that he belonged 
to a family in good circumstances. It is >n 
unusual woid. In every other place of the 
New Testament where it is used it refers 
to the garment or Biiro«d used to cover the 



oa. xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINa TO ST. MARK. 



2S7 



bodies of the dead. The sindon is supposed 
to take its name from Sidoii, where the 
piirtioular kind of linen was manufactured 
of which the garment was made. It was a 
kind of light cloak frequently worn in hot 
weather. 

Ver. 52. — But he left the linen cloth, and 
fled naked. Thi^ somewhat ignominious 
flight Is characteristic of what we know of 
St. Mark, It shows how great was the panic 
in reference to Christ, and how great was the 
hatred of the Jews against him, that they 
endeavoured to seize a young man who was 
merely following with him. It shows also 
how readily our Lord's enemies would have 
seized his own disciples if they had not taken 
refuge in flight. 

Ver. 53. — And they led Jesus away to the 
high priest. This high priest was Caiaphas. 
But we learn from St. John (iviii. 13) that 
our Lord was first brought before Annas, the 
father-in-law of Caiphas. Annas and his 
five sons held the high priesthood in suooes- 
sion, Caiaphas, his son-in-law, stepping in 
between the first and the second son, and 
holding the office for twelve years. It is 
supposed that it was in the house of Annas 
that the price of the betrayal was paid to 
Judas. Annas, though not then high priest, 
must have had considerable influence in tlie 
counsels of the Sanhedrim; and this will 
probably explain the fact of our Lord having 
been first taken to him. 

Ver. 54. — And Feter had followed him afar 
off, even within, into the oourt(6isTV auA^j/) 
of the high priest. This court was the place 
where the guards and servants of the high 
priest were assembled. Our Lord was within, 
in a large room, being arraigned before the 
council. St. John informs us (xviii. 15) 
that he himself, being known to the high 
priest, had gone in with Jesus into the court 
of the high priest ; and that he had been the 
means of bringing in Peter, who had been 
standing outside at the door leading into 
the court. "We now see Peter amopg the 
servants, crouching over the fire. The 
weather wiis cold, for it was early spring- 
time ; and it waa now after midnight. Peter 
was warming himself in the light of the fire 
(wphs rh (pias), and so his features were clearly 
seen in the glow of the brightly burning 
charcoal. 

Ver. 55. — Kow the chief priests and the 
whole council sought witness against Jesus 
to put ^lim to death, and found it not. Their 
supreme object was to put him to death; 
but they wished to accomplish their object 
in a manner consistent with their own 
honour, so as not to appear to have put him 
to dnath without reason. So they sought for 
false witnesses against him, that they migljt 
deliver the Author of life and the Saviour 
of tb« world to deftth. V«t in re«l truth. 



although they knew it not, and were tha 
instruments in his hands, he had determined 
by the death of Christ to bestow on us botk 
present and eternal life. 

Ver. 56. — For many bare false wltnesi 
against him, and their witness agreed not 
together. Whatever things these witnesses 
brought forward were either false, or self- 
contradictory, or beside the purpose. 

Vers. 57, 58. — And there stood up certain, 
and hare false witness against him, saying, 
We heard him say, I will destroy this temple 
that is made with hands, and in three days 
I will build another made without hands. 
St. Matthew (xxvi. 60) says that they were 
two. What our Lord had really said was 
this — we read it in St. John (ii. 19) — " De- 
stroy this temple; and m three days I will 
raise it up." These words the false wit- 
nesses perverted ; for they assigned to Jesus 
the work of destruction wliioh he left to the 
Jews. He did not say, " I will destroy ; " but 
" Do ye destroy, and I will rebuild." Nor 
did he say, " I will build another ; " but " I 
will raise it up," that is, from the dead ; for 
St. John tells us that "he spake of the temple 
of his body," in which, as in a temple, there 
dwelt the fulness of the Godhead. He 
might have said plainly, " I will rise from 
the dead ; " but he chose to speak as in a 
parable. According to their witness, how- 
ever, our Lord's words would appear as little 
more than an empty boast, certainly not as 
anything on account of which such a charge 
as they desired could be brought against 
him. 

Vers. 60, 61. — And the high priest stood 
np in the midst, and asked Jesus, saying, 
Answerest thou nothing? , . . But he held 
his peace, and answered nothing. The high 
priest would naturally be seated at the top 
of the semicircle, with the members of the 
Sanhedrim on either side of him, and the 
Accused in front of him. Now he rises from 
his seat, and comes forward into the midst 
(«s rh ixiaov), and demands an answer. But 
Jesns answered nothing. It would have 
been a long and tedious business to answer 
such a charge, which involved a garbled and 
inaccurate statement of what he had said. 
It would have answered no good purpose to 
reply to an accusation so vague and ina»- 
curate. Our Lord knew tliat, whatever his 
answer was, it would be twisted so as to make 
against him. Silence was therefore the most 
dignified treatment of such an accusation. 
Bebides, he knew that his hour was come. 
The high priest now aska him plainly. Art 
thou the Christ, the son of the Blessed % Here 
he touches the point of the whole matter. 
Christ had frequently declared himself to 
be such. Caiaphas, therefore, now asks tha 
question, not because he needed the in- 
formation, bi|t that he might con4emii him. 



238 



THE GOSPEL ACCOfiDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1—72. 



Ver. 62. — To this question our Lord re- 
turns a plain and candid answer, out of 
reverence for the Divine Name which, as St. 
Matthew and St. Luke tell us, had been 
invoked by the high priest, and also out of 
respect for the ofiSce of the high priest, by 
whom he had been put upon his oath. St. 
Chrysostom says that our Lord answered 
thus that he might leave without excuse all 
those who listened to him, who would not 
hereafter be able to plead in the day of 
judgment that, when our Lord was solemnly 
asked in the council whether he was the 
Son of God, he had either refused to answer, 
or had answered evasively. This answer of 
our Lord is full of majesty and sublimity. 
He is arraigned as a criminal, standing in 
the midst of the chief priests and scribes, his 
bitter enemies ; and it is as though he said, 
"You, O Caiaphas, and you the chief priests 
and elders of the Jews, are now unjustly 
condemning me as a false prophet and a 
false Christ ; but the day is at hand when I, 
who am now a prisoner at your judgment 
seat, shall sit on the throne of glory as the 
Judge of you and of all mankind. You are 
now about to condemn me to the death of 
the cross ; but I shall then sit in judgment 
upon you, and condemn you for this terrible 
guilt of slaying me, who am the true God 
and the Judge of the world." 

"Ver. 63,— And the high priest rent his 
olothes (5m^^7)|aj Toiisx'T»''M); literally, Ais 
tunics ; St. Matthew (xxvi. 65) has rii iiiana, 
literally, his garments. None but people of 
rank wore two tunics. The Greek verb 
here rendered " rent " implies violent dra- 
matic action. The Jewish tunio was open 
under the chin, and large enough to receive 
the head, so that it could easily be placed 
OT«r the shoulders, by inserting the head. 
When the wearer wished to give this sign 
of indignation or grief, he would seize the 
garment at this opening with both hands, 
and violently tear it asunder down to the 
waist. But it was unlawful for the high 
priest to do this in a private grief (Lev. z. 6). 
Some of the Fathers think that by this action 
Caiaphas involuntarily typified the rending 
of the priesthood from himself and from the 
Jewish nation. 

Yer. 64. — They all condemned him to be 
worttiy of death (evaxov Bavdrov). There 
were, therefore, none there but those who 
were known to be opposed to our Lord. It 
will be remembered that all these proceed- 
ings were illegal. 

Ver. 65. — And some began to spit on Mm. 
St. Matthew (iivi. 67) says, "Then did they 
spit in his face." That Divine face, to be 
reverenced and adored by every creature, 



was exposed to this vile contumely ; and ha 
bore it patiently. " I hid not my face from 
shame and spitting" (Isa. 1. 61). And the 
officers received him with blows of their hands 
(pi iiTTTipeTat pa-niff^atTiv avrhv iKa^ov), 

Yer. 66. — ^And as Peter was beneath in the 
court. The room in which the Sanhedrim 
were assembled was an upper chamber. 

Yer. 67. — And seeing (iSoDira) Peter warm- 
ing himself, she looked upon him (4iJ.p\€'l/aaa 
aiiT^). She looked upon him, in the light of 
the fire, so as to see his features distinctly. 
Tills was one of the menial servants who 
attended to the outer door of the court, and 
perhaps had been the one to let in Peter, 
so that she could say with some confidence. 
Thou wast also with the Nazarene, even 
Jesns. 

Yer. 68. — But he denied, saying, I neither 
know, nor understand what thou sayest. 
"This shows the great terror of Peter," gaya 
St. Chrysostom, " who, intimidated by the 
question of a poor servant-girl, denied his 
Lord ; and who yet afterwards, when he had 
received the Holy Spirit, could say, ' We 
ought to obey God rather than man.'" 1 
neither know,nor understand what thou sayest. 
Every word here is emphatic. It amounts 
to this : " So little do I know who this Jesus 
is, that I know not what you say or what 
you ask concerning him. I know not who 
or what he is or anything about him. A 
question has been raised as to the number 
of times that Peter denied our Lord. The 
narratives are best explained by the con- 
sideration that all the denials took place in 
the house of Caiaphas. Furthermore, tlie 
accounts of the evangelists may be reconciled 
thus : First, Peter denied the Lord in the 
court of the high priest, when he was first 
asked by the maidservant, as he sat over 
the fire (Matt. xxiv. 69) ; secondly, ha 
denied him with an oath ; thirdly, when 
urged still more, he denied him with many 
oaths and execrations. The cock crew the 
first time after the first denial, when we read 
(Matt. xxvi. 71) that he went out into the 
porch (irpoavxiov). This crowing would be 
about one or two in the morning. The second 
crowing would not be until five or six. This 
shows us the length of time that the pro- 
ceedings lasted. It was doubtless as Jesus 
passed through the court that he gave Peter 
that look of unutterable pain and grief which 
moved him at once to repentance. 

Yer. 72.— And when he thought thereon, 
he wept {koI eirl/SoXic, IkAoie, not l/cXause). 
The word implies > long and continued 
weeping. 

This concludes the preliminary trial, th< 
whole proceedings of which were illegal. 



OH. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 23> 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1, 2. — "Hie plot. The apprehension and death of Jesus were brought about by 
a combination between his foes and a professed friend. The avowed enemies employed 
the necessary force, and secured the authority of the Roman governor for his cruci- 
fixion ; and the disciple suggested the occasiun, the place and time of the capture, and 
delivered his Master into the hands of the malignant persecutors. The events of the 
first three days of this Passion week had been such as to enrage the Pharisees and 
scribes beyond all bounds. The only way in which it seemed possible for them to 
retain their threatened influence, necessarily diminished and discredited by their 
repeated public confutation, seemed to be this — to strike an immediate and decisive 
blow at the Prophet whom they were unable to withstand upon the ground of 
argument and reason. 

L The enemies who plotted against Chbist. These seem to have included all 
classes among the higher orders of society in Jerusalem, who, whatever their distinc- 
tions, rivalries, and enmities, concurred in hatred of the Holy One and the Just. The 
chief priests, who were largely Sadducees, the scribes, and the Pharisees, who were the 
most honoured leaders of the people in religion, all joined in plotting against him who 
attacked their various errors with equal impartiality, and whose success with the 
people was undermining the power of them all. 

II. The cbaft and caution of Cheists enemies. It was in accordance with the 
nature of such men that they should have recourse to stratagem. Open violence was 
scarcely after their manner, and was out of the question in this case ; for many of the 
people honoured the Prophet of Nazareth, and would probably have interfered to pro- 
tect or to rescue him from the onset of his enemies. Upon days of great popular 
festivals the people thronged every public place, where Jesus might be found teaching 
those who resorted to him ; and those who delighted to listen to Jesus would certainly 
resist his capture. The opposition of Christ's enemies to his teaching had been 
captious, and it is not surprising to find that their plot for his destruction was cunning 
and secret. 

IIL The purpose of Christ's enemies — his destruction. This had, indeed, been 
foreseen and foretold by himself; but this does not lessen the crime of those who com- 
passed his death. The resolution to slay Jesus seems to have been taken because of the 
popular impression produced by the raising of Lazarus, and because of the discussions 
which had only just now taken place between him and the Jewish leaders, whom he 
had overcome in argument and put to silence. Thus, he had come up to the metro- 
polia with the intention of so conducting his ministry as he was well aware would 
bring down upon him the wrath of his bitter foes. 

IV. The season and occasion or this plot. It was at the time of the Passover 
assemblies and solemnities that these deliberations took place. In this there was a 
coincidence which was not unintended, and which did not escape the observation of 
the Church. " Christ our Passover " — our Paschal Lamb and Sacrifice — " was slain 
for us." The Lamb of God came to take away the sin of the world. His death has 
become the life of humanity ; his sacrifice has wrought the emancipation of a sinful race. 

Vers. 3—9. — Tribute of grateful love. A singular interest attaches to this simple 
incident in Christ's private life. Proud and foolish men have tried to turn it into 
ridicule, as unworthy of the memory of a great prophet. But they have not succeeded. 
Our Lord's own estimate of Mary's conduct is accepted, and the world-wide and lasting 
renown promised by Jesus has been secured. The record of the graceful act of the 
friend of Jesus is instructive, touching, and beautiful. And the commendation which 
the Master pronounced is an evidence of his human and sympathizing appreciation of 
devotion and of love. 

L The acceptable motivb to Christian bebvice is herb revealed. Mary was 
prompted, not by vanity and ostentation, but by grateful love. This had been 
awakened both by his friendship and teaching, and by his compassionate kindness in 
raising her brother from the dead. What Jesus appreciated was Mary's love. Services 
and gifts are valuable in Christ's view, not for themselves, for he peeds them not, but 



240 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MASK. [ch. iiv. 1-72 

as an expression of Ms people's deepest feelings. Let Christians consider what they 
owe to their Saviour — salvation, life eternal. They may well exclaim, " We love him, 
because he first loved us." Acceptable obedience does not come first, for in such case 
it would be a form only ; but if love prompts our deeds and services, they become 
valuable even before Heaven. 

II. The natural modes of Chbistian bbbviob. These are severally exemplified in 
this incident. J.. Personal ministry. Mary did not send a servant ; she came herself 
to minister to Jesus. There is some work for Christ which most Christians must do 
by deputy ; but there is much work which may and should be done personally. In 
the home, in the school, in the Church, in the hospital, we may individually, according 
to opportunity and ability, serve the Lord Christ. What is done for his " little ones " 
he takes as done for himself. 2. Substance. Mary gave costly perfume, estimated to 
have cost upwards of ten pounds of our money. She had property, and therefore gave. 
All we have is his, who, when he purchased us with his blood, purchased all our powers 
and possessions. It is a precious privilege to offer him his own. " It is accepted 
according to what a man hath." 3. Public witness. Mary anointed the Master's feet 
in the presence of the company, and thus declared before all those assembled her devo- 
tion to him. It is good for ourselves that we should witness to our Saviour, and it 
is good for others who may receive our testimony. It is a disgrace to professing 
Christians when they are ashamed of the Lord who redeemed them. 

III. The true measure or Christian sekvioe. She did, it is recorded, what she 
could; she gave what she had to give. This is an example worthy of universal 
imitation. We are reminded, as it were paradoxically, of two apparently opposed 
characteristics of Christian action and liberality. 1. Sow much devoted friends of 
Christ may do! Men may do much for harm and evil; and, on the other hand, 
what good even one person has sometimes accomplished in private life ! What can be 
done should be done. 2. Yet, how limited are men's powers I If Christians could do 
more than they do, how vast a field of labour stretches around them ! We are limited 
in our powers for usefulness. Our means may be small, our circle of influence restricted. 
Our powers of body and of mind are often a restraint upon us ; our life is brief, even at 
the longest. The sister of Bethany could not do what others might; nevertheless, 
what she could do she did. And we are never to rest in inactivity and indolence, 
because the claims are so many, and our powers are so small, and our opportunities 
fofew. 

IV. Thk approval and acceptance or Christian sbbviob. 1. The Lord accepts 
what his firiends bring to him, as the expression of their love, in proportion to their 
means and powers. He is not influenced by men's regards. Good men as well as bad 
men often disapprove wise and benevolent actions. He judgeth not as man judgeth. 
2. The Lord rewards the grateful and devoted friends who minister unto him. He 
enlarges their opportunities of usefulness and service here. " To him that hath shall be 
given." And he will hereafter recompense them in the resurrection of the just, when 
he shall say, " Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord." 

Application. 1. Let Christians give love its way, and follow where it leads. There 
is no danger of our loving our Saviour too ardently, or of our serving him too zealously. 
2. If your means of showing devotion be but few, fret not ; only let it be said, " They 
have done what they oould." 

Vers. 10, 11. — The traitor. That there should be a traitor in the camp of our Lord's 
followers and professed friends, may be regarded as an instance of the Divine forbear- 
ance, which tolerated one so unworthy, and also as a fulfilment of the predictions of 
Scripture. The fact is, however, one which is fraught with instruction and warning to 
every disciple of the Lord. 

L The aggravations of the traitob'b ouilt. These are to be recognized in two 
circumstances which have been recorded regarding Judas Iscariot. 1. He was not 
only a disciple and follower of Jesus ; he was actually one of the twelve. These were 
admitted to an especial intimacy with Jesus ; they knew his movements, they shared 
his privacy, they heard his language of friendship and partook his counsels. All this 
made the treachery of one of this select band the more guilty and reprehensible. 
% Q« was entrusted wi^h office in the little so^iet^ to wbich he belonged. Tb« treasurer 



ea. xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 241 



of the twelve — although, doubtless, their means were always small— Judas bare the bag, 
and made the purchases necessary for the wants of the companions, and even gave 
from the general poverty for the relief of those poorer than they. He was accordingly 
a trusted official, who abused the confidence reposed in him. 

II. The motives to the traitor's quilt. These were probably two. 1. Judas 
was dissatisfied with his Master's methods. Doubtless his expectations were of k. 
carnal character ; he wished Jesus to declare himself a King, and to assign to his twelve 
friend* posts honourable and lucrative in this new kingdom. It may have been to 
hasten on this catastrophe that the Iscariot acted as he did. 2. Judas was covetouo, 
and was prompted in his treason by the love of money. He secured from the chief 
priesis the thirty shekels which formed the customary price of a slave — " the price of 
hiia that was valued 1 " Surely it is a warning against avarice and covetousness, to 
fiad a professed friend of Jesus misled by these degrading vices 1 

IIL The odtoome or tre traitor's guilt. 1. It might have been difficult for our 
Lord's enemies to have seized him had they not been in the confidence of one of his 
companions. There wer.j obvious reasons why the arrest could not have taken place 
at Bethany or in Jerusalem. It was the duplicity and treachery of Judas that sug- 
gested the garden of prayer as the scene of this disgraceful apprehension. 3. To Judas 
the consequences were terrific. In remorse and despair he afterwards took his life. 
3. Yet how was all this overruled for wise and gracious ends ! The treachery of the 
Iscariot was the occasion of the crucifixion of Jesus, and this was the means of the 
salvation of the world ! 

Vers. 12 — 26. — The Paschal supper. The Lord's Supper is a distinctively Christian 
ordinance. Yet this record shows us that it was our Lord's design that it should be 
linked on to an observance with which his disciples were already familiar. He thus 
took advantage of a principle in human nature, and connected the associations and recol- 
lections which to the Hebrew mind were most sacred, with what was to be one of the 
holiest and most pathetic engagements of his people throughout all time. 

I. I.'HE 000A8ION AND OIROUMSTANCES OF THE INSTITUTION OF THE LoRD's SUPPER. 1. 

The jjZace in which this festival was first celebrated was provided by willing friendship. 
The circumstantial narrative points to the high probability that some wealthy friend 
of the Lord Jesus placed the guest-chamber of his house at Jerusalem at the disposal 
of the Master whom he honoured. There was something very appropriate in the con- 
secration in this manner of the offices of human love. 2. The time is very instructive 
and pathetic. It was evening ; it was the last evening of rest and peace our Lord 
should enjoy ; it was the evening which preceded the day of his sacrifice. 3. The 
company consisted of the twelve favoured companion.') of Jesus. Judas was at the 
meal, but retired before the institution of the Eucharist. How sacred and congenial a 
gathering ! How sweet and touching this calm which came before the bursting of the 
storm! 4. The occasion was the observance of the Paschal meal. Thus the light of 
the Hebrew Passover was shed upon the Christian sacrament and Eucharist. Thus it 
was suggested to the apostle that " Christ our Passover was slain for us." 

II. The trouble which saddened the Supper. Evidently this made a deep impres- 
sion upon all who took part in the meal. They saw that their Master was distressed, 
and they felt with him the touching sorrow. The treachery of Judas was known to 
him who needed not to be told what was in man. The grief which weighed down the 
heart of the Lord was communicated by him to all the sympathizing members of the 
group. The sin which was bringing Jesus to the cross was gathered up and made 
visible and palpable in the conduct of the traitor. And the sensitive nature of our 
High Prie.st .was affected and oppressed by it. 

in. The spiritual import op the Supper. 1. It was a commemoration of the 
Lord's sufferings and death. The broken bread was intended to keep in perpetual 
memory the body which was broken ; the wine poured out to recall to Christian hearts 
throughout all time the blood which was shed. 2. It was a symbol. Here is the 
explanation of the Lord's own words concerning eating the flesh and drinking the blooa 
of the Son of man. Thus are we taught and helped to I'eed on him by faith who is the 
Bread of life. 

IV. The pbophkot and promise op the Suppbb. It had a first chief bearing upon 

MARE— Q. B 



242 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xir. 1— 72. 

the past, jet it pointed on to the future; it prefigured tbe marriage supper of th« 
Lamb. In the kingdom of God the heavenly wine should be quaffed ; in the upper 
temple the plaintive hymn of the sacrament should be exchanged for the triumphal 
•nthem of the glorified, immortal host and choir. 

Application. 1. The blood was shed for many ; have we shown our consciousness 
that it was shed for us ? 2. Let every communicant tremble lest he betray the Lord, 
and ask with concern and contrition, "Lord, it it I?" 

Vers. 27 — 31. — Anticipation. Long before had our Lord clearly realized what would 
be the end of his ministry of benevolence and self-denial. The prospect of ungrateful 
violence leading to a cruel death had not deterred him from efforts for the good of those 
whom he loved and pitied. And now that the blow was just about to fall upon him, 
his mind was no less steadfast, although his heart was saddened. 

I. Jesus anticipates his own sufferings, and the kesurrection which should 
FOLLOW HIS death. 1. He foresaw that, as the Good Shepherd, he should be smitten. 
He was to lay down his life for the sheep, that they might be saved and live. 2. He 
foretold that he should rise, and should be found in Galilee in an appointed plar- ' 
This assurance gives us an insight into the considerate kindness of the Redeemer, who 
not only resolved to triumph for mankind, but took care for his own friends that their 
solicitude might be relieved, and that his intimacy with them might be renewed. 

XL Jesus anticipates the confusion and unfaithfulness or his disciples. 
Sorely as this prospect must have distressed his heart, he was not by it to be deterred 
from his purpose. He foretold to his friends how they were about to act, that they 
might learn a lesson of their own frailty and dependence upon unseen aid. 1. Offence 
and scattering were foretold concerning all. This, as the record informs us, came tc 
pass ; for in the hour of his apprehension " they all forsook him, and fled." 2. The denial 
of the foremost and the boldest of the twelve was also foretold. Peter loved Christ, 
had displayed a remarkable insight into Christ's nature, and now professed, in the 
ardour of his attachment, a readiness to die for his Lord. It was as though nothing 
that could distress the Divine Saviour should be wanting to his sufferings and sacrifice; 
he consented even to be denied by the foremost of the select and beloved band. 3, 
Jesus knew the hearts of his disciples better than they knew their own. They vehe- 
mently asserted their attachment, their devotedness, their unswerving fidelity. But 
he knew the underlying nature which afforded at present no foundation for their resoln- 
tions and protestations. And ho was evidently prepared for what actually happened; 
it did not take him by surprise. Only after his s^cension, and the baptism with the 
Spirit, could the apostles withstand the onset of the foe, the rage of the persecutor. 

Practical lessons. 1. Lean, the frailty and feebleness of human nature. 2. Learn 
the steadfastness and the love of the Saviooi. 3. Learn the necessity of dependence 
upon Divine grace to keep from falling. 

Vers. 32 — 42. — Oethsemane. How pathetic is this scene I Here we are in the 
presence of the sorrow of the Son of man ; and there is no sorrow like this sorrow. 
Here we see Christ bearing our griefs, carrying our sorrows — a load beneath which 
even he almost sinks 1 It is not to us a spectacle merely of human anguish ; we are 
deeply and personally interested in the agony of the Son of Gted. It was for our sake 
that the Father spared not his own Son. It was for our sake that Jesus, our High 
Priest, offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears unto God, and 
learned obedience by the things which he suffered. The last quiet evening of fellow- 
ship has been passed in the upper room at Jerusalem by Jesus and the twelve. The 
last discourse— how full of encouragement and consolation I — has been delivered. 
The last, the most wonderful and precious, prayer lias been offered by the Master for 
his disciples. Instead of returning, as on the earlier evenings of the week, to the 
seclusion of hospitable Bethany, the little company proceed to a spot where Jesus was 
wont to retire, from the excitement of the city ministry, for meditation and for prayer. 
By the light of the Paschal moon they pass through the open gate, and, leaving the 
city walls behind them, descend into the valley of tlie Kedron. Eve.'y heart is full of 
the sacred words which have just been spoken, and silence falls uj'on the pensiv* 
gruujpb On the slope of Olivet they halt at an enclosure, where aged olive treeg ciwt a 



CH. XTT. 1—72.] THE GOcii'EL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 243 

sombre shade, and the rooks offer in their recesses a meet scene for lonely prayew. It 
is the garden of the olive- press, well known to every member of the band. Leaving 
the rest behind hira, Jasus takes with him the favoured three, who are witnesses to 
the awe and deadly sorrow that come upon him. He entreats their sympathy and 
watchfulness, and then withdraws to a spot where in solitude he pours out all his soul 
in prayer. The hour indeed has come. The ministry of toil is over, and the ministry 
of suffering and of sacrifice only now remains. He is straitened until the last baptism 
be accomplished. The shadow of the cross has often before darkened his holy path ; the 
cross itself is just upon him now. Hitherto his soul has been almost cloudlessly serene ; 
in this hour the tempest of sorrow and of fear sweeps over him and lays him low. 
There is no resource save in prayer. Earth rejects him, man despises him. So he turns 
to heaven ; he cries to the Father. He is feeling the pressure of the world's sin ; he 
is facing the death which that sin, not his, has merited. It is too much, even for 
Christ, in his humanity, and he implores relief. " Oh that this cup may pass untasted ! " 
Yet, even with this utterance of natural feeling, there is blended a purpose of submis- 
sion : " Not my will, my Father, but thine, be done ! " It is the crisis of agony, 
unexampled, never to be repeated I An agony of grief, an agony of prayer, an agony 
that finds its vent in every pore. Angelic succour strengthens the fainting and ex- 
hausted frame. Is there human sympathy with the Sufferer ? Surely the dear friends 
and scholars — they are praying with and for him ! His craving heart draws him to the 
spot, to find them neither watching nor praying, but asleep! He treads the wine- 
press alone ! It is an added drop of bitterness m the bitter cup. " What, could ye 
lot — not even Peter — watch with me — not for one short hour ? " Alas ! how feeble is 
the flesh, even though the spirit be alert and active! The prayer of Jesus, repeated 
with intensest fervour, gains in perfectness of submission. Thrice he retires to renew 
his supplication, with a growing acquiescence in the Father's will ; thrice he approaches 
his chosen friends, each time to be disappointed by their apathy. But now the victory 
has been won. Jesus has wrestled in the garden that he may conquer on the cross. 
He leaves his tears and cries behind. For the eleven there is no further opportunity 
for sympathy ; for the Master there is no more hesitation, no more outpouring of per- 
sonal distress. He loses himself in his work. With the cross before him, a former 
exclamation seems to arise from the depths of his spirit: " For this cause came I unto 
this hour." He goes forward to meet the betrayer and his band. " Rise up, let us 
go ; behold, he is near who betrays me ! " 

I. OuB Saviour's sufferings in his own soul. It is noticeable that, up to this 
point in his earthly career, Jesus had maintained singular tranquillity of soul and com- 
posure of demeanour. He had been tempted by the ilivil; he had been calumniated 
by his enemies ; lie had been disappointed in professed iriends ; but bis calm seems to 
have been unrufBed. And it is also noticeable that, after his agony in the garden, he 
recovered his equanimity; and both in the presence of the high priest and of the 
governor, and (generally speaking) when enduring the agonies of crucifixion, showed 
the self-possession, the dignity, the uncomplaining resignation, which have been the 
occasion of world-wide and enduring admiration. But this hour in Gethsemane was 
the hour of our Lord's bitter grief and anguish, when his true humanity revealed itself , 
in cries and tear.«i in prayers and prostration, in agony and bloody sweat. How is this 
to be accounted for ? That his nature was pre-eminently sensitive we cannot doubt. 
Never was a heart so susceptible to profound emotion as the heart of the High Priest 
who is touched with the feeling of our infirmities, because he had been in all points 
tried and tempted even as we are, though without sin. But what occasioned, in this 
hour, feeling so deep, anguish so poignant? To a certain extent we can clearly under- 
stand his sorrows, but there is a point here at which our finite understanding and our 
imperfect human sympathies necessarily fail us. It is clear that Jesus foresaw what 
was approaching. He was not ignorant of the hostility of the Jewish leaders, of the 
treachery of Judas, of the fickleness of the populace, of the timidity of his own disciples. 
And, by his Divine foresight, he knew what the next few, awful hours were to bring 
him. There awaited him bodily pain, scourging, and crucifixion ; mental distress in 
the endurance of the insults of his foes, the desertion of his friends, the ingratitude of 
the people for whom he had laboured and whom he had benefited. All this we can 
understand ; but what careful reader of the narrative can deem even all this a sufficient 



244 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1—72. 

explanation for woe unparalleled ? It \s, indeed, true that the sufferings and death of 
Jesus were undeserved ; hut this fact, and his own consciousness of innocence, might 
rather relieve than aggravate bis distress. The fact is that, when we read of his being 
amazed and appalled — "exceeding sorrowful unto death," and asking that if possible he 
might be spared the approaching experience of shame and anguish — we are compelled 
to regard our Saviour in the light of our Representative and Substitute. His mind was. 
In a way we cannot understand, burdened with the world's sin, and his body was 
about to endure death which be did not deserve, but which he consented to pass 
through that he might be made perfect through sufferings, and that he might giye his 
life a ransom for many. In the garden of the olive-press the Redeemer endured the 
unprecedented pressure of hunian sin and human woe 1 

IL OuB Saviour's pbaybb to the Father. The words of Jesus are reported some- 
what differently by the several evangelists, from which we may learn that it is not so 
much the language as the meaning which is important for us. 1. Observe the address : 
" Abba, Father 1 " It is clear that our Lord was conscious of the personal favour and 
approval of him to whom he was rendering obedience, never so acceptable as in the 
slosing scenes of the earthly ministry. 2. The petition is very remarkable : it was 
that the hour might pass, and that the cup might be taken away untasted. We are 
admitted here to witness the workings of Christ's human nature. He shrank, as we 
should do, from pain and insult, from slander and cruelty. Although he had forewarned 
his disciples that there was a baptism for him to endure, a bitter cup for him to drink, 
now that the time approached, the trial was so severe, the experience so distressing, 
that had he been guided by his individual feelings he would fain have avoided a doom 
so unjust and so overwhelming. 3. The qualification added explains what would 
otherwise be inexplicable. Jesus did not absolutely ask for release ; his condition was, 
" If it be possible," and his conclusion, " Not my will, but thine, be done 1 " There wag 
no resistance to the Father's appointment ; on the contrary, there was perfect submis- 
sion. Not that the Father took pleasure in the Son's sufferings, but the Father 
appointed that the ransom should be paid, that the sacrifice should be offered. 

IIL Our Saviour's clinging to his disciples. Very touching is our Lord's attach- 
ment to the eleven ; " he loved them unto the end ; " he took them with him to the 
garden. And very touching is his craving for human sympathy. Although his 
anguish could be best endured alone, he would have the little band not far off, and the 
favoured three he would have close by him. If they, would watch with him one hour, 
the one only, the one last remaining hour of fellowship — ^if they would pray for them- 
selvee, perhaps for him — it would be a solace to his tender soul ; to be assured of their 
sympathy, to be assured that, even on earth, he was not alone ; that there was, even 
now, some gratitude, some love, some sympathizing sorrow, left on earth. Why Jesus 
ihould have gone thrice to see whether his three nearest friends were watching with him 
in the hour of his bitter woe, seems only to be explained by considering his true 
humanity, his heart yearning for sympathy. Even his prayers, fervent though they 
were, were interrupted for this purpose 1 There is a tone of reproach in his final per- 
mission, " Sleep on now ! " — now that the glimmering of the torches is seen through the 
olive bonghs as their bearers cross the deep ravine, now that the step of the traitor 
falls upon the ear of the betrayed. A sad reminder of " the irreparable past ; " an ever- 
lasting expostulation, again and again in coming years to ring in tho ear of each 
slumberous, unsympathizing disciple, and rouse to diligence, to watchfulness, to prayer. 

rV. OuB Saviour's resignation and acoeptanos of the future before him. His 
bodily weakness was supported by angelic succour. His spirit was calmed by prayer, 
and by the final assurance that from the cross there was no release, except at the cost 
of the abandonment of his work of redemption. From the moment that the conflict 
was over, and big mind was fully and finally made up to accept the Divine appoint- 
ment — from that moment his demeanour was changed. Instead of seeking sympathy 
from his disciples, he spoke words of authority and encouragement to them, in their 
weakness and their panic. Instead of falling upon his knees or upon his face, in agony 
and tears, he went forward to meet his betrayers. Instead of seeking release from ths 
impending fate, he offered himself to his foes. He put forth his hand to take the cup from 
which he had so lately shrunk. He boldly met the hour which, in the prospect, had 
teemed almost wo awful to encounter. He had now no wUl W. his Father's, no aim 



OH. XIV. 1—72.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 24£ 

but OUT salvation. Even now be saw " of the travail of his soul, and was satisfied." 
" For the joy *,hat was set before him, he endured the croiss, despising the shame 1 " The 
unity of the. Saviour's saori6ce is thus apparent. He was obedient unto death ; and 
the triumph of the spirit in Gethsemane was part of his filial and perfect obedience 
Indeed, it would seem that the price of our redemption was paid, spiritually, in the 
garden ; and, in the body, upon the cross 1 

Application. 1. This representation of our Saviour's character is peculiarly fitted 
to awaken our reverence, gratitude, and faith. As we trace our Saviour's career of 
actlTe benevolence, our minds are constantly impressed with his unselfishness and pity, 
his willingness and power to relieve the wants, heal the disorders, pardon the sins, of 
men. But when we behold him in suffering and anguish, and remember that he con- 
sented to this experience for our sake, for our salvation, how can our hearts remain 
viutouohed ? The innocent suffers in the place, and for the benefit of, the guilty. If 
we are the persons benefited, how sincere should be our thanksgiving, how lowly our 
adoration, how ardent our faith, how complete our devotion 1 2. In the demeanour of 
our Saviour in the garden there is much which we shall do well to imitate. His patient 
endurance of grief and trouble encountered in the path divinely appointed, the absence 
of any hatred or vindictiveness towards his foes, his forbearance with his unsympathizing 
friends, and, above all, his submissive prayer offered to the Father,— all these are an 
example which all his followers should ponder and copy. Whilst we cannot suffer eM 
he did for the benefit of the whole human race, our patience under trouble, our per- 
severance in resignation, and consecration to the will of God, are qualities which 
will not only prove serviceable to ourselves, but helpful and advantageous to some at 
least over whom our influence may extend. 3. Nothing is more fitted to deepen our 
sense of the enormity of human sin, nothing is more fitted to bring our sinful hearts 
to penitence, than the contemplation of the dread scenes of Gethsemane. Jesus was 
oppressed by a burdea of sin — the sin of others, which we may take as an example of 
the sins of mankind, and ourselves — all of which he then bore. The coldness and 
callousness of the eleven, the treachery of Judas, the cowardice of Peter, the malice ot 
the priests, the fickleness of the multitude, the injustice of the Roman governor, the 
unspiritual and unfeeling insolence of the rulers, — all these in this awful hour pressed 
heavily upon the soul of Jesus. But these were only samples of the sins of humanity at 
large, of the sins of each individual in particular. He took all upon his own great heart, 
and bore them, and suffered for them, and on the cross submitted to that death which 
was their due penalty. In what spirit should we contemplate these sufferings of our 
Bedeemer ? Surely, if anything is adapted to bring us in lowly contrition before the 
feet of God, this scene is pre-eminently so adapted. Not indeed in abject, hopeless, 
terror, but with humble repentance and confidence. For the same scene that reminds 
us of our sins, reminds us of Divine mercy, and of the Being through whose sacrifice 
that mercy is freely extended to every contrite and believing suppliant. This is the 
language of every Christian who is a spectator of these unparalleled woes : " He loved 
me, and gave himself for me ! " 4. And what more fitted to awaken within the breast 
of every hearer of the gospel a conviction of the greatness and sufficiency of the 
salvation which is by Christ unto all who believe ? There is no extenuation of the 
seriousness, the almost desperateness, of the sinner's case ; for sin evidently needed, if 
this record be true, a great Saviour and a great salvation. The means used were not 
trivial to bring sinners to a sense of their sin and need, to make it consistent with the 
Divine character to pardon and accept the contrite sinner. " Ye were redeemed . . . 
with the precious blood of Christ 1 " Therefore, without hesitation or misgiving, receive 
Jesus as your Redeemer; " be ye reconciled to God 1 " 

Vera, 43—5'?. — Betrayal and arrest. The agony and the betrayal are most closely 
rehited. Neither can be understood apart from the other. Why did Jesus so suflfer in 
the garden, and endure sorrow such that there was none like it ? Doubtless it was 
because he was anticipating the approaching apprehension, and all the awful events 
which it involved. His soul was darkened by the knowledge that the Son of man was 
about to be betrayed into the hands of sinners. And how came Jesus, when the crisis 
arrived, to meet his foes so fearlessly, and to bear his pain and ignominy with patience 
go Inimitable, so Divine ? It was because he had prepared himself m solitude, by 



248 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xtv. 1—72. 

meditation, prayer, and resolution ; so that, upon the approach of his foes, his attitude 
was one of meekness and of fortitude. We observe here — 

I. An 0KHIBITION OF HUMAN SIN. It ssems as if the iniquity of mankind reached 
its height at the very time when the Saviour bore it in his own body, in his own souL 
As the awful and sacred hour approached when the Good Shepherd should lay down 
his life, Bin appeared almost omnipotent ; the Lord confessed as much when, upon Lis 
apprehension, he said to his captors, " This is your hour, and the power of darkness." 
Observe the combination of the various forms of sin manifested on this occasion. 
1. The malignity of the conspirators is almost incredible. The chief priests, scribes, 
and elders had long been plottiag the death of the Prophet of Nazareth. It had all 
along been the case that his truthful and dignified assertion of his just and lofty 
claims, and the performance of his best deeds, excited their worst feelings. They had 
especially been angered by his miracles of healing and help ; both because they led the 
people to regard him with favour, and because they were a rebuke to their own 
indifierence to the people's welfare. And it was probably the raising of Lazarus 
which determined them, at all hazards, to attempt the destruction of the Holy Oae and 
Just. Their own deeds were evil, and they hated the li°;ht. Hence their hateful and 
cruel conspiracy. 2. The baseness of the authorities. The Sanhedrim leagued itself 
with the Roman governor. With the temple servitors and officers were conjoined the 
band from Antonia. Discreditable to the Ruuian authorities, and disgraceful to the 
Jewish, was this leaguing together for a purpose so unjustifiable. Ecclesiastical and 
civil authorities concurred in reversing the true canon : they were a praise to evil-doers, 
and a terror to those who did well. 3. 2%« treachery of the hetrayer. Whatever 
may have been the motive of Judas, his action was traitorous and flagitious. Pre- 
tending still to be Jesus' friend, he conspired with his enemies against him, took their 
money to betray him, and even used to his disadvantage the knowledge his intimacy 
gave him of his Master's habits of devotion. Unparalleled was the baseness with which 
the traitor betrayed the Son of man with the kiss of the seeming friend. In suffering 
all this, our Lord showed his readiness to submit for our sake to the uttermost humilia- 
tion, to the keenest anguish of soul. 4. The cowardice apparent in the time, place, 
and manner of the Lord's apprehension. His indignation with these circumstances the 
Lord did not conceal. Why did not his enemies seize him in the temple, instead of 
in the garden ? when teaching in public, instead of when praying in private ? by day, 
instead of in the partial darkness of the night ? Why did they come armed as against 
a robber, when they knew him to be peaceable and unresisting ? If all this shows some 
consciousness of our Lord's majesty and authority, it certunly reveals the depth and 
degradation of the iniquity which could work deeds at once so foul and so cowardly. 
5. Ttie timidity and desertion of the disciples. Shall we call this excusable weak- 
ness ? If so, it is because we feel that we might have acted as they acted had we been 
in their place. But, in truth, it was sin. They could not watch with him when he 
prayed, and they could not stand by him when he was in danger and encompassed by 
his foes. There is something infinitely pathetic in the simple statement, " They all 
left him, and fled." Even Peter, who had protested so lately his readiness to die with 
him ; even John, who had so lately reclined upon Jesus' breast ; even the young man 
(was it Mark himself?) whose affectionate curiosity led him to join the sad procession, 
as it passed through the still streets of Jerusalem I 

n. A REVELATION OP ChRISt's DIVINELY PERFECT CHABAOTER. CirCUmStanceS of 

trial prove what is in men. When the sea is smooth and the wind is still, the unsound 
vessel seems as stout and as safe as that which is seaworthy ; the tempest soon makes 
the difference manifest. Even our sinless, holy Lord shines out more gloriously in his 
adversity, when the storm breaks upon his head. 1. We recognize in him a calm and 
dignified demeanour. He had been disturbed and distressed in his solitude, and his 
feelings had then found vent in strong crying and tears. But his agitation has passed 
away, and his spirit is untroubled. He meets his enemies with unquailing boldness 
of heart and serenity of mien. 2. We are impressed with his ready, uncomplaining 
mibmission to his fate. He acknowledges himself to be the One whom the high priests' 
myrmidons are seeking ; he offers no resistance, and forbids resistance on the part of 
his followers ; he acts as One who knows that his hour has come. There is a marked 
contrast between the action of our Lord on this and on pre^ous occasions. Before, h* 



OH. xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 247 

had eluded his foei, and escaped from their hands ; now, he yields himself up. Hii 
conduct is an illustration of his own word : " No one taketh my life away from me ; but 
I lay it down of myself." 3. We remark At* compassion exercised towards one of hii 
captor$. The impetuous Peter aims a blow at oue of the attendant and armed bonds- 
men ; but Jesus rebukes his friend, and mercifully heals his foe. How like himself^ 
and how unlike all beside I 4. We admire his willingnesi to fulfil the Scriptures and 
the will of Ood. It was a moment when, in the case of an ordinary man, self would 
have asserted its claims, and the purposes of Hearen would probably have been lost 
sight of. It was not so with Jesus. The word of the Father, the will of the 
Father, — these were pre-eminent in their authority. 

IIL A STEP TOWABDS CHRIST'S 8ACBIFI0E AND HAN'b BEDEMFTION. If the whole of 

our Saviour's career was part of his mediatorial work, the closing stages were emphati- 
cally the sacrifice. And it was in Gethsemane that the last scene opened ; now was the 
beginning of the end. 1. We discern here conspicuous self-devotion, Jesus appears as 
One baring his breast for the blow. From this moment he has to suffer, and of this he 
is evidently clearly conscious, and for this prepared. 2. His action is evidently in 
obedience to the Father; he treads the path the Father marks out, and drinks the cup 
the Father presents to his lips. 3. He already stands in our place. The innocent and 
holy One submits to be treated as a guilty offender ; the most benevolent and self- 
denying of all beings allows himself to share the contumely and the doom of the 
ciiminaL He is " numbered with the transgressors," Unmerited sufferings and insults 
are endured for our sake by the very Son of God. 4. Thus he prepares for death. " He 
is led as a lamb to the slaughter." He is bound as a victim, to be laid upon the altar. 
His sensitive nature tastes, in anticipation, the agonies of the cross. Already he is 
taking to himself, that he may bear it and bear it away, the sin of the world. 

Afflioatiok. How deserving is such a Saviour as this narrative portrays of the 
faith of every sinner, and of the love and devotion of every believer ! His forbearance, 
patience, and compassion show the tenderness of his heart, and the firmness of his 
purpose to save. This may well justify the confidence of every poor, sinful, helpless 
heart. His love, his sacrifice, demand our grateful trust. And to such a Saviour what 
adequate offering can be presented by those who know his power and feel his grace ? 

Vers. 63 — ^65. — The trial hefore Oaiapkas. Surely this is the most amazing scene in 
the long history of humanity ! The Redeemer of mankind upon his trial ; the Saviour 
at the bar of those he came to save ; — there is in this something monstrous and almost 
incredible. But the case is even worse than this. The Lord and Judge of man stands 
at the tribunal of those who must one day appear before his judgment-seat. They 
judge him in time whom he must judge in eternity. It is a spectacle the most affect- 
ing°and the most awful this earth has ever witnessed. 

I. The tbibunai.. Jesus has already been led before the crafty and unrighteous 
Annas. He is now led into the presence of the high priest, the Caiaphas (son-in-law to 
Annas) who has declared that it was good that one man should perish for the people ; 
which meant, that it was better that the innocent Jesus should die, rather than that the 
ruler's influence with the people should be imperilled by the prevalence of the spiritual 
teaching of the Prophet of Nazareth. With Caiaphas are associated, first informally, 
and then in something like legal fashion, the chief priests, elders, and scribes. It 
tppeara that these are mainly of the Sadducees, of the party who aimed at political 
power. The tribunal before which Jesus is arraigned is composed of the Sanhedrim, 
so far as it may be said to exist at this time. It is observable, accordingly, that the 
accusers of Jesus are his judges. These are the men who sent down spies into Ghililee, 
to lay in wait and tempt Jesus, and catch him in his speech. These are the men who 
instigated the cavillers who, in the public places of Jerusalem, opposed the teaching of 
the Lord with foolish questions, uncandid criticisms, unfounded calumnies. These are 
the men who, after the raising of Lazarus, plotted against the mighty One, and resolved 
that they would have his life. These are the men who themselves sent out the band 
that apprehended Jesus in the garden. He appears, therefore, at the bar of those who 
have watched and pursued him with eager malice, who have persecuted him with 
unscrupulous hatred, and who have now got him within their toils. Such was the court 
before which Jesus appeared. From a tribunal like this there was no prospect, no 



848 TH3i? GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xit. 1—72 



txpectation, no possibility, of justice. This JesUs had long foreseen, and for the conse- 
quences Jesus was perf«otly prepared. 

II. Tbb evidence. When the judges condescend to become the accusers, it is nc 
wonder that they seek evidence against the accused. In such circumstances Jesus must 
be obviously, undeniably innocent, if no charge can be substantiated against him. 
False witnesses appear; but so flaarantly inconsistent are their unfounded accusations, 
that even such a court, to prejudiced, cannot condemn upon testimony so mutually 
destructive. At length, however, I'alse witnesses slaud up, who distort a memorable 
saying of Christ into what may be construed as a disi aragement of the national temple 
which all Jews regard with pride. Jesus, B[ieaking of the temple of his body, hail 
said, " Destroy this lemple, and in three days I will rear it again." This saying is 
misreprebented, and made to appear the utterance of an intention to destroy the sacred 
and noble edifice. Even so, however, the witnesses agree not. If this is the worst 
charge that can be bronght against Jesus, and if even this cannot be substantiated ; if 
no remembered words can be twisted so as to give some colour for condemnation before 
a tribunal so constituted and so prejudiced; then this is certain, that the ministry of 
Jesus must liave been discharged with amazing wisdom and discretion. At the same 
time, the sin of the Lord's enemies appears the more enormous and the more inexcusable. 
Jesus was not condemned upon any evidence, any testimony, against him. 

III. Th« APPEAif AND ADJURATION. 1. The president of the court, stung with dis- 
appointment, springs from his seat, indignant at the silence and calmness of the accused ; 
and, with most unjudicial unfairness, interposes, and endeavours to provolie Jesus into 
language which may inculpate himself. But ha is met with a dignified demeanour and 
with continued silence. 2. This effort being in vain, the high priest adjures the 
accused, and requires him to say whether or not he persists in tlie claims which he has 
made in the course of his ministry to be the Messiah, and the Son of the Blessed. Let 
him say " No," and he is for ever discredited and powerless ; let him say " Yes," and then 
his admission may be construed into a claim which may be represented to the Eonian 
procurator as a treasonable assumption of royal power. The intention of the judge in 
this proceeding was evil ; but an opportunity was thus given for the great Accused 
publicly to put himself right with the court and with the world. 

IV. The acknowledgment and deolakation. Our Lord does not think it worth 
while to refute witneisses who have refuted themselves and one another. «But now that 
the ruler of the people puts him upon his oath, and requires of him a plain answer to a 
plain question, Jesus breaks his silence. 1. He acknowledges what he has often asserted 
before, that no claim can be too high for him to make with truth. It he is to die — 
and upon that he has resolved— Jesus will die, witnessing to the truth and for the 
truth. He is the foretold Deliverer, the anointed King, the only Son of the Blessed and 
Eternal. This he will not conceal; from this avowal nought shall make him shrink. 
2. He adds that his high position and glorious office shall be one day witnessed by his 
persecutors and judges, as well as by all mankind. There is true sublimity in such an 
avowal, made in such circumstances and before such an assembly. To the view of 
man Jesus ia the culprit, powerless before the malice and the injustice of the mighty, 
and in danger of a cruel and violent death. But in truth the case is otherwise. He is 
the Divine King, the Divine Judge. His glory is concealed now, but it shall shine 
I'orth ill due time and ere long. Men on earth shall bow in his Name, receive his laws, 
and place themselves beneath his protecting care. The world ehall witness his majesty, 
and all nations shall be summoned to bis bar, and heaven shall crown him "Lord of 
all." What striking harmony there is between this profession and expectation of 
Clirist on the one hand, and on the other that wonderful statement of an apostle, " For 
the joy that was set be. ore him, he endured the cross, despisin;.; the shame " 

V. The sentence. 1, The avowal is treated as a confession. No witnesses are now 
needed. From his own mouth he is judged. The charge, which Jesus' own language 
is held to justify and iubstantiate, is one of blasphemy. And, if Christ were a mere 
m»n, this charge wa* just. 2. The whole court concurs in the judgment. The president 
is eager to condemn, but not more eager than his assessors. One mind moves thorn all-^ 
» mind of malice and hatred, a mind rejoieing in iniquity, grasping at the fulfilment 
of base hopes. 3. The sentence is death. It was a foregone conclusion. The destruc- 
tion of Jesus had been tesc<l'-ed upon long since. Death for the Lord of life ; death for 



fflL xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. M» 

the Benefactor of mankind ; death for the innocent hut willing "Victim of haman ferodty 
•nd human sin I 

VI. The insults. Again and again, in the course of that awful night, that »wful 
morning, was the Lord of glory treated with derision, ignominy, and contempt. The 
record is almost too distressing to be read. We can read of the agony in the garden, of 
the anguish of the cross, but we scarcely know how to read of the treatment our Saviour 
met with from our fellow-men, from tlioae he came to save and bless. The spitting, the 
buffeting, the mockery, the blows, — those will not bear to be thought upon. We may 
believe, we cannot realize, the record ! 

Application. 1. Here we behold sin at its height, raging and seemingly triumphant. 
Whether we look at the witnesses who maligned Jesus, the court which condemned him, 
or the ofiBoers who abused him, we are confronted with appalling proofs of the flagitious- 
ness of human sin. 2. Here we behold innocence in its peerless perfection. No fault 
is found in Jesus. Even his demeanour, amidst all this injustice, is consummate moral 
beauty. His unruffled calm, his Divine dignity, his immovable patience,— all command 
the profoundest reverence of our heart. 3. Here we behold a willing Baorifioq. Jesus is 
•' obedient unto death, even the death of the cross." With these stripes we are healed. 
These are a part of the suffering Jesus bore for us. That we may be freed from condem- 
nation, he is condemned ; that we may live, he is delivered unto death. 4. A glorious 
example is hero presented for our imitation. " Christ also suffered for you, leaving you 
an example, that ye should follow in his steps . . . who, when he was reviled, reviled 
not again ; when he suffered^ threatened not ; but committed himself to him tHoAtJiKlgeth 
righteously." 

Vers. 66 — 72.— Peter's denial. The story of onr Saviour's humiliation uid Buffering 

is a story not only of the malice and the injustice of his enemies, but of the frailty and 
unfaithfulness of his professed friends. It is true that the priests and elders apprehended 
him with violonca and condemned him with unrighteousness ; and that the Boman 
governor, against bis own convictions, and influenced by his weakness and hia selfish 
interests, condemned him to a cruel death. But it is also true, that of the twelve 
chosen and intimate associates one betrayed him and another denied him. 

I. This oonduot was at variance with Peter's usual principles ahd habits. 
No candid reader of the Gospel narrative can doubt either the faith or the love of this 
leader among the twelve. His confidence in the Master and his attachment to him 
were thoroughly appreciated by Christ himself. Had not Jesus named him the Bock ? 
Had he not, upon the occasion of his memorable confession that Jesus was the Son of 
God, warmly exolfiiroed, " Blessed art thou," etc. ? A warm and eager nature had found 
a Being deserving of all trust, affection, and devotion ; and the Lord knew that in Peter 
he had a friend, ardent, attached, and true. He admitted the son of Jonas into the 
inner circle of three ; he was one of the elect among the elect. 

II. This conduot was at variance with Peter's previous intention and 
PROFESSION. When the seizure and capture were approaching, the Lord warned his 
servant that he would be found unfaithful. Peter's declaration had been, "I am 
ready to go with thee, both into prison, and to death ; " " If I must die with thee, I 
will not deny thee." And he was no doubt sincere in this bold and confident declara- 
tion. But sincerity is not enough ; there must be stability as well. The professions 
of the ardent, experience teaches, must not always be taken with impUcit trust. 
Time tries all; and endurance in trial is the true test of character. Peter's fall is 
a lesson of caution to the confident and the ardent. 

III. This conduct was fobesekn and foretold by thk Lord Jesus. The 
Master knew his servant better than he knew himself. In warning him of his impend- 
ing fall, Christ had assured Peter that only his prayers should secure him from moral 
destruction. 

IV. This conduct must be explainbd by the combination in Pbtbb's jasi> of 
toTB AND FEAR. It was his affection for Jesus which led this apostle to enter the 
court, and to remain in the neighbourhood of the Lord during his mock-trial. The 
others had forsaken their Master, and had fled ; John only, being known, and Pet«r, 
being introduced by his friend, clung thus to the scene of their Master's woe. 
Fetor, lik« John, felt unable to desert his Lord. Strange that he should feel able to 



250 THE GOSPEL ACCOHDING TO ST. MArlK. [cH. xiv. 1—72. 

dsny him. He felt for his Master, but he feared for himself. Cowardice for the time 
4 yerpowered the courage which first brought him to the spot and then deserted him. 

V. This conduct is an instance op the tendency op sin to bbpbat itself. 
A single falsehood often brings on others in its train. To get it believed, the liar lies 
again, and confirms his falsehood with oatha. Peter found himself in a position in 
which he must either repeatedly deny his Lord, or else expose his own falseness, and run 
into the very danger which he had sinned to escape. Ah ! how slippery are the paths 
of sinl How easy it is to go wrong, and how difficult to recover the right way 1 Who 
knows, when once he lies, or cheats, or sins in any way, where, if ever, he shall stop ? 
How needful the prayer, " Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps 
slip not " 1 

VL This conduct could not endure the ebbukb op conscibnob and the 
REPROACH OP Christ. There was inconsistency between what Peter felt in his inmost 
heart, between the prayers which he was wont to offer, and what in this night he did 
and said. The falsehood and the fear were on the outside of his nature ; below, there 
was a sensitive conscience and a loving heart. It was the look of the Master, as he 
was led through the open court, and met his faithless servant's eye, which melted 
Peter's heart, recalling in a moment the warning which had been disregarded and the 
profession which had been belied. If there had ;iot been a heart, a conscience, responsive 
to the appeal and the reproach conveyed in that look, those eyes would have met in 
vain. All Christ's servants are liable to temptation, and it is possible that any one 
among them may be betrayed into faithlessness towards Christ ; but it is only where 
there is true love that there is susceptibility to the Saviour's tender expostulation 
and affectionate rebuke. It is thus that the Lord makes manifest who are his ; he 
shames them because of their own weakness and cowardice, and awakens what is best 
within them to a sense of personal unworthineas, and to a desire of reconciliation and 
renewal. 

VII. This conduct was the occasion of bhamb and oontbition. " When he 
thought thereon, he wept." Thought, reflection, especially upon the words of Jesus, 
are fitted to bring tlie misguided soul to itself. It is the haste and hurry of men's lives 
which often hinder true repentance and reformation. " They that lack time to mourn 
lack time to mend." These tears were the turning-point, and the earnest and the 
beginning of better things. Another evangelist relates to us at length the restoration 
of Peter to favour, and his new commission of service. But the simple words with 
vsihich this narrative closes furnish the key to what follows, to the rest of Peter's life. 
Jmdas's sin led him to remorse ; Peter's sin led liim to repentance. The root of the 
difference lay in the two men's distinct and opposed characters. Judas's principle was 
love of self; Peter's was love of Christ. The recovery, which was possible for the one, 
was therefore morally impossible lor the other. 

Application. 1. A warning against self-confidence. 2. A suggestion as to the 
spirit in which to encounter temptation: Watch and pray; look to Jesusl 8. An 
encouragement to true penitents. 



HOMILIES BY VAEIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. S— 9.— The precious spikenard; or, the impulse of the absolute. The house of 
Simott the leper was a familiar resort to Jesus. It is Mary the sister of Lazarus who 
now approaches him as he reclines at meat. Let us look at — 

I. Heb act of devotion. The nard or spikenard was an unguent of the East. 
It was " genuine " and costly. Probably it had been kept against that day. She now 
entered, probably at first unperceived, and, breaking the neck of the alabaster cruse, 
poured the precious nard upon the Saviour's person (John says his feet; Matthew and 
Mark, his head ; probably both received the anointing). John adds, " And wiped his 
feet with her hair ; and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment.'' The 
offering was : 1. Sudden. It was given ere any one could interfere. The breaking of 
the cruse may also have pointed to the quick, spontaneous impulse which prompted. 
The woman who had come forward so unexpectedly, at once retired again before the 
tumult and anger her act had occasioned. 2. It sprang from tecret tources ofrevereaee 



OH. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 261 

and love. The disciples could not comprehend it. They were not consulted. It 
expressed her own feeling unshared with any other. 3. It was oblivious of cost. The 
price put upon it by the disciples — three hundred denarii — was about ten pounds of 
our money, but of greater actual value at that time. Mary belonged to a respectable 
family, and could probably afford the gift, although its purchase would tax her personal 
means. Of that she does not think. It is freely given, poured out without care or 
stint upon him for whom it had been designed, 

II. The cbiticism to which it exposed. The disciples "had indignation among 
themselves." It presently broke forth in reproaches and murmurs. The action was 
stigmatized as purposeless " waste." Another use it might have served, viz. the relief 
of the poor, was mentioned. This judgment was partly honest, partly knavish ; wholly 
ignorant and wrong. " What is not outwardly useful may be highly proper ; " and men 
ought to be very careful in pronouncing upon religious offerings. A higher platform of 
principle is often affected by those who are really less spiritual. 

III. Chbist's vindication. "Why trouble ye her?" They had no business to 
interfere. 1. The act was commended. " A good [noble, beautiful] work." He saw 
the inward character of it. In his sight alone was it justified. 2. Jt was defended at 
more opportune and urgent than almsgiving. "Ye have the poor always with you, 
. . . but me ye have not always. She hath done what she could : she hath anointed 
my body aforehand for the burying." Many and mingled feelmgs prompted the 
offering — gratitude ior the restoration of Lazarus, adoration of the character of Jesus, 
recognition of him as " the Way, the Truth, and the Life," as the Lord of life and dealh , 
etc. ; but may not the foremost motive have been the reverent one which sought to do 
honour to One about to die ? She who sat at the feet of Jesus divined his teaching more 
deeply than his professed followers. How are we to characterize this emotion which over- 
came her ? It was deep, pure, unselfish, overwhelming. May it not fitly be termed " the 
impulse of the absolute " ? It is the essence of religion. Thus the devout soul responds 
to the infinite sacrifice. Martyrs, apostles, missionaries, have felt its power. It obeyed 
a higher reason than the rudimentary religious experience of the apostles could compre- 
hend. When the " length, and breadth, and depth, and height " of the passion of Jesus 
are perceived, no gift can fully express the sense of worship and obligation that arises. 
The highest sentiments of human nature are appealed to, and all the resources of our 
life are at his service, at the same time that we are profoundly conscious how far short 
they fall of his deserts or the claim he has upon us. It is a transaction, when it takes 
place, which others cannot judge ; it is between the soul and its Lord. — M. 

Vers. 4, B. — The spirit that betrays. L Selfishness. An exaggeration of the 
natural principle of self-love. Judas, as chief representative of this spirit, shows the 
virtues of his great vice, and naturally enough becomes keeper of the bag, containing 
the earthward dependence of the band. He looks at everything from this point of 
view. Already his thrift or prudence has degenerated into avarice, the more quickly 
owing to the grace which he resisted. The money value of the offering is at once 
appraised, the spiritual worth being wholly discounted. 

II. This is eepeesented (by St. Matthew and St. Mark) ab not coneinbd to 
ONE issiTiDUAli. In truth, every disciple had a share of it, although in a few it was 
more strongly manifest, and in one it may be said to have become incarnate. St. John, 
who is more given to this personalization of principles, speaks only of Judas. This, 
then, is a general danger to which the Church is liable, and requires the most careful 
self-examination. It can only be washed out of the soul by frequent and copious 
baptisms of Divine purity ; it can only be consumed by the constant fire of the Divine 

love. 

III. Herb it is oallbd into qbeatbb steength by the peesbnob of the spieit 
OF 8A0BIFI0B. It is provoked by the display of self-forgetful affection. Why so? 
1. Because it fails to discern the imminence and significance of the Divine event 
tpiritwMy revealed to the soul of Mary. 2. Because, in resisting that spirit, its own evil 
is exaggerated and confirmed. It seeks, therefore, to discredit the special manifestation 
of the spirit of devotion taking place. The indirect form of Divine charity, viz. alms, 
Is declared preferable to the direct, viz. self-sacrificing devotion to God in Christ. How 
often is this exchange actually made in the history of the Church ; almsgiving (with all 



252 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. xiv. 1—72 

its attendant corruptions) taking the place of the soul's immediate allegiance to Jehovah ! 
But on this occasion it is only a oloalc for a deeper depth of selfishness, perhaps 
hardly confessed to himself by the chief culprit. He would by-and-hy have stolen the 
worth of the gift, diverting it thus wholly irom its rightful destination. Soon this 
self-seeking will declare itsulf in selling the Christ himself for money ; a leaser sum 
^thirty pieces of silver, the price of a »lave) being temptation enough. — M. 

Vers. 10, 11. — Volunleering to betray. The "and" connects this with the pre- 
ceding paragraph, not only historically but psychologically. His present action was 
(immediately) determined by the gift of Mary and the mild rebnke of the Master. 

I. The CBiMB CONTEMPLATED. To deliver up Christ to his enemies. Whether he 
fully realized how much was involved as a result of this step is uncertain. He might 
imagine that not death, but the checking of his Master upon the career he had marked 
out, would ensue. But there is recklessness as to any consequences, provided he 
himself should be no loser. In robbing the alms from the bag, he was guilty of a 
breach of trust ; in this new development of his master passion the unfaithfulness 
culminated. It is manifest that the spiritual side of Christ's ministry had for him no 
value. It was only the earthly rewards that might attend on discipleship that made 
it attractive to him. Was it to force the hand of the ideal, unpractical Christ that he 
sought to deliver him up? A miracle of deliverance might then result in a realization 
greater than his most brilliant hopes could depict, and thus his (passing) act of villainy 
be condoned. Or was it in sheer disgust and desperation respecting the course affairs 
seemed to be taking that he conceived of his deed ? We cannot tell. In a mind like 
that of Judas there are depths beyond depths. 

II. Tee motive. That selfishness was at the root we may be sure. Avarice is the 
direction it took. He proposed money, and asked how much (Matt. xxvi. 15). Thirty 
pieces of silver a small sum ? Yes, but he might be at that moment in real or fancied 
need, or the amount might be looked upon as a mere instalment of further reward, 
when he might have niade himstlf nselul, perhaps necessary, to the rulers. Fear of 
consequences, if he followed Christ further in the direction in which he was moving, may 
also have influetici d his mind. And there can be no question as to the immediate 
impulse of wounded feeliny, through baflBed dishonesty and the sense that Christ saw 
through him. Falling short of the higher illumination and power of the Spirit, he was 
at the mercy of his own base, earthly nature. 

III. CoNspiEiNQ oiEcnMSTANCES. The background to all this mental and spiritual 
movement on the part of Judas is the attitude of the chief priests and scribes, " seeking 
how they might take" Christ. But for opportunity affoided the treachery of Judas 
might have remained an aimless mood or a latent disposition, instead of becoming a 
definite purpose. In this consists the danger of unspiritual states of mind: they 
subject those in whom they are indulged to the tyranny of passing influences and 
circumstances. — M. 

Vers. 12 — 16. — Preparing for the Passover. The festival of "unleavened cakes," or 
" unleavened bread," commenced on the night of the 14th of Abib or N iaan ( Kxod. xii . 16) 
after sunset ; that day, corresponding to our 16th of March, was therefore popularly called 
the first of the festival, because it was the preparation day for it. This preparation of 
the Passover, i.e. the killing of the lamb, etc., had to take place between three and 
six o'clock, the ninth and twelfth hours of the solar day. " Sacrificed," or " killed," 
has the force of " accustomed to saci ifice or kill." The room was to be " furnished," 
literally "strewn,'' i.e. the tables and couches were to be laid ; and it was to be ready, 
i.e. cleansed, etc., in conformity with ceremonial purifications. A considerable amount 
of work had to be carefully gone through ere all things would be ready. The lamb, 
unleavened brea'l, bitter herbs, wine, and "conserve of sweet fruits," had to be 
purchased ; the lamb had to be slain by the officiating priest in the temple ; and then 
it had to be roasted with the herbs. Prom the circumstances connected with this 
preparation in the case of Christ and his disciples we see — 

I. The bepeesentative headship of Christ. The disciples looked to him tor 
direction. They spoke of him, and not themselves severally, as being about to observe 
the Passover, which indicated, not that they themselveu were not going to observe it, 



CH. XIV. 1—78.] THE GOSPEL AOCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 263 

but that they ranged themselves under him as constituting, bo to speak, his household. 
That they should have to seek his direction at the last was no proof of carelessness, 
but only of habitual dependence upon him ; and it pathetically suggested how closely 
their circumstances correspondeil with the typical character of the first celebrants, 
who as strangers and sojourners partook Of the hasty feast. Fittingly enough, he 
who sought at birth the shelter of an inn, goes to such a place to observe the Passover 
with his disciples, in a separate and distinct capacity from that of any other household 
in Israel. They were to ask, " Where is my yuest-chamher f " it was he who was to 
entertain. 

U. HiB REOABD FOE THE OBSBBVANOEB AND DtBTlTUTIONS OP THE LaW. This is 

shown in the careful attention he gave to the details of the feast. Whether the 
arrangements made were due to the exercise of supernatural foresight, or merely to 
the natural forethought and human care of Christ, it is impossible to determine. In the 
former case, the " man bearing a pitcher of water," who was to meet them, would be 
indicated as a Divine token ; in the latter, the man would be simply arranged for with 
the master or " goodman " of the hostelry. Either way, the feast was r»illy prepared 
for by Chriit, and no regulation was neglected. When the poverty, homelessness, and 
personal danger of the Saviour are remembered, his observance of the Passover will be 
seen to possess an emphasis and intention quite special. 

III. The continuitt in which the " Lord's Supper" stands. It was a "moment " 
or stage of the Paschal feast, and tlierefore a portion of the same celebration. Doubt- 
less the feast would be protracted, or at any rate the actual eating of the lamb would 
be distinguished in time from the partaking of the bread and wine, which came a 
little later, as a new commencement after Judas had withdrawn at the bidding of the 
Master. In this way the retrospective character of the eating and drinking is quite 
natural. The two great feasts of Judaism and Christianity are thus vitally connected, 
the new celebration being a survival of the old one, and a perpetuation of its spiritual 
meaning. Iq such instances do we see the continuity of essential ideas, observances, 
and institutions throughout the varying pliases and progressive stages of religious 
development. 

IV. The spiEirtJAL preparation op Christ fob that which the Pabsover 
SYMBOLIZED. It is just in the attention to these minute details, paid by One to wliom 
in general the " spirit " was ever of so much more consequence than the " letter," that 
the inward preparedness of the Saviour is suggested for his great sacrifice. The whole 
typology of the sacred festival had been spiritually realized by him, and its connection 
with his own death. In Matthew's Gospel this foreboding consciousness of doom, 
elevated into a higher mood by spiritual willinghood, is expressed : " The Master saith, 
My time is at hand," etc. — M. 

Vers. 17 — 21.— 'T?ie betrayer denounced. I. The shadow at the peabt. Not /ear, 
as of a criminal under sting of conscience ; nor over-anxiety, the spectre that sits with 
the worldling at his board; but moral repugnance expressing itself in lympathetic 
Borrow. An inward sense of intei rupted sympathy and fellowship. 

II. The betrayer indicated. It is necessary to declare what it is which prevents 
the full communion of the household of Christ. This is done in order : 1. To awaken 
the spirit of lelf-examination and self -distrust. " Is it I ? " Therefure the indication 
giTen is general and anonymous. 2. To characterize and accentuate the moral hideous- 
ness of the crime. It was shown to be an evil foretold from afar. The betrayal is to 
take place, " that the Scripture [Ps. xli. 9] may be fulfilled. He that eateth my hread 
[or his bread with me] lifted up his heel against me " (John xiii. 18). And so, antici- 
patively, a new evidence is funiLshed by which to identify Jesus as the Messiah (John 
xiii. 19). As done by one enjoying the benefits of the Christian household, and 
reclining in pretended communion with the Lord, it is declared to be an act of the 
basest treachery and ingratitude. 3. As a personal discovery determining the further 
action of the guilty one. The special sign given was perceived by Judas alone, althoi^h 
explicitly mentioned. In answer to John's inquiry (the question of spiritual love), the 
partaking, which is here spoken of as a general thing, is specialized in a definite way 
•with respect; to the individual m ant (John xiii, 26). The further command is given, 
tiu( to do the deed, but, as he is determined even then «> ao it, to do it quickly 



254 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. £oh. siv. 1— 72, 

(John xiii. 27, 30). Thus the foulest crime against the Son of God is determined and 
accelerated amidst communion and sacred celebration — a psychological truth. 4. Ai 
on occasion, for solemn lamentation over the miserable destiny of Judas. The " woe " 
is not spoken so much as a denunciation, but rather in commiseration. All the good 
of life is spoken of as forfeited — and more than forfeited. " The apophthegm is rathel 
remarkable when microscopically examined, for, strictly speaking, nothing would be 
good to a man who never existed. But our Saviour's meaning is not microscopic, but 
obvious, and most solemn. A man's existence is turned into a curse to him when h« 
inverts the grand moral purpose contemplated in its Divine origination " (Morison). 
At the feast of love there is ever a sense of mingled reprobation and sympathy with 
respect to sinners. 

III. The pbinoiplb of the intekdependence op good and evil stated. " The 
Son of man goeth," etc. Evil is overruled and made the occasion of good. Not that 
it is thereby necessitated : it is still the product of the free-will of the creature. Yel 
is it foreseen, and the operation of good is modified so as to produce the greater good. 
That Christ shogld die was foreordained ; it was the expression of an eternal deter- 
mination of the Divine nature ; but the particular circumstances affecting the external 
character of his death were not foreordained. And, therefore, as freely committed, 
evil is not altered in its morcU character by the result flowing from its being divinely 
overruled. Judas was a criminnl awfully and uniquely wicked, and his "woe" is 
wailed forth by Infinite Love himself! — M. 

Vers. 22 — ^25. — Tlie Lord's Supper. A good title, as it was an evening meal ; and it 
was appropriated to a new and special purpose by our Lord, in connection with whom 
its significance is received. He is the Host, while his disciples are the guests. Con- 
sider it— 

I. In relation to the Passover. The general meaning of the Passover was per- 
petuated in a spiritual sense. There was : 1. A tranfer. Not of the whole Passover, 
but of a portion. It was during the progress of that merO, " as they were eating," 
that this particular occurrence took place. " He took bread [or o loaf\" thus adopting 
that, and the cup which was passing round, as somethinc; distinct from the main 
portion of the Passover meal, viz. the eating of the lamb itself. The cup was usually 
passed round three times, the bread frequently. We can conceive Christ's manner 
unusually solemn and impressive, as he raised these otherwise subordinate elements of 
the Paschal feast into prominent distinctness. 2. An interpretation. He took the 
brittle cake of unleavened bread and broke it, saying, " This is my body ; " and the 
cup, saying, " This is my blood." The doctrines of transubstantiation and consubstan- 
tiation are philosophical refinements upon the simple meaning of the phrases, and lead 
inevitably to contradiction and absurdity. Christ was alive before them, and usinp; 
his body, as he spoke. It must, therefore, have been distinct from the bread. " When 
our Lord said that the bread which he took in his hands was his body, and that the 
wine which he held in the cup was his blood, he used a simple figure of speech, such 
as he often employed. He called himself bread, a door, a vine ; meaning that these 
objects resembled and so represented him. The words are understood fijjuratively by 
all, and must be so. Controversies merely concern the nature of the figure. . . . The 
Bomanist interpretation is figurative. It supposes a figure without a precedent, a 
miracle without a parallel ; and it attributes the salvation of men, not to the actual 
death of Christ, but to what he did with the bread and wine. As the Passover was 
simply a symbolical service, the addition to it would be regarded as similar" (Godwin). 
" Note that, according to our Saviour himself, the liquid contained in the cup was not 
literal blood, but the fruit of the vine" (Morison). 

II. In itself. 1. A covenant or testament. It was " a disposition of things," by 
virtue of which the good to be obtained through the obedience and sacrifice of Christ 
is secured to those who believingly partake. It is a " testament," inasmuch as it was 
to have effect after Christ's death, and through the fact and manner of that death 
believers were to become heirs of the blessings it secured. This " agreement," which 
is contained in the covenant-idea, is a mutual affair, and involves mutual obligations. 
It also, after the precedent of anciejit Israel, constitutes the true recipients Goii'a 
people and him their God. The thing handed over is not the body and blorKi, but 



OH. XIV. 1— 72J THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 256 

that life and grace which they represented. 2. A communion. "Take ye." "Ha 
gave to them : and they all drank of it." It is only as a conimunion that the cove- 
nant has effect. To those who have received the life and spirit of Christ there is for- 
giveness and peace. Their sins are blotted out, and they are passed over in the mercy 
of GoQ. And so the act of communion is a spiritual one, and involves fresh realization 
of the meaning of the great facts of atonement, and the duties of the reconciled 
children of God. 3. An anticipation. There is to be another feast, when the Saviour 
comes to his people, and his people enter with him into the scene of the " marriage 
supper of the Lamb." It was Christ's last earthly Passover : he looked thence con- 
iidently forth to the final victory over sin and death, and the consummation of all 
things. 4. A thanhsyiving. " Eucharist." In view of all the blessings to be 
conferred through Christ's death, and as acknowledging the mercy and love of God 
in common viands and (as symbolized by them) in the benefits of salvation. — M. 

Vers. 22 — 25. — The Lord's Supper a celtbration of death. It is elsewhere spoken of 
as a " memorial," i.e, a funeral feast for the Saviour. Not merely a vain regret, an 
indulgence of disconsolate affection, but — 

I. A CELGBBATION OF DEATH AS COMPLETED SELF-8ACBIFICB. 1. Therefore all that 

was most precious in the life was secured, in the highest degree and the best way, as a 
blessing for others. The early disciples were not handling mangled, useless remains, 
but touching a living spirit, pregnant with grace and power and inspiration. The 
" body " and " blood " of Christ, kept from moral corruption and death, were a 
spiritual fruit " rich and rare." 2. And believers are made partakers of the spiritual ful- 
ness of Chrises perfected nature, in receiving the " elements " of his " body " and " blood." 

II. A OELEBEATION OP DEATH AS THE BEVBLATION AND AVENUE OF IMMORTALITT. 

This " funeral feast " is full of hopeful, confident anticipation, because in the death 
that is celebrated: 1. The higher spiritual life is seen as the result of the sacrifice of the 
earthly nature. It is in the voluntary and obedient laying down of this earthly life 
that Christ set free his Spirit as an influence to savingly affect mankind, and satisfied 
and ccmmeudod that perlect righteousness which is the ground of acceptance and 
union with God, the true life of the Spirit. 2. A foretaste is given of the final 
victory of righteousness over sin and death. The Captain of salvation, about to enter 
into final conflict with the powers of darkness, confidently looks forward, and invites 
his followers to look forward with him, " to fjlory, and honour, and immortality." In 
prospect of the final feast of victory and joy that was set before him, he was ready 
to go down into the gloom and shadow of death, — M. 

Vers. 27 — 31. — Peter's denial foretold. Christ's thoughts dwelt constantly upon the 
prophecies that foretold the sufferings and death of the Son of man. They were 
passing through his spiritual consciousness, voluntarily adopted as the expression of 
his own inward life, and consequently wrought out in external actions. He now quotes 
Zech. xiii. 7. It taught him how absolutely solitary his position would be in judg- 
ment and death, as other passages had done ; and suggested to him the reason for it. 

I. The UNIVERSAL DEFECTION OF THE DISCIPLES BEFORE ChKIST's DEATH WAS A 

tPiRiTUAL NECESSITY. They could not understand or allow it. It seemed so unnatural 
and unlikely. But their Master felt, by gauging his own spirit, how much would be 
required to enable them to be steadfast, and how wanting they were in the higher 
principles of spiritual life. He accepted the situation, and sought beforehand to 
prepare his disciples for the revelation of their own weakness, that when it took place 
it might not destroy all hope or desire to return to their fidelity. It was, then, at once 
in expression of his own inward Messianic consciousness, and in order to their warning 
and instruction, that he quoted the prophecy. How was this desertion of their Master 
a necessary experience ? Because the realization of absolute oneness with Christ in 
the spirit of self-denial, or rather of love, would only be possible after hb own 
sacrifice, as its ground or condition. They were, meanwhile, still in a state of pupilage 
or infancy. They could not understand the reason of his strange path, so unlike what 
they had anticipated. Had they been able to stand l>y the Lord when he was delivered 
up they mifht have been their own saviours, and his work would not have beov 
req^uiaita. 



166 THE GOSPEL AOCOBDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oh. mv. 1—72. 

n. SeIiT-OOKVIDENCB tM ABBBBTtNO ITS gUPBRIOBITT 10 THIS JjAM WOULD OMLT 

THE MOBB BiONALLT ILLUSTBATE IT. Peter, the representative of theoretic faith, was 
strong in his contradiction to this statement. It was he who had said, " Lord to 
whom can we go? " etc., and who had heard the approving response, "Blessed art thoU) 
Simon Bar-Jona : for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father 
which is in heaven " (Matt. zvi. 17) ; and who had been called the rock. He there- 
fore goes forward in the strength of his own convictions, and courts the disaster be 
sought to avoid, and that in an exaggerated form. (The seeming discrepancy between 
the evangelists as to the crowing and crowing twice is easily explained.) That very 
day, nay, that night, ere the dawning, he should deny his Lord thrice, i.e. absolutely 
and utterly ; and, that he might test his Master's faithfulness and his own failure, the 
sign was given—" before the cook crow twice." His bold self-confidence and resolute 
endeavour to be with Ohrist were shown in his penetrating the hall of justice, and 
mingling in the very crowd amidst which the Saviour stood. But this only provoked 
the challenge before which all his manhood quailed. The others did not orally deny 
Christ, because they had fled beforehand. 

in. But WITH THE WARNING A WOBD OF HOPE AND COMPORT WAS UTTERED. The 

Shepherd would reassemble his scattered flock, when he went before them into Qalilee. 
But they could not receive the saying upon which that depended — " after I am raised 
up." It was to be lodged in their consciousness, nevertheless, to be recalled again when 
its fulfilment took place, and to be put on record as another evidence of the faith. 
Then they would no longer be told, " Whither I go ye cannot come," M he would 
give his Spirit to them. — M. 

Vers. 32 — 12. — Tht agony in the garden. L Itb sorrow. 1. The manner in which 
it was experienced. There were premonitions. All through life there ran a thread of 
similar emotions, which were now gathering themselves into one overwhelming sense 
of grief, fear, and desolation : it was crescent and cumulative. He did not artificially 
create or stimulate the emotion, but entered into it naturally and gradually. Qeth- 
semane was sought, not from a sense of assthetic or dramatic fitness, but through 
charm of long association with his midnight prayer, or simply as his wonted place of 
retirement in the days of his insecurity. As a good Israelite observing the Passover, 
he tnay not leave the limits of the sacred city, yet will he choose the spot best 
adapted for security and retirement. 2. At first awakening conflicting impulses. He 
craved at once for sympathy and for solitude. The general company of disciples were 
brought to the verge of the garden, and informed of his purpose ; the three nearest to 
him in spiritual sympathies and susceptibilities were taken into the recesses of the 
garden, into nearer proximity and communion. And yet ultimately he must needs be 
alone. All this is perfectly natural, and, considering the nature of his emotion, expli- 
cable upon deep human principles : " Sympathy and solitude are both desirable in 
severe trials " (Godwin). There was a sort of oscillation between these two poles, 
3. To be attributed to the influence of supernatural insight upon his human sympathy 
and feeling. What it was he saw and felt cannot be adequately conceived by us, but 
that it was not emotion occasioned by ordinary earthly interests or attachmente we 
may assure ourselves. The exegesis which sees in " exceeding sorrowful to die " a 
reason for concluding that it was the idea of dying which so overwhelmed our Saviour, 
may be safely left to its own reflections. The " cup " he felt he had to drink to its 
dregs be had already alluded to (ch. x. 88). It had " in it ingredients which were nevei 
mingled by the hand ol his Father, such as the treachery of Judas, the desertion of 
his disciples, denial on the part of Peter, the trial in the Sanhedrim, the trial before 
Pilate, the scourging, the mockery of the soldiery, the crucifixion, etc." (Mori- 
son). " Bte began to be sore amazed [dismayed, sorrowful], and to be very heavy 
[oppressed, distressed]," are terms which are left purposely vague. He saw the depths 
of iniquity, he felt the overwhelming burden of human sinfulness. 4. Se betook 
himself to prayer as the only relief for his surcharged feeling. The safest and highest 
way of recovering spiritual equilibrium. Well will it be for a man when his grief 
dri\'ns him to Goal There is no sorrow we cannot take to him, whether it be great or 
small. 

Ix. The bolitus*. 1. Bymbdliztd by his physical apartness from the thrte diaci]^9$^ 



CH. XIV. 1— 7ii.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MABK. 257 



" Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow ? " We may not intrude. Qoi only can 
fathom its depths and appreciate its purity and intensity. 2. Suggested hy their faUurt 
to " watch." 

III. Thb conflict. The physical eifeots of this are given hy St. Luke. His prayer 
was a " wrestling," not so much with his Father as with himself. But the struggle 
gradually subsides to submission and rest. This shows itself in his detachment from 
his own emotions and attention to the condition of his disciples, and soon in his move- 
ment towards the approaching band of the betrayer. There is a complete " grammar " 
of emotion gone through, however, ere that spiritual result is attained. Uncertainty, 
dread, the weakness of human nature, are overcome by the resolute contemplation of 
the Divine will. His own will is deliberately and solemnly submitted to his Father's, 
and the latter calmly and profoundly acquiesced in as best and most blessed for all it 
concerns. — ^M. 

Vers. 43 — 50. — The betrayal. It involved in its very conception a rude, prof*ne 
intrusion upon our Lord's devotions. At the head of the band was Judas, and vdth 
him the Roman soldiers with their swords, and the servants of the chief priests with 
staves (cudgels, thick sticks). Having met the temptations of the soul in the solitude 
of jirayer, the Lord is now the better able to meet the external trials of which the 
garden is also the scene. 

I. The pretended fbiends of Christ are his worst enemies. Only a disciple can 
betray as Judas did. The kiss and salutation of respect, " Rabbi 1" have become 
classical. 

n. Not the skill or force of his captors, but his own meekness and meroitul 
PTJBPOSE, bendered THEIR SCHEME EFFECTUAL. There was no surprise, for the Victim 
of the treachery was fully aware of it, and, indeed, warned his disciples of me 
ajjproach of the band (ver. 42). As a stratagem, the midnight expedition was therefore 
a failure. And there is something unspeakably ludicrous in the portentous weapons 
which were thoui;ht necessary, and the large number of men. This is the sting of 
many a carefully hatched villainy, viz. that eventually it loses even the merit of 
originality or cleverness. The wisdom of this world is in a ly case no match for the 
wisdom of God. 

IIL The interests of Christianitv are not served by force or violbncb. It 
was Peter whose impulsiveness had betrayed him into the thoughtless act. Hidden 
probably by the darkness, he was not detected, tave by the eye of the Master. Had it 
even been expedient to oppose force with force in the general conflict of Christ with the 
world-power, on that occasion the odds were tremendous (cf. Matt. xxvi. 52). 

IV. The Son of man had to meet the onset of evil alone. His prediction was 
fulfilled (ver. 27).— M. 

Vers. 43 — 50. — The betrayal. I. A transcendent crime. Because of: 1. Tha 
chaa-acter of Jesus. 2. ITie betrayer's relations to him. Ingratitude. Callous selfish- 
ness. Breach of trust. 3. Circumstances of the act. Intrusion upon holy retirement. 
Simulation of highest regard and purest sentiment. The spiritual interests of humanity 
trified with. 

II. A BUPREMB FOLLT AND FAILUBB. Overdoue. Foreseen. Ending in contempt 
and misery. — M. 

Vers. 53 — 65. — Jesus at the bar of Judaism. I. The oharactbb of the evidehcb 
AGAINST HIM. 1. Not in support of any clear and definite indictment. 2. Encouraged 
by a desire on the part of the judges to incriminate. " They sought witness." The 
death of the Prisoner a foregone conclusion. 3. The accusations unreliable and con- 
flicting. 

II. His REPLY TO HIS ACCUSERS. Silence : (1) Because of their character, and (2) his 
own. The impressive dignity of this attitude. He would not juatity himself before 
an earthly tribunal. 

IIL His answer to the high priest's question. Ee declared himself the Messiah 
and the Judge of all the earth. This was done out of respect to the representative 
character of the high priest, and in order to assure and inform faithful Jews. 
MASK— n. * 



268 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIJJG TO ST. MAEK [oh. xiv. 1—72 

IV, How THIS WAS coNSTKUBD. As llasphemy : either (1) on the ground of imagi- 
nary, or feloniously represented, resemblance of the words, "I am," to Jehcvah'g 
Name ; or (2) because the claim was a priori assumed to be false. 

y. He was BEJECTBD and DIBHONOUBED BT those he OAUE to sate, OCT or BHEEB 
WAKT0NNBS8 AND DNBELIBF. — M. 

Vers. 54, 66 — 72. — Peter denying Christ. The seeming discrepancies of the accounts 
by the evangelists of Peter's threefold denial are explained on the ground of their 
independency of one another, and their making prominent various portions of a 
lengthened and complex series of actions. " Three denials are mentioned by all the 
evangelists, and three occasions are distinguished ; but on some of these there was more 
than one speaker, and probably more than one answer." This circumstance was — 

I. An evidence op the power of evil in good men. This is the great lesson o( 
the sins of the saints. There 0UL;ht to be continual watchfulness, and living and 
walking in the Spirit. 1. It is not well to expose one's self to temptation tmless/rom the 
highest motives. Curiosity seems to have been the ruling principle in Peter's mind. 
He was following the highest good, but not as perceiving it lo be so, or truly desiring 
it — a perilous state of things. There are many unworthy foUowini^s of Christ, which 
have the "greater condemnation." Duty and self-sacrifice will, on the other hand, 
carry men safely through the most terrible trials. 2. Low views of Chrisfs character 
and office tend to unworthy conduct. The whole spiritual state of Peter was such as to 
expose him to the perpetration cf the worst actions, and this arose from prevalence of 
false conceptions of Christ's person and work. His attitude and occupation imme- 
diately beforehand (" afar off;" " warming himself ") have been regarded by many as 
symbolical of his spiritual position with regard to his Master. Scepticism and mental 
confusion on religious subjects, if not corrected or neutralized by close fellowship with 
Christ, or loyalty to the highest truth one knows, have sad moral results. Peter was 
still clinging against hope to his idea of a worldly Messiah. 3. Evil words and 
actions, if once indulged in, are the more easily repeated and aggravated. He proceeds 
from an equivocation — "I neither know nor understand what thou sayest" — to a stronger 
and more direct negative, and then to oaths and profanities. 

n. An evidence of the necessity and power of Christ's atonement. Even 
good men like Peter, if left to themselves, will grievously eir and sin. How are men 
in such a position to be recovered? 1. Tliere must there/ore he a saving principle 
outside, and independent of, ourselves. It is by virtue of his completed sacrifice in 
spirit that Christ by a look recalls his fallen disciple, and thus shows : 53. The power of 
his Spirit to redeem. In connection with such a power over spirit and conscience the 
greatest sins may be made the turning-points of repentance. Memory was appealed to, 
and the outward signs predicted by the Saviour served as a spiritual index or clock of 
conscience. The cockcrowing has also an element of hope in it; it marked th« 
dawning of a new day of penitence and enlightenment. — M. 

Ver. 6. — " She hath wrought a good work on me." Describe the feast in the housB 
of Simon the leper, and distinguish the incident from that which is recorded in 
Luke vii. Indicate Mary's reasons for loving the Lord, with all her heart and soul and 
strength, and show that this act of exquisite self-abandonment was the natural 
expression of her love. Learn from the subject the following lessons : — 

L That ah act which is pleasing to odr Lord mat be misconstrued and con- 
demned BY HIS DISCIPLES. All the disciples were guilty of murmuring against Mary, 
but John points out that Judas Iscariot began it. Entrusted with the bag in which 
the common fund was kept, he had carried on for some time past a system of petty 
thievery. It has been suggested that, as our Lord knew his besetting sin of avarice, 
it would have been kinder not to have put this temptation in his way. There is, 
however, another aspect of this question. Evil habits are sometimes conquered by 
a tacit appeal to honour and generasity. An outward habit may be got rid of by 
removal of temptation, but absence of temptation does not root out the sin. In effect 
our Lord said to Judas, " I know your sin, but yet I put this money in your charge ; for 
surely you would not rob the poor, defraud your brethren, and dishonour mel" This 
•ppeal might have saved Judas ; but he yielded to his sin till it damned hiju. Suph a 



:k. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDmG TO ST. MARK. 269 

man would be likely to feel aggrieved at this generous act of Mary's. He folt as if he 
had been personally defrauded. He Itnew that if this spikenard, which had vanished 
in a few minutes of refreshing fragrance, had been sold he would have had the manipu- 
lation of the proceeds. Therefore he was angry with Mary, and angry with the Lord, 
who had not rejected her offering. We can easily understand the feeling of Judas. 
But how was it the disciples re-echoed his complaint ? They sided with him, although 
they certainly were not actuated by his base motive. Well, we all know that if a word 
of censure be uttered in the Church it swiftly spreads, and is like leaven, which soon 
leavens the whole lump. Suspicion and slander find easier access to men's hearts than 
stories of heroism and generosity. Weeds seed themselves more rapidly than flowers. 
The disciples had more to justify their fault-finding than we sometimes have. They 
were plain peasants, who had never known the profusion of modern life, and they were 
aghast at the idea of such a prodigality of luxury as this. From all they knew of their 
Lord they supposed that he would have preferred the relief of the poor to any indulgence 
for himself, and that he himself would have been disposed to say, " To what purpose is 
this waste?" Many now imagine that they can infallibly decide what will please or 
displease their Lord, yet in their condemnation of others they are often mistaken. 
Mary, no doubt, was discouraged and disappointed. Her gift had been the subject ol 
thought and prayer, and now that her opportunity had come for presenting it slie eagerly 
seized it. She was prepared for the sneers of the Pharisees ; but surely the disciples 
would be glad to see their Lord honoured. At their rebuke her heart was troubled ; her 
eyes filled with tears as she thought, " Perhaps they are right. I ought to have sold 
it." Then Jesus looked on her with loving approval, and thiew over her the shield of 
his defence. 

II. That any seevicb which is the orpspRiNa of love to the Lobd is aoceptablb 
TO him. He perfectly understood and approved her motive, and therefore was pleaset 
with her offering. Whether it came in the fragrance of this ointment, or in the form 
of three hundred pence, was of comparatively little consequence. It meant, " I love 
thee supremely," and therefore he was glad. Naturally so. When a child brings you 
the relic of some feast which you would rather not have, yet because it has been saved 
from love to you, you eat it with as much gusto as if it were nectar from Olympus. 
Why? Because you judge of the gift from the love it expresses; and this, in an 
infinitely higher sphere, our Lord also does. Unlike us, he always knows what the 
motive is, and about many an act condemned by his disciples he says, " She hath 
wrought a good work on me." Ka\6i>, translated " good," means something beautiful, 
noble, or lovely. Mary's act was not ordered by the Law, nor dictated by precedent, 
nor suitable to everybody ; but for her, as an expression of her love, it was the most 
beautiful thing possible. She poured her heart's love on Jesus when she poured the 
spikenard firom the broken cruse. 

III. That a gift or act pkompted bv love to the Lobd may have far moke 
EFFECT than WE DESIGN. " She is come aforehand to anoint my body to the burying." 
Some argue from this that Mary knew Jesus was about to be crucified, and would rise 
again from the dead, so that this would be the only time for such anointing. I doulit 
that. Probably she had no distinct, ulterior design when she simply did what her love 
prompted. But in commending her .Jesus in effect said, " In this act she has done 
more than you think — more than she herself imagines ; for she is anointing me for my 
burial." In God's Word we find that we are credited for the good or for the evil latent 
in our actions, by Divine justice or in Divine generosity. We read of some standing 
jefore the Judge of quick and dead who are amazed at the issues of their half-forgotten 
acts for or against the Saviour. " When saw we thee an hungred or athirst ? " etc. 
This was the principle on which Christ attributed to Mary's act a result she could not 
have foreseen. 

CoNCLnsioN. This is true of evil as of good. There is not a sin you commit but it 
may beget other sins, and in effect as well as in memory the words are true, " The evil 
that men do lives after them." For the far-reaching effects of siuful words and deeds, 
of which he may know nothing till the day of judgment, the sinner is responsible tc 
God. What an encouragement is here to steadfast continuance in well-doing ! That 
which has the smalle.-t immediate result may have the greatest ultimately. The story 
of Mary's inexpressible love has had far greater effect in blessing the world tha,n tlw 



260 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDLNG TO ST. MAEK. [oh. xiv. 1—72 

dUtribudon of three hundred pence among the poor, which human judgment might 
have preferred. — ^A. B. 

Ver. 12. — The Passover. The Passover was by far the most important of the Jewish 
feasts. The disciples of our Lord were sure that he, who ever fulfilled the righteous- 
ness of the Law, would not fail to observe it. Their reminder of what they supposed 
he had forgotten, but which really was the subject of far profounder thought with him 
than they could fathom, immediately led to the remarkable incidents which are here 
recorded — the strange provision of the feast by a secret disciple, and the spiritual insti- 
tution which Christ founded on the ancient rite. There were truths set forth by the 
Mosaic festival of which the Jews were never to lose sight, and which are full of siguifi- 
cance to us. A few of these we will recall. 

L The Passovbb ebquirbd a spotless victim. In this, as in many other Jewish 
ordinances, the spiritual was represented by the visible. The victim might be chosen 
from the goats or from the sheep. (Kids were offered as late as Josiah's reign (2 Chron. 
xixv. 7), although in our Lord's time only lambs were sacrificed.) This was of less 
consequence than the rule that the victim chosen should be " without blemish." Not 
deformed, sickly, or injured. 1. Doubtless this taught the worshippers to offer their 
best, and do so cheerfully, with humble acknowledgment of the Divine right. The Jews 
learnt the lesson. Their religion cost them something, and they nobly responded to its 
claims, as we see when the tabernacle was erected and when the temple was built. 
Christians, in their gifts and in services, too often act as the Israelites would have done 
had they chosen their blemished and sickly lambs for sacrifice. 2. Besides, this pro- 
vision was significant of the sacred pmrpose to which the victim was devoted, and sym- 
bolical of the moral integrity of the person it represented. The male of the first year, 
in the fulness of its life, stood for the firstborn sons of Israel, who were spared, while it 
died. 3. Nor does this exhaust the meaning. The spotless lamb points to him of whom 
John Baptist said, " Behold the Lamb of God 1 " to him who " otfered up himself; " to 
him of whom we read, " Ye are not redeemed with corruptible things . . . but with th« 
precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, and without spot." 

II. The Passover bequired personal participation. It might have seemed to 
human wisdom hardly reasonable that deliverance from a pestilence should be the result 
of sprinkling the blood of a slaughtered lamb on the two side posts and lintel of the 
door; but he would have suffered the penalty of his rashness who had run the risk of 
his incredulity. Every saved household had its own lamb, and every saved one in that 
household was compelled to remain, for his safety, in the blood-sprinkled house. This 
arrangement, on the basis of family relationship, was not made so much for con- 
venience as it was to sanction and sanctify home life, and to teach all who were 
united by earthly love to find their centre in the Paschal lamb. The Israelites were 
not saved because they were descended from Abraham, but because of the blood 
sprinkled in faith and obedience. 

III. The Passover was to be accompanied by penitence and sincerity. 1. 2%e 
use of unleavened bread was ordained. Leaven, the presence of which was strictly 
forbidden, was a symbol of moral corruption, which the people were to put away froin 
their hearts. Christ Jesus warned his disciples against " the leaven of the Pharisees, 
which is hypocrisy." St. Paul (1 Cor. v. 7, 8), referring to evil in the Church, said, 
" Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us : therefore let us keep the feast, not with old 
leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened 
bread of sincerity and truth." More than anything else our Lord rebuked insincerity. 
As the King of truth he still says, " He that is of the truth heareth my voice." 2. Bitter 
herbs were also to be eaten at the Passover, Not because ahey would give flavour to 
Biveeter food, nor as a mere accompaniment to it, but as an essential part of the feast. 
The bitter bondage of Egypt was thereby represented, which was overpowered by the 
sweetness of the lamb. It may symbolize the bitter sorrow with which we should 
mourn our guilt. 

IV. The Pabsoveb was a source of peace, and a plbdqb of progress. 1. Th« 
Israelites in Egypt knew that judgment was falling around them, and in that ominous 
dreadful night the peace of each one was proportioned to his trust in the ap- 
pointed means of deliverance. 2. Those who paitook of the feast were prepared 



m. xiT. 1— ?2.] THB CMDSPEL ACCOllDINa TO ST. MABK. 261 

for the maroh through the Bed Sea and the wUdemesa, until Canaan waa reached and 
won. — A. B. 

Vera. 22— 24.— 3^ £or<r« Supper, The Lord's Supper was the natural outgrowth 
uf the PasBOTer. The broken bread, which was made a symbol of our Lord's broken 
body, had been seen and partaken of for generations by the Jews, who had regarded it 
as " the bread of affliction " which their fathers once ate in Egypt. " The cup of 
blessing," transformed into " the communion of the blood of Christ," was the third cup 
in the feast, which followed on the distribution of the Paschal lamb, and preceded the 
singing of the Hallel. The whole Passover was a symbolical festival of remembrance, 
and this we believe the Lord's Supper was intended to be. It was not to be a repeated 
sacrifice, as Gregory the Oreat was the first to suggest, but was a feast to be eaten in 
remembrance of the Saviour. No symbols could be more appropriate. The bread 
represented the Bread of life ; the broken bread that it was broken for us. The wine was 
" the blood of the grape " (Gen. xlix. H), poured out from the true Vine (John xv. 1), 
which was its Source. The expression, " This is my body," surely could not have been 
taken in any literal sense by the disciples, who had their Lord in his physical presence 
visible amongst them when he spoke. It was equivalent to " This represents my 
body ; " just as elsewhere we read, " The field is the world ; " " I am the true Vine; 
" Leaven ... which is hypocrisy " (see also Gal. iv. 24 ; Heb. x. 20). What, then, 
are some of the advantages of this commemorative feast ? 

I. It befbesents the fbofitiatobt ohabacteb of Christ's death. His blood was 
shed for many, for the remission of sins. His death was not merely a martyrdom ; it 
was an atonement. He gave his life for the sheep. The prophets foretold this (Isa. liii.) ; 
the apostles declared it (Bom. v.); the redeemed praise the Lamb who was slain, 
because he washed them from their sins in his own blood. 

XL It BEHiNsa ns of the neoessitt for febsonallt PABTAEma of Chbist. "Take, 
eat : this is my body." What we eat and drink becomes a part of ourselves. Once our 
Lonl said, " Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no 
life in you.'' Food is useless unless we partake of it. Christ came to ns in vain unless 
we trust him as our own Saviour and Lord. 

III. It IS IN ITSELF A MEANS OF OBACE. This is to be proved in experience rather 
than by Scripture. Just as a word which we can see or hear conveys a thought which 
we cannot see or hear, so the bread and the wine convey thoughts of Christ, of his 
sacrifice, of his claims, of his love, which refresh and strengthen our inmost life. 

IV. It IS A PBOOLAMATioN OF FELLOWSHIP. 1 Cor. X. 16, ctc, " For we being 
many are one bread, and one body : for we are all partakers of that one bread." A 
" communion " is that of which we are common partakers, and St. Paul argues that hy 
eating and drinking together thus we proclaim our unity; just as the Israelites in 
Egypt, on the night of the Exodus, met in families, each finding its centre of thought 
and safety in the Paschal Iamb. It is the idea of the family, and not of the priesthood, 
that God makes the germ of the Christian Church. Those in it are to " bear one another'a 
burdens, and so fulfil the Law of Christ." By the extension of the Church will oome 
about the true brotherhood, for which the world still sighs. 

V. It 18 A PLEDGE OF FIDELITY. The " sacramentum " was the oath taken by the 
Boman soldier that he would never desert the standard, never turn his back on the foe, 
and never be disloyal to his commander. By our presence at the sacrament we pledge 
each other, before God, that with his help we vrill be true men, more courageous, more 
pure, more victorious, tiiau before. 

VI. It IS A SIGN OF 8EPABATI0N. The Egyptians had no part in the FasBOver. Tlw 
scribes and Pharisees were not invited to the upper room. Judas, so far as we can 
judge, left before the new rite was instituted. St. Paul spoke of the duty devolving on 
the Ohuich at Corinth to remove the immoral from fellowship. Yet all true disciples, 
though they may doubt as Thomas did, or deny their Lord like Peter, are invitea to 
Mt and drink wUh each other, and with tlieir Lord. — A. B. 

Vers. 32 — 35. — Qethsemane. The Mediator between God and maij experienced all 
the vicissitudes of human life. From the loftiest height of joy Ije plunged into th« 
deepest depths of distress. Because of the fulness of his nature he surpassed us in thcM 



ki I'SE GdsPEL ACcoRDma TO s*. Mark. to^.tmA-^ll 

experiences, alike in the glory of the Transfiguration and in the agony of Gethsemana 
Therefore we are never beyond the range of his sympathy. We are all familiar with th« 
outward circumstances of this incident, but the wisest of us knows but little of th« 
depths of its mystery. Indeed, although our interest in the scene is intense, although 
we feel it is fraught with the destiny of our race, we shrink with hesitation from speak- 
ing much of it. A sense of intrusiveness overpowers those who are conscious of ignor. 
ance and sin, when they would gaze on that sinless agony of grief. It seems as if oui 
Lord still said to his disciples, " Sit ye hart, while I shall pray." The place whereon 
we stand is holy ground. 

L The sufpebino Savioub. 1. There ii mystery about his agony. Our recognition 
of the proper deity and humanity of our Lord leads us to expect seeming contradictions 
in him. They appear in his intercessory prayer. In one breath he speaks as the Son 
of God, in another he wrestles as a weak man might do. Sometimes he pleads as a 
Mediator, and sometimes he expresses himself with Divine majesty and authority. It 
is so with our Lord's agony, which must ever be a stone of stumbling to all who refuse 
to recognize that they only know in part and prophesy in part. Thus some assert that 
this experience contradicts the composure and resolution with which our Lord had 
previously anaounced his sufferings; and that his prayer is in antagonism with his 
omniscience as the Son of God. Here is the Prince of peace seemingly destitute of 
peace ; the world's Redeemer wanting deliverance ; the Comforter himself needing con- 
solation. As the old myth reminds us, we sometimes come across a fact which appears 
like a glittering ring which a child could lift when we walk around it and talk about 
it ; but, when we try to lift it, we find it is no isolated rinp:, but a link in a chain which 
we can hardly stir, for it girdles the earth and reaches heaven and hell ! " Behold, 
God is great, and we know him not ; and darkness is undc- his feet." 2. There is a 
meaning in this agony. We gain some little insight into it when we remember the 
vicarious nature of Christ's sufferings ; that " the Lord hath laid upon him the iniquities 
of us all." If Jesus Christ were only a great Prophet, who came to enlighten the world, 
he might now seem to have lost his courage. If he were only an Exemplar of uncon- 
ditional resignation or heroic endurance, he was surpassed by others. All points to the 
conclusion that his sufferings were not like those of Job, or Jeremiah, or Paul, or 
Stephen, but were unique in the world's history. He, the sinless One, was the Repre- 
sentative and Substitute of the sinful world. 

IL The tboubled believes may find instruction and comfort in this experience of 
his Lord, especially in the consciousness of his sympathy. 1. Sympathy was longed for 
even hy our Lord. He wanted to have near him those who could best understand Mm, 
■o that in the thought of their affection and prayer he might find comfort. It &iled 
him. They were overpowered by sleep, and when aroused, they fell back into the old 
drowsiness. It was another pang in his anguish. He trod the winepress cUone. How 
tenderly he feels for lonely sufferers I 2. Absence of sympathy intensified prayer. When 
our trouble is very heavy it has a tendency to paralyze prayer, and makes the heart 
stony; but we should rather follow him who, being in an agony, prayed the more 
earnestly. If, in answer to prayer, the cup is not taken away, still the prayer is not 
useless. Paul thrice besought the Lord in vain to remove the thorn in the flesh ; but 
he had an answer, " My grace is sufiBcient for thee." And our Lord came forth from 
the place of prayer as one who had already gained the victory. 3. Earnestness in 
prayer led to absolute submission. When we pray we realize with growing intensity 
that there is another will besides ours and above ours firm and wise and good. If God 
sees further than we see ; if he knows what would harm and what would bless us, when 
we do not ; if he looks not only to this little life, but to the eternity to which it leads ; 
let us seek in prayer to know what his will is, and then say, even though it be with 
tears, " Nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." — ^A. B. 

Ter. 36. — The eup of experience. The mystery of our Lord's suffering is beyond our 
power of accurate analysis. We cannot fathom the depths of sin and grief which ha 
experienced. We must not suppose that, because we are so familiar with this narrative, 
we know all its significance. At the most we have only felt one wave of the sea of 
sorrow which sobbed and swelled in his infinite heart. Only one phase of this many- 
irided subject will engage our attention. Leaving the atoning nature of the sufferiogi 



efl. xtv: 1—^2.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 36^ 

of our Lord, we will now regard him as the Bepresentatiye of hia people, their Fore- 
runner in this as in all things. The " cup " is a figure familiar enough to all students 
of Scripture. 

I. The CUV of expebienok may be represented by the cup which was the symbol of 
the mockery and shame and grief the Saviour suffered. 1. The phrase remindi ui 
that ourjoyi and griefs are measured. A cup is not illimitable. Pull to the brim, it 
can only hold its own measure. (1) Our joys are limited by what is in us, and by 
what is in them. If a man prospers in the world, his wealth brings him not only 
comfort, but care, anxiety, and responsibility, so that he may occasionally wish himself 
back in his former lowlier lot. And family joys bring their anxieties to every home 
which has them. No one drinks here of an ocean of bliss but he thanks God for a 
" cup " of it, measured by One who knows what will be host for character. This is 
true even of spiritual joys. The time of ecstasy is followed by a season of depression. 
The Valley of Humiliation is passed, as well as the Delectable Mountains, by (Jhristian 
in his pilgrimage. Nowhere on earth can we say, " I am satisfied ; " but many, like 
the psalmist, can exclaim, " I shall be satisfied." (2) Our griefs are limited also. 
They are proportioned to our strength, adapted for our improvement. Even in the 
saddest bereavement there is much to moderate our grief if we will but receive it : 
gratitude for all our dear one was and did ; gladness over all the testimonies of love 
and esteem in which he was held ; hope that by-and-by there shall be the reunion, 
where there shall be no more sorrow and sighing, and where " God shall wipe away all 
tears from our eyes." God does not let an ocean of sadness surge up and overwhelm 
U8, but gives us a cup, which we may drink in fellowship with Chiist in his sufferings. 
2. The phrase in our text suggests not only measurement, but loving control. Our Lord 
recognized, as we may humbly do, that the cup was filled and proffered by him whom 
he addressed as " Abba, Father." In one sense the events in Gethsemane and on 
Calvary were the results of natural causes. Integrity and sinlessness called forth the 
antagonism of those whose sins were thereby rebuked. Plain-spoken denunciations of 
the ecclesiastical leaders aroused their undying hate, and no hatred is more malignant 
than that of irreligious theolo;;ians. Judas, disappointed and abashed, was a readj 
instrument for evil work. Yet, behind all this, One unseen was carrying out his eternal 
purpose, fulfilling his promise, "The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head." 
Hence Jesus speaks not of the plot accomplished by his foes, but of the cup given him 
by the Father. We are at an infinite remove from him, yet, as the same law which 
controls worlds controls insects, so the truth which held good with the Son of man 
holds good also with us. We may recognize God's overruling in man's working, and 
accept every measure of experience as provided and proffered by our Father's hand. 

II. The pceposb or its appointment. That it comes from our " Father " shows that 
it hag a purpose, and that it is one of love, not of cruelty. It is not like the cup of 
hemlock Socrates received from his foes, but Uke that potion you give your child that 
he may be refreshed, or strengthened, or cured. 1. Someti'mea the purpose respects our- 
selves. Even of Jesus Christ, the sinless One, it is said he was " made perfect through 
sufferings;" that as our Brother he might feel for us, and as our High Priest might 
sympathize, being " touched with the feeling of our infirmities." Much more is the 
experience of life a blessing to us who are imperfect and sinful ; correcting our world- 
liness, and destroying our self-confidence. 2. Sometimes the purpose respects others. 
It was so with our Lord pre-eminently. He " came not to be ministered unto, but to 
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many." " None of us liveth unto himself." 
If our cup of blessing runs over, its overflowings, whether of wealth, or strength, or 
spi-itual joy, »re for the good of those around us. If our lot be one of suffering, we 
may in it witness for our Lord, and from it learn to console others with the comfort 
wherewith we ourselves have been comforted of God. — ^A, R. 

Vers. 39—43. — /borrow, sleep, and sin. When a dear friend is in trouble our foot- 
fall is quiet and our voice hushed. Even children are awed to silence when they see 
the face they love stained with tears and pale with anguish. How much more doot 
stillness of soul become us when we enter into the Garden of Gethsemane and see the 
Lord we love in his agony I Christ completed the cycle of human temptations la 
Qethsemaue. In the wilderness he had been tempted to desire what was forbidden, t* 



«W THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1—72. 

obtain prorision In a wrong way, to manifest Divine power in an act of preiumption, 
to gain the kingdom by force and fraud. Now he was tempted to avoid what waa 
ordained. And to do what we ought not, not to do what we ought, sums up all temp- 
tations. He " was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin." In this 
mystericug scene we discern a concentration of human history. 

I. The bin-foegettinb CHimcH is lepresented by the disciples who failed their 
Lord. 1. They did not underftand the necessity/ and r/readfulness of Ohrisfa struggle 
with the powers of darkness. They allowed natural weariness to overcome them, so that 
they had no share in the conflict endured near them and for them. As little does the 
Church share the purpose of Christ in the redemption of the world from sin ; nor does 
she see the need for being in an "agony" about it. Is there the feeling about sin, even 
abo«t our own sin, that there should be ? Are we not too often like those who, under 
the shadow of Christ's sorrow, slept, though he himself had said, " Tarry ye here, and 
watch"? 2. Nor did these disciples reach the source of power that niyht. It was 
impossible to find victory through human passion, as Peter discovered after he had 
drawn and used his sword. Indiscriminate zeal, which will attack heretics and sceptics 
with bitter words and penalties, is sure to fail. Power to overcome is found in obe- 
dience to the command, " Watch and pray." To watch without praying is presumption; 
to pray without watching is fanaticism. The difference between our Lord and his 
disciples was this : they refreshed themselves by natural means, and he by spiritual ; 
they fell back on sleep, and he on prayer — just as too often we rely on human agencies, 
aiid not on Divine. 3. Their confusion and indecision increased as they diverged from 
their Lord. He became more calm, and more sure of victory. They became more 
heavy with sleep, more cowardly and unpre|)ared, till they all forsook him and tied. 
Only when they assembled a^^ain in his Name to pray in the upper room were they 
endued with power from on high. " Let us not sleep as do others, but let us watch 
and be sober," lest again he should say, "Sleep on now, and take your rest. . . . Behold, 
the Son of man is betrayed." 

n. The SIN-COMMITTING WORLD. (Ver. 43.) 1. While the disciples slept, the hostile 
world was alert. This vigilance was a rebuke to their sloth. Still it is so. Frequenters 
of haunts of pleasure are often more eager than members of Christ's Church to invite 
their companions to join them. 2. 1 hose who assail the cause of Christ are animated 
by different motives. Some are malignant, as the priests were; others join in the 
popular cry, though it be " Crucify him 1 " The mob in Jerusalem had little idea what 
they were doing — casting out of the world the Son of God, who had come to be their 
Saviour and Friend. Men's acts have more in them than appears ; and some who are 
simply careless will be amazed to find themselves reckoned amongst his foes ! The 
world had no power over Christ except through the traitor Judas. The weakness of 
the Church, the inconsistency or apostasy of Christians, ever lead to the most successful 
attacks. Judas knew where Jesus resorted, and betrayed him by a kiss. The fall of 
one sentinel may prove the destruction of the camp. 

III. The sin-bearing Savioub. It is no figment of theological imagination that he 
himself took our infirmities, that " he was wounded for our transgressions, and bruised 
for our iniquities." He made atonement for us, as well as learnt sympathy with us. 
He took the cup of bitterness that we might receive the cup of blessing. — A. B. 

Ver. 54. — Follounng afojr off. The story of Peter's denial is not omitted by any of 
the evangelists. They were, more anxious for truth than for reputation. They get 
before us the strongest disciple at his weakest moment without a word of wonder, of 
blame, or of excuse. Our text indicates the state of mind which led to his fall. He 
was just beginning his descent to the depths of shame. Because he " followed afar off " 
he found the door of the house shut against him, cutting him off from John and from 
his Lord. Outside, alone, in the dark, he became more despondent as he reflected that 
Jesus was in the power of his foes, and that any attempt at rescue had been rebuked 
by himself; so by the time John came out he had given up hope, and still stooil afar 
off from his Lord, amidst his fues. Then and there occurred this moral tragedy in 
Church history. Let us consider — 

I. Some motives weuch should havb inducbd Pbtbk to follow closely. 1. Thh 
f«m«miranc« i^hi» vumprofessions. When Jesus had asked, "Will ye also go away?" 



•H. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 26S 

Peter had made a noble response ; and when an earnest warning had been uttered a 
few hours before this, he had exclaimed, " Though all shall be offended, yet will not L" 
He meant his promises, and to abide by them ; but though the spirit was willing, the 
flesh was weak. The world is fair in expecting move from those who are professed 
followers of Christ. Flight is more disgraceful to a soldier in uniform than to a camp- 
follower. 2. Peter's recognized leadership of his brethren was another reason for close 
following. The Lord indicated that Peter would be their leader from the first, and the 
disciples acquiesced in this, always making way for him to speak and act on their 
behalf. His responsibility was the heavier. If he had continued to watch, they would 
have done so; if he had followed closely, they might have rallied. The failure of on« 
was the failure of all. Each one is responsible to God for the talent, position, or force 
of character which constitutes him a leader of, men. To whom much is given, from 
him much is required. 3. The loneliness of the Lord ought to have appealed tii 
Peter's heroism and generosity. We can hardly understand how, with hij noble im- 
pulses, he could have left Jesus alone amongst his foes. Yet how often do Chris- 
tians now fail to stand forth like men to rebuke wrong-doing at any riskl The 
fact that they alone represent their Lord amid evil companions, is an appeal to all that 
is chivalrous in them to speak. 4. The remembrance of Christ's personal love to him 
might have drawn him nearer. Jesus had dealt gently and generously with Peter. 
He had chosen him, with two of his brethren, to see his glory on the Mount of Trans- 
figuration, and to see something of his dire agony in the garden. He had been faith- 
fully warned of danger, and assured of the intercession of his Lord. Yet all seemed 
forgotten, and he only "followed afar off." It is when we realize the words, " He loved 
ne, and gave himself for me," that we can say, " My soul foUoweth hard after God." 

II. Some excuses which Pbteb might have ueqbd for his conduct. 1. It seemed 
as if he could do no good to his Lord. He had tried in his own way to defend him, but 
had been rebuked, and no other way seemed open. He forgot that, though his Master 
had refused the use of physical force, he would have gladly welcomed human sym- 
pathy. John had deeper insight. Amid the sea of hatred which surged around him, 
our Lord saw at least one face which expressed love and sympathy. Utilitarianism 
sometimes keeps us from beautiful and graceful acts, because we do not see immediate, 
practical good in them. We should probably not have poured out the spikenard as 
Mary did, but should have joined with those who asked, " To what purpose is this 
waste ? " Let us never follow afar off because we do not see the practical advantage of 
walking closely with our Lord. Heaven's best blessings are too subtle to be tabulated. 
2. It seemed as if evil would befall himself if he stood close beside his Master. On 
entering the palace amongst this excited rabble, he might fear personal violence, espe- 
cially if he were recognized as the assailant of Malchus. He wished, therefore, to con- 
duct himself as one of the miscellaneous crowd. In doing so he put his soul in danger, 
instead of his body. " He that saveth his life shall lose it," his Lord had said, and 
Peter learnt the meaning soon. This mingling of courage and cowardice puts many a 
man in danger. May God give ua the whole-hearted fidelity which even Peter failed 
that night to show 1 — A. R. 

Ver. 70. A detected disciple. This chapter is crowded with contrasts. 1. The 

unmeasured love of Mary of Bethany shines radiantly beside the unexampled treachery 
of Judas Iscariot. 2. Contrasts occur also in the experience of our Lord. He passes 
from the fellowship of the upper room to the solitude of Gethsemane ; from the secrecy 
of prayer to the publicity of a mock-trial before his foes. a. There are also great 
changes visible in the spiritual condition of certain disciples. Judas appears amongst 
the chosen disciples, listening to the Master's words and eating at the same table with 
him ! and a few hours after he is seen at the head of a band of ruffians, betraying his 
I,ord' with a traitorous kiss. Peter, in the garden, starts forth as a hero in defence of 
his Master ; but in the palace of the high priest, with trembling heart, demes all 
knowledge of him. To this last scene our text points us. (Describe it.) 

I. That there are circumstances in which the cause op Cheist arouses uncom- 
PROMisiNO hostility. Peter was experiencing this in the palace of Caiaphas. 1, 
Paganism was instinctively hostile to Christ's teaching. Far-seeing men amongst th« 
e«ntUos 80UU saw its drUt. They spoke of the apostles, not inaptly, as men who would 



266 I'flE aOStliL ACCOSDiNd TO ST. MARfe. [ch. xiv. 1—72. 

turn the world upside down. Christ's doctrine of hrotherhood would he the destroyer ol 
slavery. His inculcation of purity and righteousness threatened licentious pleasure! 
and tyrannous exactions. Men who could win high positions hy force or fraud, and 
immoral people, who loved brutal or sensual amusements, would unite in antagonism 
to the Christian faith. Some would hate it the more intensely because their worldly 
interests were associated with the continuance of paganism. Many a Demetrius saw 
that his craft was in danger, and priests, with their crowds of attendants, would contend 
zealously for the idolatry which gave them their living. They would have granted 
Christ Jesus a niche in their Pantheon ; but his followers claimed that he should reign 
supreme and alone. 2. 2%e Jems, hmoever, were the first instigator! cf opposition, 
Christianity threatened to destroy their national supremacy by inviting the Gentiles to 
all the privileges of the kingdom of God. They hated a Messiah who came not to 
deliver them from political bondage, but from their own prejudices and sins. 3. 
Heathenism in owr own day, whether at home or abroad, is at enmity with Christ. The 
vicious, who live to gratify their passions, the worldly, who would make this life their 
all, as well as the idolaters in distant lands, hate the teachings of our Lord. 4. Even in 
nominally Christian society there is sometimes seen an ill-suppressed dislike to earnest 
fidelity to Christ's cause. 

II. That a disciple of Christ, in thbsb oiRonMSTANOES, meets with a test of 
HIS UOBAL COURAGE. We all appreciate the heroism of the apostles, who, with their 
lives in their hands, witnessed for their Lord before Jews and pagans, rejoicing that they 
were counted worthy to suifer for his sake. Equal courage is occasionally exhibited in 
lives which are unromantic and prosaic, which endure each day the bitterness of scorn 
and shame. 1. Sometimes a Chrintian shows heroism by speech. Profanity is thus 
rebuked, slander is silenced, impurity is indignantly reproved, and the cause of Christ 
defended against mockery. It is well when this can be done without any sign of a 
Pharisaic spirit or of a censorious temper ; so that from the tone of the defence the 
godless are compelled to say, " These men have been with Jesus, and have learnt of 
him." 2. Silence may also be on occasion the display of courage. If one, by reason ol 
youth or sex, cannot speak, witness may be borne by quitting the scene where Christ 
is dishDnoured. The responsibility for witness-bearing is the heavier in proportion to 
the weight of our influence. The effect of Peter's denial was the greater because he 
was like a standard-bearer in the army of Christ. Even although his testimony might 
not have changed the opinion of one in the crowd around him, he was none the less 
bound to give it ; and our Lord was grieved because he withheld it. 

III. That very trivial things mat sometimes reveal association with Jbsus 
Christ. Peter had no expectation of being discovered. He was a stranger ; the crowd 
was large, and the excitement great ; it was dark, and attention seemed centred in 
Christ Jesus, to the exclusion of all beside. A question unexpectedly put necessitated 
an answer, and his rough Galilean brogue increased the suspicion to a certainty tliat ha 
was a peasant who had come up with .Jesus from Galilee, and was intimate enough 
with him to know of his secret and sudden arrest. 1. Even the nominal connection 
with Christ which we all have as Englishmen is betrayed by speech in foreign parts ; 
and how often is the work of our missionaries hindered there by dishonest tiaders, 
or profligate sailors and soldiers, who are supposed to be " Christians," but who by 
word and act deny the Lord! 2. Others, who have been under direct Christian 
influences in their homes, are sometimes tempted, at school or in business, to keep that 
fact secret, as if it were something to be ashamed of. But wlien some small phrase or 
act unexpectedly betrays the truth, and one of those standing by says, " Surely thou 
art one of them, . . . thy speech agreeth thereto," then comes the crisis, the turning- 
point, on which the whole future will hinge. Happy is it if then they are saved from 
Peter's £alll X Occasionally those who are devout disciples wish, like Nicodemus, to 
remain secretly so. They wish to avoid all responsibility, and therefore make no pro- 
fession of tlieir love. Little do they suspect how many are discoura'^ed by their failure 
to avow their loyalty to their Lord. Let all our influence everywhere bia consecrated 
to him. 

Conclusion. ITie hall of judgment is still standing. Christ Jesus is being examined 
and questioned now by men who resent his claims. Still we bear the cry, " Prophesy ' 
who is it that smote the« ? Tell us something new. Work some miracle now, %SM wn 



ejt. Xtv. 1-72J f Hfi GOSt»fiL ACCOfetot^a *0 St. MARK 261 

^ 4 

may believe thee." And to It all Jesus answers nothing. His Church is keeping close 
beside him, as John did, and is glad to share his reproach. But many are like Peter; 
they have followed afar off, so that the world should not notice them. They would not 
be so near as they are, but that others have led them, as John led his brother apostle. 
Yet, after all their friends have done, they are still outside, in the courtyard, among ths 
foes of their Lord. They hope that all will end well ; they dare not help In the conflict, 
so they keep lar enough away to retain their popularity, and yet to see the end. Aa 
the light of the fire revealed Peter, as his speech further betrayed him, so something 
has called attention to these, and companions begin to say, "Surely thou art one of 
them." What shall the answer be ? Shall it be, " I know him not; " or shall it be, 
" Lord, thou knowest all things ; thou knowest that I love thee " ? — A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 9. — The alabaster cruse. A scene of great interest and beauty is described 
in these words and in the supplement supplied by St. Matthew and St. John. On the 
last sabbath eve before his crucifixion, Jesus came to Bethany. In the bouse of Simon 
the leper a feast was made in his honour. The disciples were there, and, of necessity, 
Martha and her sister Mary, and Lazarus. What a representative group 1 Simon, the 
type of suflfering, healed, and restored human nature. Lazarus, a living testimony to 
the Lord's power over life and death — a blossom from the tree of life plucked in that 
early spring-time, promising a final fruitfulness in richness and beauty. Martha, who 
in her true character served, type of all faithful, diligent, practical, hardworking 
disciples. Mary, who also served in her way, with her heart full of meditative love ; 
the incarnation of pure, rapt, fervent devotion, and the sanctity of deep thought. And 
the disciples were there. Those wonderful men, who have led and will continue to lead 
the world, as the pillar of cloud of old time led the hosts of Ood through the desert. 
And the Master was there, sanctifying all life, as he was the Spring of all. Jesus was 
there, about whom we cannot say too much. They had met in his honour, for he 
received honour and hospitality from lowly men. They were met in his Name, and he 
was " in the midst." Around, outside, were the assailants, the Pharisees and the multi- 
tude, the powers of the world, surrounding as with a black drapery ; while all within was 
pure and white and heavenly, save the stream of hot breath from one earthly spirit, 
himself set on fire of hell. Judas was there. Our thoughts must fix themselves, first, 
on the silent deed of Mary ; then on the open word of Judas ; then we must hea/r the 
words of Jesus, who, on this occasion at least, made himself a Judge and a Divider 
OTer them. 

L The deed of Mabt. (Yer. 3.) Ho reason for the act is assigned. Is one needed ? 
Was it the offering of gratitude, or duty, or love? Was there goodness enough in that 
heart to lead it to do a kind action spontaneously, without respect to any previous per- 
sonal obligation ? Was there a sufiBoiently clear discernment of the true character of 
the distinguished Guest to compel her to offer her best gifts? We know not. One 
thing we know — Lazarus was there, " whom Jesus raised from the dead." Then upon 
that head so hot, and upon those feet so weary, she pours her costly perfume ; pours it 
freely, so " that the house was filled with the odour." 

II. Could any one have suspected a spot could be found in this almost heavenly feast ? 
Alas ! so is it with all things and all times of earth. Though all the college of the 
apostles was there ; though there was one who had been raised from the dead, and one 
whose body had been purified and made anew ; though all had seen the miracles which 
he did ; though there were renewed and chastened spirits present, types of perfect love 
and faithful service; and though the Master himself was in the midst, on that sweet last 
sabbath eve ; — yet even in this Eden of blessing was the trail of the serpent to be seen. 
Hearken (vers. 4 — 6), poor human nature I Though Heaven itself come down to us, we 
tarnish it with some earthly foul breath. 

III. Jesus, by his words, passes judgment on Mary's deed and on Judas's pronounce- 
ment upon it. He appears for her defence. " Why trouble ye her ? " (vers. 6, 8, 9). 
He may have been troubled, but in selt'-forgetfulness he thinks of her as she did of 
him. The work was a good one. "She hath anointed my body aforehand lor the 
burying." Did she really know the meaning of her act? Did she really know that he 
would M soon be taken away ? Then, to her quick apprehensive grief, he was dead 
already. Did she unconsciously predict bis burial, or was love quick-'tritted here? W» 



268 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1—72, 

know not ; but who can tell what she leamt at his feet ? Probably she knew not on thin 
quiet sabl»th evening that on the next he would be in the tomb, or her heart would havi 
been broken as well as her alabaster box. But if her gift of grateful love meant mora 
than ihe supposed, it was only as all gifts of love do. They go beyond the discernmenti 
of intellect and judgment ; they reach further ; they mean more. So is it with all works 
done to Jesus. When we coinfort th^ sorrowful, or minister to the sick or destitute, or 
do any " good work " in him and for him, he maltes them symbolize himself. They 
show forth his praise. They reveal his spirit. As to the poor and our help of them, 
who, to our disgrace, are always with us. Let us see how Jesus honours even their lot 
by placing himself in the position of a receiver of doles of charity and human kindness. 
And let us, undeterred by the misuse which some make of our gifts, still break our 
alabaster boxes. Let us pour over the world the fragrance of a godly life, the sweetness 
of our Christian temper, the labour of our Christian zeal, the gifts of our Christian 
love.— G. 

Vers. 10, 11, 17 — 21, 43 — 52. — Betrayal. We now approach the darkest of all the 
dark hours through which our Redeemer passed in this world, so overcast with clouds. 
" The Son of man is betrayed into the hands of men." It was by " one of the twelve," 
and " unto the chief priests," and for " money " ! 

I. What lessons on the feailty of the poob human heart ! The hand that 
received " the sop," that dipped into the same dish with Jesus, received into its hardened 
palm the miserable pittance — a slave's price. Ah 1 even in the presence of the holy 
One could he plot and scheme for his delivery. Let us, when we decry the deed, bow 
our heads lowly, remembering that we share the same frail nature. How barefaced the 
lie — walking, reclining, talking with the little band, carrying their common purse, and 
so trusted by them all, yet stealing away in the darkness to meet bis enemies and 
plot with them how, " in the absence of the multitude," he could deliver him unto 
ihem ! And going so far as to choose the symbol of brotherly affection — a kiss — to be 
the sign by which in the darkness they should distinguish him 1 " Woe unto that man 
through whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man if he had not 
been bom." Truly so ; for what theory or process of restoration could prevent the 
name Judas from being for ever the symbol of treachery and base desertion and 
sordid misery. " Woe," indeed I " And he went away and hanged himself." It is 
impossible to contemplate the heights from which men have fallen into deep abysses, 
without a feeling of shame and humiliation. But it would be wrong to think of 
them without being warned by them of th« sad possibilities to which we are all 
exposed. 

IL The iksuffioienot of office to sboube m biohtful sfibit. The parallel of 
Judas's infamy is found in the men who stood as the head and representatives of the 
very religion it was Jesus' high mission to fulfil and perfect. How deplorable is the 
contrast between the sanctity of the position held by these ofiScials and the spirit 
in which they held it] It was theirs to be the leaders of religious thought, and the 
embodiment of the religions spirit. But the sad testimony is borne to the insufficiency 
of o£Scial relationship to secure the true spirit of ofSce. Truly may the Shepherd say, 
" I was wounded in the house of my friends ; " and the poor one, " yea, mine own 
familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel 
against me." 

IIL The foweb of coYETonsNEBS. And this was all for money ! Well might it be 
written, " For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil." But it is needful to return 
to the preceding incident to find the hidden clue to such a deed of darkness. St. John 
has left the sad record, " He was a thief, and having the bag took away what was put 
therein." So, yielding little by little to the love of pelf, this chosen one, who harboured 
the demon of oovetousness within the folds of his dress, had lost all strength of virtue, 
and being overcome of evil, and under the infiuence of a master-passion, sold his 
Master for thirty ideces of silvei^— " the price of him that was priced, whom certain of 
the children of Israel did price." But our thoughts should rest less upon the faithless 
disciple or the more faithless priests than upon the patient, submissive One who drank 
to deeply of our cup. He who descended to that lowest condition of hnman shame 
was foimd, like the slaves is the market, " priced " and sold. Ravolting from that 



CH. XIV. 1— 72,J THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINff TO ST. MAEK. 26S 

unfaithfulness which could sell a friend for gain, from that love of pelf which could 
crush all the fine and noble and generous feelings of the heart, even closing it to th« 
sweet, winning voicsi of him who spake as never nnan spake — revolting equally from that 
deceitfulness which could occupy holy ofBce without the slightest apprehension of tha 
sanctity of demeanour, or the slightest possession of the purity of spirit due to such a 
position — let us maik and imitate the lowly, patient, self-possessed, forgiving, trustful 
spirit of him who endured all that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled, 
that the will of the Father might be done, that the redemption of the lost might be 
effected. — G. 

Vers. 12 — 16, 22 — 26. — The Lor^i Slipper. Daring the process of the betrayal, the 
"first day of unleavened bread" came round, and "the Master," with "his disciples" in 
"a large upper room furnished and ready," sat and together partook of the Passover. It 
was the last time. The long series of observances begun in Egypt had now come to 
an end. Before the next year should bring round the time of the Passover, it would be 
" fulfilled in the kingdom of God." A deeper and wider meaning would be given to it. 
Another Lamb would be slain, whose blood, sprinkled by faith, would cleanse the "con- 
science from dead works." New symbols would supplant the old, by means of which 
the Lord's death should be showed forth until his coming again. The simplicity of the 
newly appointed ordinance stands in marked contrast to all the elaborate rites of the 
earlier service, and to the scarcely less elaborate forms of the extreme schools of 
the Christian Church. 

L The elements. Taking up the common articles of their daily food, he made 
them symbolize himself. The " bread " his " body ; " the " wine " his " blood." Any- 
thing more simple could not have been conceived, anything more ready-at-hand, more 
truly universal. At the same time, he glorified that food by making it to represent, 
to memorialize, himself — his body given and his blood shed, through which spiritual 
life and nourishment were secured for them. Thus materials and spirituals are united ; 
and a portion of our daily food may be taken in remembrance of him who gives life to 
the world, and " feeds the strength of every saint." 

IL The ebpkesentation. To the simple " This is my body" of St. Mark, St. Luke 
adds, " which is given for you " — ^given up unto death on your behalf. He who " gave 
himself" — his entire personality — for our sins, gave his body "unto death, yea, the 
death of the cross." This is the sacrifice offered " once for all," " when he offered up 
himself." The blood represents, he says, " my blood of the covenant ; " or, in St. Luke's 
words, " This cup is the new covenant in my blood, even that which is poured out for 
you." It is " shed for many unto remission of sins." Both are to be taken with the 
impressive and tenderly touching words, "This do in remembrance of me." 

III. The command. " Take ye ; " " Take, eat ; " " Drink ye all of it ; " " This do in 
remembrance of me ; " " This do, as oft as ye drink it, in remembrance of me." With 
these words our Lord enjoins on his disciples the observance of this simple, central 
Christian rite ; and they form the warrant for the observance of the LorcPs Supper. 
Gathering together the several words of direct and indirect reference to this Christian 
service, we see how it is the centre from which radiate many lines of relation to the 
entire circle of the Christian life. 1. It is an affectionate memorial service, bringing 
to remembrance the entire self-devotion of the Hedeemer — " in remembrance of me." 
It calls up all that the one word me represents, with an especial allusion to the supreme 
act of self-immolation, " I lay down my life." 2. It is a covenant service. He who 
drinks of the cup places himself under the bonds of the new covenant, and receives at 
the same time the seal of the certain inheritance of all covenant blessings (see Heb. viii 

Q 12). 3. It is a service of communion. It symbolizes our joint participation witn 

the whole body of Christ (1 Cor. x. 14—17). It declares the perfect oneness of the 
Church of Christ: " We, who are many are one bread, one body;" and it affirms our 
perfect community of interest: we " all eat the same spiritual meat ;" we "all drink tha 
same spiritual drink." 4. It is at once a service of lowly confession and humble faith, 
of exulting hope—" As often as ye eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye proclaim the 
Lord's death till he come"— of brotherly love. It is to the believer the pledge of all 
blessing and help; while from him it is the pledge of all oVdience, And the Euoha> 
ristic song speaks pf the life, the fellowship, and the jos of heaven.— G. 



270 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xiv. i— 72. 

Vers. 27 — 31, 66 — 72. — Peter's fall. The painful declaration that the words of 
the |.rophet, "I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall he scattered abroad," 
would find their fulfilment in them, and in " All ye shall be offended," roused Peter's 
spirit, and with a bold but mistaken estimate of his own courage and devotion, he 
fearlessly, even presumptuously, afSrmed, " Although all shall be offended, yet will not 
1." St. Luke has preserved for us words which throw much light upon the incident of 
Peter's fall, and upon the position which Peter held amongst the disciples : "Simon, 
Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat : but I mada 
sui'iihciiliun for thee, that thy faith fail not : and do thou, when once thou hast turned 
a^iiin, stablisli tuy brethren." So Satan, the enemy of man, the agent for testing his 
religious character, has made demand to put all the disciples into his sieve. Man sift 
wheat to reveal and separate the useless from among the valuable — the bad from the 
good. Such is the good end of emptation. Brought to bear upon the great Master 
himself, it was powerless. He could say, " The prince of the world cometh : and he 
hath nothing in me." There was no chaff mingled with that pure grain. Assailing 
Judas — alas ! how little of any thing but husk 1 In Peter how strange a mixture 1 In 
each of us ? Peter, warned by the first prophetic admonition, by the parabolic words 
of Jesus, and by the yet more definite assurance that ere " the cock crow twice thou 
shalt deny me thrice," repeats his boast of fidelity with an emphasis, " If I must die 
with thee, I will not d 3ny thee." The sieve is ready. Peter is accosted by a woman, 
" one of the maids of the high priest." " Thou also wast with the Nazarene, even 
Jesus." The story ib well known, and needs not to he repeated. The word of Jesus 
found its exa«t fulfilment. " Thrice" did he deny, "and straightway the second time 
the cock crew." " And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter." It was enough ; 
with broken heart he " went out, and wept bitterly." 

Let us learn- 1. Our constant liability to be tempted to evil. Go where we will, 
temptation assails us. Amidst the blessedness of Eden or the sanctities of the temple, 
the tempter hides. The felicities of home, the marts of trade, the seclusions of contem- 
plation, are all as open to the evil presence as to the air of heaven. Our steps are 
dogged, our life assailed. Surely for this — for such an exposure of the precious life — 
a sufficient justification can be adduced. 2. One end of temptation is to search out 
existing evil for its exposure and destruction. On the elevated plateau, over the 
hardened and smooth floor, the wheat is shaken from the sieve. The gentle winds blow 
aside the chaff, for which the consuming fire is prepared, and the pure grain falls to the 
ground. Peter little knew that cowardice and fear lay lurking beneath the folds of his 
dress ; but temptation revealed them. As men pass the magnet through the metal 
dust to discover and separate the particles of iron from more precious metals, and those 
particles resjiond, leaping up to the attractive force ; and as men test the strength of 
iron beams by means of heavy weights or blows ; so the wily temptation tests the 
purity of our hearts and the strength of our principles, and draws forth the lurking 
cvU, that, being exposed, it may be separated ere it ruins the whole life. 3. If by 
temptation a weakness or flaw is discovered, our wisdom is, by penitence and contrition, 
to return for recovery and healing. We may be sadder and humbler, but we shall be 
wiser. Happy for us if we have strength so to do, and not, Judas-like, in blank self- 
despair and self-disgust, sink to rise no more. 4. But a further lesson is to guard against 
those evils which are the especial cause of danger to our spiritual life. Each has his 
own especial lialiility. Peter's was not covetousness ; Judas was not in danger from 
pride of power. Our danger is always as the amount of alloy in our character — the 
amount of chaff amongst the wheat. 5. Again, let us seek the removal of our own 
peculiar faults by the winnowing fan and purging fire of the Spirit, that we may not 
be exposed to the destructive surprises of sudden temptation. 6. An additional lesson 
is so tc guard our spiritual life that the current of our thoughts be pure. How often a 
coloured stream, or one holding earthy salts in solution, gives its own tint to the banks, 
or determines the growths on either side ! Well also is it for us to separate from thosa 
habits of life which are condemned by any conviction of right. 7. The great lesson, on 
the surface of this incident, is the necessity for humility — that we boast not of our 
religion, that we presume not on our power ; but, in lowly dependence on the sttengtk 
ui rJivine grace, walk warily, watching lest we enter into temptation, — Q, 



«B.xiY. 1— 72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 271 

Vers. 32 — 42. — Oethsemane, With reverent steps and bent head must we approach 
this scene. It would be improper to intrude upon the privacy of the Saviour's suf- 
fering had noi the Spirit of truth seen fit to "declare" this also unto us. The disciples, 
with the three exceptions, were excluded by the words, " Sit ye here, while I pray." 
And even from the favoured three " he went forward a little," " about a stone's cast." 
Then, "sore troubled," and with a "soul ei'oeeding sorrowful even unto death," he 
" fell on the ground," knei'ling, with his face to the earth. Then, fmm that spirit so 
sorely wrung, the cry escaped, which has ever been the cry from the uttermost suf- 
fering, " If it be possible, let this cup pass from me." Thrice the holy cry was heard, 
and in so great " an agony " that " his sweat became as it were great drops of blood 
falling down upon the ground," though strengthened by " an angel from heaven." 
Thrice the words of uttermost submission, "Thy will be done!" completed his act of 
entire surrender and self-devotion. " The will of the Father," which had been his law 
through life, was no less his one law in death. For all nges and for all sufferers Oeth- 
semane is the symbol ol ihe uttermost suffering, and of the supremest act of devotion 
to the will of the Father on high. Its depth of suffcM-iii'.; is hidden in its own dark- 
ness. The bearing of this hour upon the great work of redemption, as well as the 
precise references of the liedeemer in his words, and many other solemn questions 
that this scene suggests, deserve the most careful thought. But we turn, as in duty 
bound, to consider its instruction to us. By him, who taught us to pray, we have been 
led to desire the accomplishment of the Divine will. By him, who is ever for us the 
Example of righteous obedience, we have been constrained to seek to bring our life into 
conformity with that will. And by him, Irom whom our richest consolations have 
descended, we have been led to submission . and lowly trust in the times of our deepest 
sufferings. We would that his example should gently lead us to keep the sacred words 
upon our lips, " Th)' will be done I " If we would use them in the supreme exigencies 
of our life, we must learn to use them as the habitual law of our life. Therefore, let 
us so use them that they may express: 1. The abiding desire of our heart. 2. Tht 
haM (tf our life. 8. 'The uppermost sentiment in the hour of our trial and suffering. 
The former steps lead to the latter. We cannot desire the will of the Lord to ba 
done by our suffering unless we have first learnt to submit to it as the law of our 
activity. 

I. "Thy will bb doni? I ' is to be the abiding desieb of oub hearts. The habitual 
contemplation of the I)' me will is likely to lead us to desire its fulfilment. We shall 
see, if faintly, the wis loni, the goodness, the pure purpose, which tbat will expresses. 
It is a desire for the Divine Father to do and carry out his own will in his own house 
on earth, " as it is in heaven." Seeing God in all things, and having entire confidence 
in the unsullied wisdom and unfailing goodness of the Father on hi;;h, it desires both 
that he should do his own will in all things, and that by all that will should be sought 
as the supreme law. It knows no good outside of the operation of that will. Within 
its sphere all is life, and health, and truth, and goodness ; without is darkness and the 
region of the shadow of death. 

II. As our prayer becomes the true expression of our desire, we shall seek to embody 
it in our daily conduct. It will then become the habit op ocb life. Oar great Exemplar 
said, " My meat is to do the will of hira that sent me ; " "I seek not mine own will, 
but the will of him that sent me ; " "1 am come down from heaven, not to do mine 
own will, but the will of him that sent me." And the spirit of his obedience is uttered 
in one word: " I delight to do thy will, my God : yea, thy Law is within my heart." 
How blessed to have a " will of the Lord " to turn to for our guidance ! How holy a 
Law is it I The truest greatness of life is to hold it in subjection to a great p:i'nciple. 
There can be no higher one than "the will of the Lord." Devotion to .i great jfincipla 
transfigures the whole life ; it makes the very raiment white and gUsteriug. 

III. But there are exigencies in life when the crush of sorrow comes upon us. Ho 
who has habitually sought to know and observe the will of the Lord in his daily 
activity will easily recognize the Divine will in his sufferings; and to bow to that will 
in health will prepare him to acquiesce in it in sickness. To say, "Thy will be done!" 
when health and friends and possessions all are gone, needs the training of days in 
which all the desires of the heart have been brought into subjection. Many things 
transpire which are contrary to the Divine will ; but obedient feith will rest ia the 



272 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xiv. 1— 72. 

Divine purpose, which can work itself out by the least promising means. Though held 
in " the hands of wicked men," it will cry, " If it be possible, let this cup paaa from 
me : nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done." — G. 

Vera. 53 — 65; oh. xv. 1 — 5. — EeavetCi righteous King at earth's unrighteous Judg- 
ment-seat. " They led Jesus away to the high priest." So he appears before that 
ecclesiastical tribunal, whose duty it was to see that his own laws were obeyed. He 
who is the true Judge is arraigned before one who wUl prove himself to be the real 
culprit. But an accusation must be brought, even though the court is an unjust one. 
To this end " the chief priests and the whole council sought witness against Jesus." 
Their efforts were vain, for though "many bare false witness against him," yet 
" their witness agreed not together." Then, with directness, the high priest questioned 
him, asking the all-important question, "Art thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" 
Jesup who knew how to maintain a dignified silence when suborned men bare false 
witnp/s, and who knew equally how to reply with withering and confusing words when 
foolish men presented quibbling questions, boldly and promptly replied to the demands 
with an authoritative " I am." And then, in lowly humility, he bore further witness 
to the truth, saying, "Hereafter ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of 
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven." With rage and indignation the high 
priest tears his clothes, and declares his words to be " blasphemy," which could only 
be true on the supposition that he was bearing false witness. He appeals for judgment, 
and the universal testimony is, " He is worthy of death." The ecclesiastical court 
lias condemned him. " Straightway in the morning," after due consultation on the 
part of " the whole council," they " bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered 
him up to Pilate." He is now arraigned before the civil tribunal. Pilate's direct 
inquiry, "Art thou the King of the Jews?" The reply, "Thou sayest," is an 
afBrmative. Pilate has no idea of a spiritual kingship. In each court Jesus is tried, 
and found guilty. Pilate could have no fear that the calm Prisoner before him, who 
confessed his kingdom to be " not of this world," would be able to establish his claim, 
and having his interest in him excited by various circumstances, is disposed to release 
him. But the instant assertion, " If thou let this man go, thou art not Cfesar's friend," 
and his desire "to content the multitude," and lest there should be an uproar, 
" delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified." Underneath all this show 
of human judgment we must see other forces at work. In " the determinate counsel 
and foreknowledge of God " we must find the roots of this delivering up. The Lamb 
was slain from the foundation of the world. Nor must we lose sight of that voluntary 
consecration of himself to the will of the Father which guided Jesus when he laid 
down his life that he might take it again. Other aspects of this remarkable incident 
come into our view, when we hear Jesus refusing to make the appeal which could 
bring to his help " more than twelve legions of angels," and that because he would 
that " the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled." It is needful to group 
together the various details given by the several writers, each throwing into promi- 
nence one or other important feature of the scene, and it is equally needful to read the 
records in the ligit of various portions of the epistolary writings of Paul and others, 
especially that to the Hebrews. There we see the end it was designed should be 
answered by his appearing " as a lamb before her shearers— dumb." But the judgment 
of Jesus is really the judgment of his accusers ; of them at whose bar he is arraigned, 
and by whom his sentence is pronounced. We see in it the most humihating condem- 
nation of itself by its unwarranted condemnation passed by the Jewish nation upon 
its innocent Victim. Even Pilate declared he found no fault in him; nor would he 
have delivered him up had he not been hounded on by zealots, whose sensibilities he 
feared in his weakness to excite, and whose tool he lent himself to be. This repudia- 
tion of the truth, this despisal of holiness — holiness as exhibited in the life of One 
who has become the world's type of righteousness — and this revolt from the will of 
the Father as declared in the writings of the acknowledged prophets, condemns them 
as children of error, of unholiness, and of wicked disobedience. — G. 

Vers. 1, 2.—Appro<Kh of the end. L " A time of silenoe aiv BOLirnps rsoFSBLi 

tl|KOBDj:S THB DAT OF DEAT9." 



OH. jiY. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAEK. 278 

n. "With thk hiohest eoolbbiastioal authoritt, and uuoh wobldlt Ibu- 

DXHOI, THBBK HAT BK OBIAT WIOKBDNESS " (Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 8-^9,— Anointing for martyrdom. I. Pubb love bises aboyb thb ook- 
8IDBBATI0N8 or THRIFT. Logic must give place to love. The full heart disdains the 
question of money expense. Habitual extravagance is one thing, the redundancy of 
grateful affection is another. We are never safe, in conduct or in thought, except 
when we follow the heart's lead. 

IL Sympathy pbesebves the judombnt fbom brrob. The disciples did not 
understand the woman's act. Christ lifted it into the light of truth. There is a 
narrow scale of judgment— of those who stand too close to the act, and see only its 
immediate bearings. To see truly we must see far. There is a peispective of acts. 
This Christ points out. The acts of instinctive faith and love, of obedience and 
loyalty, are worth more than those based upon prudence and calculation. 

IIL The death of Christ measures the worth of acts. This act will go 
down in history inseparable from his death. It was a forecast and a memento. The 
loving self-devotion of the Saviour attracts the like from those who surround him and 
who know him. 

IV. The truest bewaed of goodness is to be held in the lovino reoollbotion 
OF othbbb. "The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance." One great 
man prays, " Lord, keep my memory green I " A poet turns the wish into song, that 
he may be "only remembered by what he has done." — J. 

Vers. 10, 11. — Black conspiraci/, L "The best influences fob bood may be 

RESISTED AND BECOME VAIN." 

IL "Hypocrisy prepares foe dishonesty and all wickedness" (Godwin). — J. 

Vers. 12 — 21. — 2%« Paschal supper. I, The dutiful mind is the oleae-8bein» 
AND the pbepabed MIND. What struck the evangelists was the calm foresight and 
method of Jesus. It was like the strategy of a general ; the presence of mind of one 
who holds the clue to events, because he knows the moral sequence. On another 
occasion " Jesus himself knew what he would do." Here the disciples " found even 
as he told them." So generally, " everything will be found as Jesus has declared." 

IL The purest society is not free prom an impure leaven. A Judas among 
the twelve ; and an incipient Judas in the conscience of the rest. Better for us, instead 
of looking round for the Judas, to look into the heart to discover how much of Judas 
is there. 

HL There may be a ooinoidbnob of Divine appointment and human guilt in 
THE SAME ACT. It is in the law of things that the good should suffer from humao 
violence. Bnt it is not in the law of things that any man should take part in that 
violence. We may not be able to seize the secret unity of principle behind the 
seeming contradiction of the knowledge of God and the responsibility of man. But 
the latter is our /<Kt, clear and definite. The former is of the " secret things that 
beiong to the Lord our God." — J. 

Vers. 22 — 25. — Eucharistic service. I. The symbolic bread and wine. Eating 
and drinking are the most significant physical acts of life. For they are the foundation 
of life. Hence the act is appropriate as a symbol of the foundation of spiritual life. The 
appropriation of Christ by the intelligence and wUl is analogous to the appropriation 
of food in the process of digestion. 

II. The service is the visible seal of a new covenant. Which is a con- 
tinuation, an enlargement or evolution of the old ; founded on better promises. 
Objectively, the grace of God is more clearly revealed and abundantly poured forth in 
the New Testament than In the Old. Subjectively, the conditions of blessing are purer 
and simpler. The spiritual act of faith includes them all, including the man as a whola 

IIL It 18 DESIGNED AS MEMORIAL. The form, the words, the spirit of the loving 
and suffering Saviour, appear and reappear at each celebration. It is the memorial of 
devotion for our sakes, and the reminder to us of the duty to live not for ourselvei, 
Imt for the spiritual ideal contained in him. 

KABk — u. * 



274 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO bT. MARK. fcH. xiv. l-7i 

rV. It IB DESKNED TO BE PROPHETIC. "Until that day 1 " Our purest earthly 
joys are the buds of celestial flowers. The reunion of the family on feast-days speaks 
of the reunion in heaven. All our best earthly joys are promises of better joys in 
heaven. The scene of the Lord's Supper lifts us out of the commonplace associationii of 
life. We realize in it prophetically the truth of our personal and social existence,— J. 

Vers. 26 — 31. — Warnings. I. Hdman nature is not to be depended on. Th« 
most loyal hearts are not fear-proof. Men act much like sheep; are gregarious both 
in good and in evil. Olten they will follow a leader through the greatest dangers ; 
remove the leader, and throw them upon themselves, and courage vanishes, and we 
know how fiail a thing our nature is. Jesus foreknew all this. 

IL Yet Divine love trusts oub natukb. Jesus knew that he should return 
and again gather these scattered sheep. If our salvation depended on ourselves, all 
were lost. It is the power and the wisdom greater than ourselves which deliver us 
from ourselves ; and there is no worse enemy to be found than the treacherous heart 
within our breast. 

IIL Idle resolves. " Sincere purposes are not sufBcient to ensure steadfastness." 
Good men have said that the more resolves they make, the more sins they find they 
commit. This may not be strictly so. Still, to add to the original fault the fault of a 
broken resolve, does hurt to the soul. All experience teaches us our frailty. And the 
practical lesson is — not to indulge in offensive protestations of humility before our 
fellow-men, but to see ourselves as we are, and seek strength, not in self-dependence, 
but in God-dependence. — J. 

Vers. 32 — i2. — Oethsemane. I. The spirit's need of occasional bolitudk. We 
need to collect and concentrate ourselves. " We must go alone. We must put our- 
ielves in communication with the internal ocean, not go abroad to beg a cup of water 
of the urns of other men. I like the silent church before the service begins better than 
any preaching. How far-off, how cool, how chaste the persons look, begirt each ona 
with a precinct or sanctuary! So let us always sit" (Emerson). 

II. Its need to throw itself on God. We ask advice of others too much, and 
depend on human symfiathy when we ought only to depend on God. But God does 
not speak his deepest messages to men amidst a mob, but in the desert, when they are 
alone with him. Amidst the confusion of opinion and conjecture, his wiU becomes 
clear to us. In solitude it shines, the pole-star of our night. His will is ever wisest 
and best. It is ever possible to follow : — 



It is ever safest : — 



" When duty whispers low, ' Thou must,' 
The soul replies, ' 1 can 1 ' " 

" 'Tis man's perdition to be safe 
When for the truth he ought to die." 



ill. The need of watchfulness and prater. Porphyry says, in his aflfecting 
life of the great philosopher Plotinus, that the latter, though full of suffering, I'ever 
relaxed his attention to the inner life ; and that this constant watchfulness over his 
spirit lessened his hours of sleep. And he was rewarded by an intimate union with. 
or absorption in, the Divinity. He was ever interrogating his soul, lest it shoi4d ba 
yielding to fallacy and error. This was the great man of whom his disciple igain 
says, that he was ashamed of having a body. Even in ascetic extremes, there are 
lessona for us. " The spirit indeed is forward, but the body is leeble." — J. 

Vers. 43 — 52. — Violence and meekness, I. The influence of self-command. How 
majestic does the Saviour appear in this refusal to employ force against force 1 Moral 
grandeur is illustrated against the background of brute violence. It is but the show 
of violence that can ever be opposed to the majesty of truth. The Divine and the 
spiritual is conscious that it cannot be hurt. Evil, having no real substance nor person- 
ality, flees from it. 

II. IM THB PEOVIDBNOK of (3oD 18 CUB BUBB REFUGE AMIDST THE PRBTALBNOB Of 



CH. xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. 17J 

EVIL. " Thus it is, and thus it must he." Chance ia wi onmeaning word, when th« 
soul is bound up in Qod's will. 

' This is he men miscall Fate, 
Threading dark ways, arriving late; 
But ever coming in time to crown 
The truth, and hurl wrong-doers down." 

1. 

Vers. 53 — 65. — Firit trial of Jesut. L Judicial djjustiob. Optimi corruptia 
pessima. The judge who should represent on earth the equal dealing of God, may 
turn the name of justice into a mockery. Names will not influence men to right if 
the heart be not right. Under the name and garb of judge, men have sometimes 
concealed the worst passions, the most arbitrary instincts. So do extremes meet in 
human life. Only in God do names and realities perfectly correspond. 

II. Tbutb itself mat be repbesented as imposture. The Saviour is here made 
to appear an impostor. It is the triumph of party-spirit. Misrepresentation within 
every one's power. Insight into character is rare. We ought to take no second-hand 
estimate of character. The wrong we do to others by false construction is great ; still 
greater may be the wrong we do ourselves. 

III. Tbt in the end truth is elicited by opposition. The majesty of the Saviour 
is enhanced in proportion as he is assailed. God is revealed in him and upon him, and 
his glory is reflected from human falsehood and villainy. 

"Though rolling clouds aronnd his breast are spread, 
Etermd sunshine settles on his head." 

rV. The temporary success and eternal failure of oonspibaoibs. Here the 
noble and mean combined to dishonour the Christ of God, to treat liim as if he had 
been the offscouring of the earth. So later were his disciples treated. But where are 
those conspiracies and conspirators now ? For a small moment they triumphed ; 
everlastingly they are branded with shame and defeat. What feebl* f<41y vere thoss 
blows aimed at the head of the meek and unsuffering kingdom I 

" This is he who, fell'd by foes, 
Sprung harmless up, repulsed by blows ; 
He to captivity was sold, 
But him no prison-bars would hold ; 
Though they seal'd him in a rock. 
Mountain chains he did unlock." 

J. 

Vers. 66 — 72. — Extremes meet in character. I. Sblf-confidenob and weakness. 
What is a man without self-reliance ? Yet it seems to fail, and offers no security in 
temptation. In a true self-reliance is contained dependence and trust. Confidence in 
our thought is right, if we recognize that our true views are revealed to us ; that it 
is not we who think, but God who thinks in us. Separated from our root in God, 
whether in thought or will, we become mere individuals. Once isolate the picture 
of yourself and your powers and activities from the Divine whole to which it belongs, 
and it will soon be found that you are in a false position. 

II. Impetuosity and deliberation. We admire the generous eagerness of Peter, 
but it topples over into precipitous haste. And the hasty falsehood is followed by the 
deliberate persistence in it. IJrazening it out one moment, the next he breaks into a 
flood of remorseful tears. " Who can understand his errors ? " Easy to criticize Peter, 
not easy to act better. Let us humbly own that he represents us all, in greater or 
less degree. Our life oscillates between extremes. God can make profitable to us the 
experience of our sins and errors. The chemistry of his love can bring our ttagio 
scenes to a happy ending. — J. 

Vers 1—11, 18—21, 43—50. Parallel passages: Matt. xxvL 1—16, *1— 25, 
47—56; Luke xxiL 1—6, 21—23, 47—53; John xviiL 2—12; xiiL 21— 36.— !%< 



S7t THE GOSPEL ACCOBDINO TO ST. MARK. [c«. xir. 1— 72. 



htlrmyaJ iy Judas. I. Introduction to Judas. The individuality of Judas cotMi 
prominently before us in this chapter. We make his acquaintance in the house of 
Simon the leper in Bethany. We are introduced to him in connection with the 
alabaster box of ointment of spikenard very precious ; for though not mentioned hero 
by name, we know from the other evangelists that he was among those who felt 
indignant at the supposed waste of the ointment, and who expressed that indignation 
by murmuring against the worthy woman who had poured it on the Saviour's head. 
Either Judas had muttered dissatisfaction, and others of the disciples, in their simplicity, 
concurred, or Judas was spokesman of others who, accustomed to scant ways and 
means, were surprised at what naturally enough appeared to such men extravagant 
expenditure. " When his disciples saw it, they had indignation," according to St. 
Matthew's narrative; "There were some that had indignation within themselves," is 
the record of St. Mark ; " Then saith one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, 
which should betray him, Why was not this ointment sold for three imndred pence, 
and given to the poor?" is the explicit account furnished by St. John. There was 
only the one single point of contact between Judas and those of the other disciples who 
agreed with him about the matter of waste. Their motive differed from his ; their 
thoughts were not his thoughts. The large-hearted liberality of this loving woman 
was, however, rightly comprehended by the Master himself, and justly commended by 
him. Our curiosity is not gratified by any particulars of information about Simon. 
Whether he was a brother of Lazarus, or a brother-in-law, being Mary's husband, or 
some other relative, or only a friend, we neither know nor need to know. The meaning 
of the epithet mgriKris is also little more than a matter of conjecture. Some of the Greek 
and Latin interpreters understand it to mean genuine or pure, and connect it with 
irta-ris, faithful; Others hold the meaning to be potable or liquid, from wlvti; while 
Augustine derives it from the name of the place whence it came, that is. Fistic nard. 
The Yul<;;ate and Latin versions render it sjpicati ; and similar, too, is our English 
spikenard, as the name of a fragrant oil extracted from the spike-shaped blossoms of 
the Indian nardus, or nard-grass. The costliness of this unguent was well known 
among the ancients ; hence Horace promised Virgil a nine-gallon cask of wine for a 
small onyx box of this nard ; while the evangelist informs us that the value of Mary's 
alabaster box of ointment was upwards of three hundred pence, that is, of Boman 
coinage, each denarius being equivalent to sevenpence halfpenny or eightpence half- 
penny of English currency. The amount would thus be about ten guineas. 

II. Mary's liberality. This liberality of Mary had its origin in deep devotednesi 
to our Lord, but her devotedness was the outcome of enlightened faith. She had a 
correct understanding of his character and claims. A believer in his Divine commission 
and in his kingly authority, she did not stumble as many at the prospect of his death. 
She knew he was to die, and hence she anticipated that sad event by the exceedingly 
expensive preparation in question. The custom of employing perfumes on such an 
occasion has an illustration in the record of King Asa in the sixteenth chapter of the 
Second Book of Chronicles, where we read, " They laid him in the bed which was filled 
with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the apothecaries' art." The 
disciples of Christ surpassed the generality of their nation in the knowledge of, and belief 
in, his person as Messiah ; but though they had full faith in his Messiahship, they still 
clung to the notion of a temporal kingdom, with all its high honours and earthly dis- 
tinctions. From this arose the difficulty which they had in reconciling themselves to 
his death, or rather the stumbling-block which his death placed in the way of their 
iaith, as the two disciples to whom Jesus joined himself on the way to Emmaus after 
speaking of his death and crucifixion, added, " But we trusted that it had been h« 
which should have redeemed Israel." Mary's faith excelled theirs as much as theirs 
excelled that of the Jews in general. Her faith did not fail in prospect of Messiah 
being cut off, her love was not chilled by the coming coldness of his death, nor did her 
hope go out like a taper in the darkness of his sepulchre. She believed that as Messiah 
Jesus would die and revive and rise and reign. She believed, and her faith worked by 
love. She believed, and therefore she poured the precious ointment ungrudgingly oa 
her Saviour's person. 

m. Thk BE8ETTIN0 BIN OF THE TRAnoB. Jadas is usually held up 88 a monster 
•f iniquity, and hi* ain regaided as lomethiug diaboUoaL Whil* w« would not 



•H. xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 217 

diminisli by one iota the heinousness of his sin, nor say one word in extenuation oi 
mitigation of his guilt, we feel that, owing to certain exaggerated representations of hi« 
criminality, the lessons to be learnt from his character and conduct are to a large extent 
lost. On the contrary, if we carefully analyze his character and examine his career^ 
we shall find much to learn, at least by way of warning, from the sad lesson of his life. 
Of course, by placing him outside the pale of humanity altogether, and regarding him 
more as a fiend than a man, we leave ourselves without any common measure whereby 
it is possible to compare his career with that of ordinary mortals. Now, we hold that 
he was just in roll with common men, though by his sin in its results he rose at last to 
such an exceptionally bad eminence. He was, as is admitted on all hands, a bad man, 
a wicked man, and a man as wretched as he was wicked. All the elements of evil in his 
character, however, may be resolved into one besetting sin, and that sin was avarice. His 
greed of gain was insatiable, and he loved gold much more than God. This inordinat*! 
love of money was the root of the evil in his nature. Tbis love of money is a growing 
sin, for, as the old proverb has it, the love of money increases as much as the money 
itself increases — nay, it usually increases much faster. He was naturally avaricious, 
and he gave full swing to his natural disposition. Here we lea^n a lesson of the 
greatest utility and of very general application. In the Epistle to the Hebrews we 
read of " the sin which doth so easily beset us." The ease of Judas exemplifies the 
baneful tendency and the fatal result of such a single besetting sin. Most people have 
some propensity in excess, some strong passion, some evil principle in their nature mora 
likely to overpower them than any other. It is of vital importance to ascertain what 
the weak point is, in what direction it lies, and where the risk of entanglement is 
greatest. A physician is careful in the very first instance to discover the seat of the 
patient's disease, and its nature. So we should look carefully into our heart and out 
upon our life till we find out the source of weakness ; and once it is discovered — nor 
can the discovery be a matter of aoy difficulty to the honest inquirer — we must be 
ever on our guard against it, and use every available means to fortify ourselves in that 
particular quarter. However strong our character may be otherwise and in other 
respects, one besetting sin, unless resisted and shunned, will ruin all. One weak link 
will spoil the stsongest chain, and no chain is stronger than its weakest link ; one 
small opening in a dam will flood a district, or even a province. 

IV. Official dignity, official danger. It often happens that a man is placed 
exactly in that situation in life which, owing to his peculiar disposition, is fraught with 
greatest danger to him. Thus, for good and wise ends, God in his providence is pleased 
to try us, as gold is tried, that we may be proved and purified and strengthened. When 
so situated we need to seek daily increase of faith that we may be kept from falling, 
and constant supplies of grace that it may be sufficient for us. Judas had been clever 
at finance, and in consequence became bursar of the little society. This situation of 
purse-bearer was one of extreme danger to a man like Judas ; his hand was too often 
in the purse, his fingers were too frequently on the coins it contained. With such an 
opportunity without and such a disposition within, what, in the absence of restraining 
grace, could be expected ? His greedy disposition, combined with the temptation of his 
office, was too much for him ; his covetousness developed into thievishness. He failed 
to check the evil propensity ; he did not resist the strong temptation. The first act of 
pillering was committed. The Rubicon was crossed ; the line of demarcation between 
honesty and dishonesty became fainter and fainter, and was gradually effaced. Other 
acts of petty pilfering succeeded ; and though we have little reason to suppose that the 
disciples' purse had ever been a deep or heavy one, or that it ever contained more than 
supplied the bare necessaries of daily life, yet \> " have much reason to believe that the 
paltry peculations of the purse-bearer were a constant drain upon it. " He was a thief," 
our Lord tells us plainly, " and carried the bag." Here we have a second lesson, which 
is the absolute necessity of resisting the first temptation to evil ; for as the habit grows 
by indulgence, the power of temptation diminishes by resistance. 

V. Disappointed ambition. The chief attraction to Judas had probably been the 
prospect of a temporal king and earthly kingdom ; and thus of some lucrative position 
or highly remunerative office in the service of that king and in the affairs of that 
kingdom. Others of his fellow-disciples had been looking forward to posts of honour- 
to sit on thrones in the future Messianic kingdom. Judas cared less for honour than 



278 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [ch. xit, 1—72 

for profit, and however he may have esteemed such honour, it was mainly as the way 
to wealth. But now our Lord had referred in terms unmistakable, once and again, to hii 
death and burial, this gave a rude shock to the hopes of the traitor, and seemed to cut 
off at once and for ever the prospect of worldly gain. This was a bitter disappointment 
to the greedy spirit of Judas ; the cup of plenty was rudely dashed away as he was 
about to raise it to his lips ; the time of discipleship he looked upon as a dead loss ; hia 
profits had been small at best, but the prospect of improving his circumstances is now 
blighted; and his occupation is gone. Tantalizing, and even torturing, as all this must 
have been to him, another disappointment, though of a minor sort, is added. A sum of 
three hundred denarii, or more, that is to say, upwards of ten guineas, had been profusely 
lavished in a way and for an object with which he had not the least possible sympathy, 
nay, in a manner as he thought highly reprehensible. It was sheer waste, and worse, 
for no one gained anything ; the poor were not benefited — " not that he cared for the 
poor," except as a matter of hypocritical ]iretence ; he himself missed the disbursement 
of a sum from which he could have appropriated a percentage that might have been a 
crumb of comfort in present disastrous times and during the dull days he must now 
look forward to. But there was even more than this ; he must have felt himself by 
this time an object of suspicion ; conscience must have made him aware of this ; he 
must have known that the Master, at all events, saw through the thin disguises that 
concealed his real character from ordinary eyes. He did not feel at home with the 
brotherhood ; and, his occupation being gone, a spirit of recklessness was creeping over 
him. Besides, he was stung into hostility by the severe but well-deserved reproof 
which our Lord now saw right to administer to him. " The poor always ye have with 
you," said our Lord ; and it was thus hinted that it was his duty — part of his office — 
to look after them, and that opportunity was never wanting for that purpose. Thus 
wrought on, Judas bethought himself that it was high time to look to his own 
interests ; and, having failed in one direolion, to try the opposite. 

VL Waenings wasted. It is tnily astonishing what effect the continued indul- 
gence of a single sin has in hardening the heart, searing the conscience as with a hot 
iron, blinding the mind, and banishing for a time at least aU feelings of shame Aui 
even of common humanity. The black crime soon to be committed had cast its 
shadow before. More than one hint had been given, more than one warning note had 
been sounded ; but all to no purpose. The first intimation appears to have been after 
our Lord had washed the disciples' feet, impressing by that expressive symbolic action 
the great lesson of humility on all his followers. On that occasion he said, " Now ye 
are clean, but not all " (John xiii. 10). In the second section of this chapter, where 
the traitor is again referred to, words of warning still more distinct are uttered : " One 
of you which eateth with me shall betray me ; " and while all of them, " one by 
one," as St. Mark particularly mentions, deprecated with surprise and sorrow such an 
impeachment, asking, " Is it 1 ? " or literally, " It is not 1, is it ? " Judas had the 
amazing effrontery to pretend innocence, and ask with the rest, " Is it I ? " The inti^ 
mation about the betrayer being " one of the twelve, he that dippeth with me in the 
dish," and the individual who should receive the sop, may have been whispered into the 
ear of the beloved John, and through him to Peter ; but the final fearful warning was 
uttered aloud and in the hearing of all. And yet tliat terrible sentence, " Woe to that 
man by whom the Son of man is betrayed 1 good were it for that man if he bad never 
been bom," had no effect on him ; at all events, it failed to shake his diabolical purpose. 
It is possible that during the first shower of questions — each asking, " Is it I? "—Judas 
had sat silent, either sullenly through contempt, or conscious-stricken ; that subse- 
quently, with an air of careless coldness, and in order to conceal the confusion of the 
moment, he asked not, "Lord, is it I?" but " Rabbi, is it I'i" when he received the 
answer, " Thou hast said," in the affirmative, unheard perhaps except by the disciples 
John and Peter, who sat close by. The expression, too, which our Lord added, namely, 
" What thou doest, do quickly," though heard by all, was misunderstood, and referred 
by them to directions about the purchase of requisites for to-morrow's feast, or making 
distribution to the poor ; but it must have been perfectly comprehended by the traitor 
himself. At all events, on receiving the sop, he went out immediately, and, in Biite of 
all, pursued his foul and fiendish purpose. All these checks, all these warnings, were 
utterly ineffectual. His besetting sin, growing like the mountain snowball, and 



OH XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. 27J 

g&thering within its compass other elements, as disappointment, resentment, ingrati- 
tnde, and envy, had now become too powerfvd to be overcome. The sin that might 
have been checked effectually at the first had now become uncontrollable ; the evil 
one, who might hmve been successfully resisted at the commencement, had now gained 
complete mastery over this wretched man. To such a fearful extent was this the case, 
that the evangelist informs ns that " Satan entered into him." In no other way, as it 
seems, could the enormity of his crime be accounted for. No wonder it is added, "And 
it was night." It was night with earth and sky — night with all its darkness, night 
with that dark heart of the traitor, night in every sense with that unhappy manl How 
all this inculcates, as another and a third lesson, the importance of cultivating prayer- 
fulness of spirit, and enforces the necessity of praying frequently and praying fervently, 
" Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one " 1 

VII. Another scene in the traitor's life. We now open another chapter in 
his history. The bargain is struck, the sum weighed and delivered, and in the paltry 
sum thus realized we have another proof of the grovelling spirit of this unspeakably 
mean and mercenary man. He has secured the thirty pieces of silver, or thirty 
shekels — some £3 15s. of British money. Both parties seem satisfied with the bargain. 
The chief priests are glad of the promised opportunity of arresting in private him 
whom the dread of popular tumult or probable rescue prevented them arresting in 
public. Public opinion was still so favourable to the Prophet from Galilee, and had 
such force, that, hostile as the Jewish authorities were, they dreaded, and with good 
reason, the risk of a public apprehension. Judas, too, is content with his pieces of 
silver. We almost fancy we see him, like Milton's picture of Mammon in the nether 
world, eyeing with furtive, downcast glance the proceeds of his bargain. But the 
s.i tisfaction of the wicked seldom lasts long. We scarcely think that Judas at first 
realized the consequences of his wickedness ; we cannot believe that he at all antici- 
I iv.ed the sequel of his crime. Perhaps he thought that he who had wrought so many 
[v.iracles would work one in self-defence, and not allow himself to be apprehended; or 
ptjihaps he thought that, if arrested, he would escape out of the hands of those who 
came to apprehend him ; or it may be he thought Jesus would now be forced to set up 
tlie expected kingdom. All his calculations are at fault. 

VIII, The actual betkatal and apprehension. Some two hours have elapsed 
from the revelation of the traitor and his departure from that upper room, when a 
motley multitude of meo, armed with swords and staves — some of them Levitical 
guards from the temple, others Soman soldiers from the tower of Antonia, together 
with priests and elders — is marching down tlie hillside from Jerusalem to the valley 
of the Kidrou. Already they have crossed the brook and reached the garden. But 
what mean those lanterns, for the Paschal moon is at the full? Perhaps the moon was 
obscured by clouds, or shining dimly that night ; or the deep shadows of the hills 
and rocks and trees made the light of the lanterns necessary. The concerted signal was 
not really needed, owing to our Lord's forwardness to meet his fate. Had he pleased, 
he might have frustrated the attempt, as by a word he felled them to the earth 
(John xviii. 6) ; he might have ordered to his help twelve legions of angels, had he 
been unwilling to suffer. And yet, willing as he was to suffer, he is equally willing to 
save ; his sufferings were in our stead, and for our sake His ready wiilinghood to 
undertake for us and die for us assures us of equal wiilinghood to have the benefit of 
those sufferings transferred to us. The traitor's kiss, which was a fervent one 
{KOTt^ixriftv), was the signal for arrest. From this we learn the terms of familiarity 
and friendship that existed between Christ and his disciples. Nor is he changed, or 
become colder in his friendship for his true followers ; he is as cordial as ever, and 
still bends on earth a Brother's eye. His address to Judas, however, is too strongly 
expressed in the Common Version. The terra " friends " (^IXoC) he reserves for his 
true disciples; the word addressed to Judas is kraipe, which signifies "companion" or 
" acquaintance," and does not necessarily imply either respect or affection. 

Ex. The cowardice or sin. Cowardice is generally associated with sin, no true it 
is that " sinful heart makes feeble hand." Our fitrst parents, after their sin against 
God hid themselves among the trees of the garden. The chief priests and elders, 
with the captains, are here charged by our Lord with cowardice. " Be ye come out," 
he ask«, " m againat % brigand or bandit (ajjo-t^i'), with swords and staves ? " Had h« 



no THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xrr. 1— 72i 



been an evil-doer, why did they not apprehend him publicly in the broad light of day 
•8 he taught in the temple? Poor, sinful souls! their cowardly spirits shrank from 
this ; the power of public opinion, or the dread of a rescue, or the danger of a riot, 
they could not brave ; but now ekulkingly, secretly, stealthily, at the dead hour of 
night, they came upon the Saviour by surprise, with a strong posse of men well armed. 
Their sin was seen in their cowardice. Our Lord is now in the hands of his enemies. He 
had healed the servant's ear— the right ear (St. Luke and St. John) — having asked 
freedom to stretch forth his arm to touch and heal the wounded ear, saying, " Suffer 
ye thus far ; " if the words do not mean — Excuse resistance to this extent. Judas hat 
betrayed him ; all the disciples— even John the beloved and Peter the brave— haTo 
forsaken him and fled 1 — J. J. Q. 

Yen. 12—17, 22—25. Parallel passages : Matt. xxvl. 17—19, 2fi— 29 ; Luke xxU. 
7—13, 19, 20; 1 Cor. xi. 23 — 34. — 2%e old dispensation merging in the new. — L Th» 
Fabsoter and tub institution of the Suppeb. 1. Comparison of the recordt. The 
memorial Passover differed from the Egyptian or original Passover in several points. A 
still greater change is now made. The substance now takes the place of the symbol. The 
antitype supersedes the type. The true Paschal Lamb — Christ our Passover, aliout to 
be sacrificed for us — being come, the Jewish Paschal lamb disappears. The unleavened 
cakes and wine, formerly only secondary and subordinate, now become the primary 
and principal elements of the feast, as representing the body and blood of the Lamb to 
be slain. The idea of Christ's sacrificial death, previously intimated with more or less 
clearness, is now fully exhibitei In the fact of the particulars being foretold there is s 
close resemblance to that prediction which preceded the triumphal entry. The record (rf 
the Jjord's Supper is fourfold. It is recorded by three evangelists and by one apostle. 
These are the evangelists Matthew, Mark, and Luke ; with Paul, the apostle of the 
Gentiles. Some points are brought out more fully or distinctly in one, and some in 
another, of these ; accordingly, a brief comparison of their respective records with each 
other helps to a better understanding of the whole. (1) Instead of " blessed," used by 
St. Matthew and St. Mark, St. Luke and St. Paul employ the expression, " gave 
thanks." (2') In addition to the statement of " This is my body," found in St. Mat- 
thew and St. Mark, St. Luke and St. Paul give an explanation, the former adding, 
" which is given for you ; " the latter, " which is broken for you ; " while both enforce 
it by the suitable exhortation, " This do in remembrance of me." (3) St. Luke and 
St. Paul append a note of time — " after supper," or " when he had supped." (4) 
Whereas (o) St. Matthew and St. Mark say simply, " This is my blood of the new 
testament, St. Luke and St. Paul introduce the word " cup," and alter the arrange- 
ment of the sentence, in this way rendering the whole clause clearer and more explicit; 
thus, *' This cup is the new testament [more correctly ' covenant,' Revised Version] in 
my blood." Mark alone (6) supplements the accounts of the other evangelists by 
stating the fact, " They all drank of it." (5) St. Matthew and St. Mark have, " shed 
for many," using the preposition irtpi equivalent to in behalf of, oi for the benefit of{ 
but St. Luke has " shed for you," employing 6w^p which, from the idea of superposi- 
tion, covering, defence, or protection, may mean tn the stead, or place, or room of, and so 
ooKveying the idea of substitution, though not so distinctly and definitely as ianl. (6) 
St. Matthew alone points out the purpose in the expressive; words "for the remission of 
sins." (7) It is also to be noted that the original word for "shed" is ^xxw^/iecoc, a 
present participle passive, and bo signifying literally being shed, as though the suffer- 
ings were already begun, the passion entered on, and the sacrifice commenced. These 
four records of the inspired penmen, each writing from his own standpoint, but all 
under the direction of the Holy Spirit, furnish a full exhibition of this ordinance in 
its different aspects; while they impress us with its solemnity and sacredness, deepen- 
ing the interest we should take in it and the importance to be attached to it. Besides, 
there ia usually this diiference between the record of the same fact or truth when 
presented in a Gospel and then in an Epistle, that the record of the former is historical, 
tliat of the latter doctrinal; the former contains the plain narrative, the latter iti 
practical application; the concise enunciation of the former finds its complete develop- 
ment in the latter ; the direct statement of the Gospel is commented on or treated 
lomewhat controversially in the Epistle. 2. The Author qf this ordinance. The Lord 



CH.XIT. 1— 72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. «81 

Jesus Christ is the Author of this solemn institution ; both evangelist and apostle refer 
its appointment to him. He is sole King and Head of his Church. His kingship is 
the result of a Divine decree. " I have set my King," says Jehovah, " on my holy 
hill of Zion." The government, both legislative and executive, is in his hand, as the 
prophet had foretold, " and the government shall be upon his shoulders." He is also 
" Head over all things to the Church." Not only so ; this ordinance in particular is his 
ppecial appointment, for it is the memorial of his death, and keeps the memory of his 
dying love green in the Christian's soul. To him, therefore, we owe its institution, the 
manner of its observance, the time of its continuance, and the persons admissible to 
its enjoyment. Nor is there any ordinance more closely identified with the Savioui 
than this ordinance of the Supper. He is its " all in all," its Alpha and Omega. The 
words are his, and speak of him ; the symbols are his, and point to him ; the blessing* 
embodied are his, being the purchase of his blood ; the praise is his, for " unto him that 
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, ... to him be glory and dominion 
for ever and ever." The new covenant, with all its benefits, present and prospective, is 
his, for he ratified it. 3. Abuses. Little more than a quarter of a century had elapsed 
when human abuses were beginning to overlay this holy ordinance in the Church of 
Corinth, so common is it for man to leave an impure print on all his hand doth touch. 
A reformation of the holy rite had become necessary, and a republication followed. 
The abuses removed, and the ordinance restored to its original simplicity and sanctity, 
St. Paul received it by revelation, and republished it In his First Epistle to the Corin- 
thian Church, as he says, " For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered 
unto you." With this fresh publication of it, we have a fuller exposition of its nature, 
and increased obligation for its observance ; while it is restamped, as it were, with the 
seal, and resanotioned by the signature of the Church's Head. 4. The time of its 
appointment. The time of its appointment was " the same night in which he was 
betrayed." This of itself, apart from all other evidence, is proof positive that Jesus 
was more than man. It was the night when the Jewish Sanhedrim concerted measures 
for his apprehension ; when chief priests and scribes and rulers were planning his 
condemnation and plotting his death ; the night when one of his own disciples played the 
part of traitor and betrayed him into the hands of his deadliest foes ; when another 
disciple denied him, and all forsook him ; the night when he was to be delivered to 
his persecutors — to their malice and mockery and the worst tortures that their 
malevolence could devise. 

" 'Twas on that night, when doom'd to know 

The eager rage of every foe. 

That night in which he was betray'd. 

The Saviour of the world took bread." 

It was the eve of his crucifixion ; nor were the events of the coming morrow unknown 
to him. From the unrelenting hatred of his enemies, and the steady purpose of their 
persecuting fury, he might have anticipated them ; he might, without much risk of error, 
have forecast them. But with him it was no forecasting of probabilities ; he clearly 
foresaw all, and consequently in a measure foretasted all. Had he been a weak mortal 
and nothing more, the certainly approaching danger and disaster must have occupied 
his thoughts and oppressed him with grief. In this case he would have been insensible 
to the wants, and incapable of administering to the comforts, of others ; he would have 
been too much occupied with himself and his own position to spare any thought for 
the concerns, or make any provision for the consolation, of his friends. On the contrary, 
instead of concentrating his thoughts on himself and the crisis just at hand, his 
thoughts were engrossed with his followers then, thenceforth, and onward for ages yet 
to come. All his thoughts, all his feelings, all his sympathies, were enlisted on the 
side of his disciples, and exercised for their benefit. Tlie self-abnegation that had 
characterized the whole course of his life became yet more conspicuous, if that were 
possible, at the period when he came within measurable distance of death and disgolo- 
tion. Self was absolutely lost sight of, the interests of his people bulked so largely 
that they occupied the whole field of vision. 5. A comparison. A comparison luia 
frequently been instituted between the life and teaching of the Saviour and Socrates— < 
between the Prince of peace and the prince of pagan philosopher!. Their respective 



282 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. xiv. 1—72. 

sentiments on the eye of execution may for a moment be compared, or rattier con- 
trasted, here. On the part of Socrates we find a sort of posthumous ambition, present 
doubt, and practical indifference. There was posthumous ambition ; for he allowed 
his vanity to be flattered by reckoning on the praises of posterity, and referred, with a 
feeling half of self-gratulation and half akin to revenge, to the false position in which his 
death would be sure to place his enemies, and especially his accusers. There was present 
doubt ; for beautifully as he reasoned on the subject of immortality and a future state 
on previous occasions, now, in the presence of the great change, he doubted whether 
he himself or his friend Crito, who was to survive him, were likely to fare better. 
There was practical indifference ; for the interests of his family and the upbringing of 
his children appear to have cost bim little or no concern. With our Lord, on the 
other hand, there was no borrowing of comfort from the praises of posterity ; his chief 
concern was for the well-being of posterity. There was no shadow of a cloud upon 
futurity; all was bright and blissful there. There was, instead of indifference, the 
deepest and most absorbing concern for the spiritual well-being and everlasting welfare 
of his friends and followers through all coming time. Far be it from us to undervalue 
the sage of Athens — he was one of the lights of heathendom ; but we find him to the 
last human, intensely human ; while Jesus was both Divine and human — unmistak- 
ably Divine, and yet truly human. 6. Use of monuments. Monuments draw attention 
to the facts of history and to the incidents of biography. How many thousands 
there are who would never have heard of Nelson, or Wilberforoe, or Wellington; or 
who would have remained ignorant of their great achievements, and of the stirring 
times in which they lived, were it not for the monuments erected to their memory 1 
How many have had their minds directed by some monument or other memorial to 
the life and times of men of whom otherwise they would never have heard even the 
names, or studied the history, or reflected on the lives however eventful 1 Thus it 
is, in a higher sense, with the institution of the Supper ; it is a monument to Christ, 
and helps to keep up the remembrance of him, which would else have been more or less 
forgotten. It reminds men of his death, and shall continue to do so till he come again; 
it reminds us of the debt of obedience we owe to his dying command, " Do this in 
remembrance of me ; " it reminds us, too, of a day when he will come " to be glorified 
in his saints, and admired in all them that believe." 

IL The katuee op the okdinancb. A sacrament, not a sacrifice. The Lord's 
Supper is a sacrament, not a sacrifice. We reject and reprobate the teaching of those 
who regard the bread and wine in the Lord's Supper as a sacrifice — the so-called sacri- 
fice of the Mass or the offering up of the bread and wine converted into the flesh and 
blood of Christ ; and who represent it as a bloodless, yet true, proper, and propitiatory 
sacrifice for both the living and the dead. Nothing could be more contrary to or con- 
tradictory of the Word of God. Li forming a correct notion of this ordinance, of which 
the passage before us contains the institution, it may be helpful to clear away the 
rubbish which, in the course of time, accumulated round it. In doing so it may be 
^ell to state what t( is not, and then what it is — to exhibit the negative side of this 
sacrament, and then the positive. 1. In the first place, then, we reject the doctrine 
of transubstantiation held by the Latin Church. This doctrine, first formulated by 
the Abbot of Corbey, Paschasius Eadbert, in the beginning of the ninth century, first 
denominated transubstantiation by Hildebert of Tours in the beginning of the twelfth 
century, and made an article of faith by the Lateran Council in the beginning of the 
thirteenth century, means the conversion or change of the elements of bread and wine 
into the real body and blood of our Lord. We repudiate this dogma (1) as opposed to 
Bcriptwre ; for St. Paul calls the elements after blessing by the same name as before, 
saying, " For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup ; " thus they are still 
bread and wine as much and the same us ever. It is (2) contradicted by the evidence 
of the lenses ; for handle them, and they remain the same ; taste them, they are the 
same ; smell them, they are the same ; they are still bread and wine, with all their 
sensible qualities or accidents, as they are called, unchanged. Now, the testimony of 
the senses ranks the highest — the testimony of the most credible witnesses cannot over- 
throw it, and to refuse the information of the senses overturns the oertamty of all 
knowledge ; while one of the acknowledged tests of Scripture miracles is an appeal to 
the senwa. It may iaiiij be admitted that one single sense may, under certain circum- 



CH. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPKL AGCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 283 

stances, err, but it can be corrected by the others ; whereas all the senses together cannot 
and do not err. It is (3) repugnant to reason, which convinces us that the material 
body of Christ cannot possibly be in heaven and on earth at the same moment ; that is, 
at the right hand of the Majesty on high and on thousands of earthly altars at the «ame 
time. In this case the flesh and blood of Christ would be present, while their sensible 
qualities are absent ; on the contrary, the sensible qualities of bread and wine would be 
present, while those substances themselves are absent. Thus we should have the subject 
without thn accidents in the one case, and the accidents without the substance in the other. 
But this is palpably absurd, for substances are known by their qualities, and qualities do 
not exist a^art from their substances. Once more, (4) this dogma is derogatory to the 
sacrifice of Christ — that great sacrifice offered once for all and for ever, because it repre- 
sents it as needing continuous repetition in the so-called sacrifice of the altar. More 
over, (5) it destroys the very nature of a sacrament, for every sacrament necessarily 
consists of two parts, a sign and a thing signified — " an outward and visible sign of an 
inward and spiritual grace ; " in other words, a sensible object and certain spiritual 
blessings set forth and sealed by that object. But transubstantiatioU'does away with 
the sign altogether, and puts the thing signified in its place. We reject the doctrinu 
of transubstantiation, then, because of the absurdities it involves, as also because of the 
superstitions connected with it, and the idolatrous practices engrafted on it. 2. In the 
second place, we reject the Lutheran doctrine of consubstantiation, which teaches that 
though the substance of the elements is not changed, yet the body and blood of Christ 
are mysteriously but really and corporeally present in, vnth, and under the elements, 
and are received corporeally with the mouth by communicants along with the symbols. 
Though this opinion is rather speculative than otherwise, though it does not convert 
the sacrament into a sacrifice, though it does not lead to the adoration of the elements, 
and though it does not impart to the sacrament a physical virtue apart from the dispo- 
sitions of the recipient, yet it involves several grave difficulties. It necessitates a 
literal interpretation of the words of institution, and so a substantial presence of the 
Lody and blood of Christ in this sacrament. The Lutherans are at pains to define this 
presence. It was not a change of one substance into another (jierovaia), nor the mixing 
of one substance with another (awovala), nor the inclusion of one substance in another 
{ivovaia), nor the absence of substance (imovala) ; but the real coexistence or presence 
(TrapovtrCa) of the one substance witli the other, that is, the earthly with the heavenly. For 
this purpose, however, a communication of properties is requisite, so that the humanity 
of Christ shares the omnipresence of his divinity. The Lutheran doctrine, it is true, makes 
the ubiquitous presence of the body of Christ unique and peculiar to the Lord's Supper. 
It is further alleged that the humanity of Christ is at the right hand of God, and that 
the right hand of God is everywhere ; therefore Christ, as to his humanity, is everywhere 
present. It is plain, however, that this omnipresence of the flesh and blood of Christ; 
in the sacrament of the Supper is contrary to the nature of a body, and thus self-con- 
tradictory. Besides, this omnipresence of the body and blood of our Lord would imply 
their presence in every ordinary meal as well as in the Lord's Supper. Neither is it a 
sufficient or at all satisfactory answer to this to say, as Lutherans do, that omnipresence 
in this case means no more than accessibility, that is, the fact of being everywhere 
given, for the body and blood, if thus given and received everywhere, would be every- 
where operative. 3. In the third place, we do not agree with the Zwinglians, including 
Zwingle himself, Carlstadt, Myconius, Bucer, BuUinger, and the reformers of Zurich, 
who went to the opposite extreme from the Lutherans. They regarded the elements 
as signs or symbols, and nothing else and nothing more ; these they held to be memorials 
of the absent body of our Lord. The tendency of the Zwinglian doctrine was to lessen 
the efficacy and lower the character of this sacrament. Looking upon the elements as 
mere signs, viewing them as memorials and not means of grace, denying the special 
presence of the Saviour, they made the sacrament of the Supper little, i anything, more 
than » bare act of commemoration or a mere badge of profession. And so it happens 
that the doctrine of the Supper, as set forth by Zwingle himself, is that still held by 
Kemonstrants and Socinians to the present day. Here we are reminded of the memor- 
iible conference that once took place on this subject. For a full account of the dis- 
cussion, the district where it was held, and the disputants on the occasion, we must 
refer the reader to the description by D'Aubigne, which, as usual, is at onc» picturesqu* 



2M THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK, [oh. mt. 1— 7a 

»nd instruotive. We can only notice the fact in its bearing on the gnbject of the Supper. 
On an eminence OTerlooking the city of Marburg stands an ancient castle. Away in tha 
distance sweeps the lovely valley of the Lahn. Further still, the mountain-tops riss 
one above another till they are lost in the clouds or disappear in the remote horizon. 
In that old castle was an antique chamber, with vaulted roof and Gothic arches. It 
was called the Knight's Hall. There more than three centuries and a half ago, a con- 
flict tooli place, not with carnal weapons, but intellectual and spiritual. Princes, 
nobles, deputies, and theologians were there. The combatants were the mighty Luther 
and the mild Melancthon on the one side, with the magaanimous Zwingle and the meek 
(Boolampadius on the other. It was this very subject that formed the ground of debate. 
Luther held by the literal sense, dogmatically repeating " This is my body," while his 
opponents urged the necessity of taking the words figuratively. And here, in passing, it 
may be observed that much as both Romanists and Lutherans insist on the literal sense 
of the words, they are figurative even according to their interpretation. Ab need by 
the Romanists they are an instance of the figure synechdoche, as used by Lutberana 
they are a metonymy, while as used by Protestants in general they are admitted to bfl 
metaphorical 4. Now, in the fourth place, and in opposition to all these, we give in 
our adhesion to the creed of the great majority of the Reformed Churches on this 
doctrine. Here it is necessary to bear in mind that, among the Reformed themselves, 
Zwingle occupied one pole, Calvin held the opposite, while the form of the doctrine 
ultimately agreed on and acquiesced in by the great body of Reformed communions was 
intermediate. Zwingle's view, as already seen, made the sacrament of the Supper 
symbolical and commemorative, reducing it to a mere sign ; Calvin, on the other hand, 
held that believers receive an emanation or supernatural influence from the glorified 
body of Christ in heaven. The illustration he employed made his meaning plain : it 
was to this effect, that the sun is absent and distant from us in the heavens, but his 
light and heat are present with us and enjoyed by us on earth. The Reformed, how- 
ever, maintained that believers received the sacrificial virtue of Christ's atoning death. 
Eventually the Consensus Ligurinus (1549 a.d.) was drawn up by Calvin. The imme- 
diate object was to harmonise the ^winglians and Calvinists; but it accomplished 
much more than this. It embodies the doctrine of the Supper which is held by all the 
Reformed Churches. The various Reformed Confessions are in harmony with it. The 
second Helvetic Cunfession and the Heidelberg Catechism, which constitute the 
doctrinal standards of the Reformed Churches of the Continent; the Thirty-nine 
Articles of the Church of England ; the Westminster Confession of Faith and Catechisms, 
are in full accord with it. The doctrine of these Churches and Confessions may be 
expressed in, or rather compressed into, the following brief statement, slightly modified 
from the Westminster Confession : — " The body and blood of Christ are as really but 
Bpiritually present to the faith of believers in this ordinance as the elements themselves 
are to their outward senses." Hence it comes to pass that while we outwardly and 
visibly partake of the sensible signs, which are bread and wine, we inwardly and faith- 
fully receive Christ and him crucified with all the benefits of his death. The real 
presence of Christ is enjoyed by his people in this sacrament ; but that presence is not 
bodily, it is spiritual. His body broken and blood shed are present, nut materially, but 
virtually ; by this we mean that the beneficial efiects of his sacrificial death upon the 
cross are conveyed to the faithful recipient. These benefits are received, not by the 
mouth, but by faith. The whole is made effectual by the Holy Spirit to our spiritual 
nourishment and growth in grace. 

HI. The doctrines made visible by the Suppeb. Nature o^ a sermon. A 
sermon is intended to explain some doctrine, or enforce some duty, or both. The great 
object to be attained is the glory of God in Christ and the Christian's good. The sacra- 
ment of the Sapper has often been compared to a sermon; but it is a sermon to the eye 
— a visible sermon, if the expression be allowed. It is a sermon, too, that thus visibly 
sets forth several of the leading doctrines of our holy religion. 1. The first doctrine 
visibly exhibited in the Lord's Supper is the Incarnation. The Incarnation, or Christ's 
coming in the flesh, was the great event of the ages ; for " when the fulness of the time 
was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman." " The everlasting Son of the 
Father," when he took upon him to deliver man, " did not abhor the Virgin's womb ; " 
■nd so, in the language of one of the Church's creeds, he " was incarnate by the Holy 



OH. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MAEK. 281 

Gho8t of the Virgin Mary." Now, the hread symholizing the hody, and the wine th« 
Wood, hoth together set forth the hody of flesh with the living fluid that circulates through 
it; and thus the elements of hread and wine teach the doctrine of the Incarnation, 
speaking to us the same language as the Evangelist John, when, in the first chapter ol 
his Gospel, he tells us, at the first verse, that " In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God; " and then adds, at the fourteenth verse, 
" And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us." The bread and wine, therefore, 
inculcate the same sacred truth as the inspired writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews, 
when he says, " Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he 
also himself likewise took part of the same." 2. The second doctrine visibly taught 
in the Supper is that of the Atonement, or the setting-at-one of persons alienated. The 
parties in this case are God and men, the latter alienated, and enemies in their 
minds by wiclsed works, the carnal mind being enmity against God ; while " the wrath 
of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men." 
This setting-at-one is the work of reconciliation,' from which, however, atonement only 
differs as being the more comprehensive term, and including not only the reconciliation 
itself, but the means by which reconciliation is effected. The atonement, then, or 
those sufferings of the Saviour by which reconciliation is accomplished, in other words, 
the bruising and breaking of Christ's body and the shedding of his blood, are set forth 
visibly by hreaking the bread and pouring out the wine in the Lord's Supper. 

"Bread of the world, in mercy broken. 
Wine of the soul, in mercy shed, 
By whom the words of life were spoken. 
And in whose death our sins are dead; 

"Look on the heart by sorrow broken. 
Look on tlie tears by sinners shed; 
And be thy feast to us the token 
That by thy grace our souls are fed." 

3. The third doctrine presented to the eye in the sacrament of the Supper is that of 
faith, by which we feed on Christ to our spiritual nourishment and growth in grace. 
The exercise of faith on the Son of God is symbolized by our eating the bread and 
drinking the wine. These same acts of eating and drinking are employed by our Lord 
in the sixth chapter of John to symbolize and signify the exercise of faith. Thus he 
says ill the chapter cited, " Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his 
blood, ye have no life in you ; " and again, " Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my 
blood, hath eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day;" still further it is 
added, " He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, dwelleth in me, and I in him." 
Thus the most intimate fellowship with Christ, the closest union and communion with 
him, life spiritual here and everlasting hereafter, together with part in the resurrec- 
tion of the just, are conditioned by and ^connected with that faith of which eating 
and drinking are the symbols. 

" Sweet feast of love Divine ; 

'Tis grace that makes us free 
To feed upon this bread and wine^ 
In memory, Lord, of thee. 

" Here conscience ends its strifn, 

And faith delights to prove 
The sweetneas of the bread of life^ 
The fulness of thy love." 

4. The fourth doctrine thus visibly taught in the Lord's Supper is the Communion ol 
Munts. The word " communion " implies our discharging some duty together (munm)— 
doing something in common. At the Lord's table we partake of bread in common 
and of wine in common — the same bread and the same cup ; and this common par' 
ticipation is a visible manifestation of the doctrine of the communion of saints. Hence 
the apostle says, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the 
blood of Christ ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of 



286 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1— 72. 



Christ ? For we being many are one bread, and one body : for we are all partakers 
of that one bread." This communion of saints is based on union to Christ. As 
branches, we are grafted into the living Vine, and thence draw life and strength and 
nourishment ; as living stones, we are built up into a spiritual temple, the foundation 
being apostles and prophets, with Jesus Christ as the chief Corner-stone ; as members 
of his mystical body, we are knit by joints and bands to him as the living Head. By 
virtue of this union of all true Christians with Christ, they have communion each with 
the other. We have common privileges, common benefits, common blessings, and 
common duties. We have hopes and fears in common, joys and sorrows in common, 
trials and triumphs in coiiimon ; and all these not merely in connection with the same 
congregation or the same Christian communion, but to some extent "with all that in every 
place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours." Oh that 
Christians realized this more in their own souls, and exhibited it more in their lives, 
and manifested it more to the ungodly world around 1 Oh, when shall the great inter- 
cessory prayer be fulfilled : " That thdy all may be one ; as thou, Father, art in me, and 
I in thee, that they also n^ay be one in us : that the world may believe that thou hast 
sent me " ! Oh, when will that proof of the divinity of our Lord's mission be given to 
an unbelieving world and a misbelieving age ! Oh, when shall the holy Church cease 
to be rent asunder by schisms, distressed by heresies, and oppressed by the scornful I 

" Elect from every nation, 

Yet one o'er all the earth, 
Her charter of salvation 

One Lord, one faith, one birth ; 
One holy Name she blesses. 

Partakes one holy food, 
And to one hope she pressei 

With every grace endued." 

6. The fifth doctrine is that of the glorious second Advent — that advent which the 
Church is looking for and hasting to. But this doctrine is presented in the communion, 
not visibly, but orally ; not to the eye, but to the ear, in the words, " Ye do show the 
Lord's death till he eome." 

IV. The sacramental signs; theib sionipioance. 1. Ke sacramental elements. 
These are two in number — bread for nourishment and wine for refreshment. One of 
these might serve the purpose; then why are two employed? Two are employed 
instead of one (1) for assurance. Thus we read in relation to Pharaoh's dream, " The 
dream is doubled to Pharaoh twice, because the thing is established by God, and God 
will shortly bring it to pass." In like manner the two signs show the certainty of the 
covenant and strengthen our faith in its provisions. Like the everlasting covenant 
made with David, well ordered in all things and sure, the promised blessings of the 
New Testament are firmly established, being " Yea and Amen in Christ Jesus." Their 
bestowal on the specified conditions is sure, soon, and certainly coming to pass. Again, 
they are (2) for appi ehension ; that is, in order that tliey may be rightly and more 
readily apprehended. Thus two signs were granted to Moses, as it is written, " If they 
will not believe nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, they will believe the voice of 
the latter sign ;" the reason assigned being the character of the Israelites, stiffnecked 
and hardhearted as they were. So God, because of our slowness of apprehension and 
hardness of heart, has added sign unto sign, mercifully accommodating himself to us, 
the frail and fallen children of men. But (3) they imply abundance. While they 
quicken our faith and help us to a clearer view of Christ, they exhibit the plenitude of 
his resources, for " it pleased the Father that in him should all fulness dwell," and 
" in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge," the ample suppHes he 
has in store for our necessities, the full forgiveness and plenteous redemption that are 
found in bim, the rich abundance of all needful gifts and necessary graces, as also the 
sufficient nourishment he bestows on us. 'I. The sacramentai actions. Some of these 
are performed by the administrator, others by the recipient. On the part of the former 
they are taking, blessing, hreaJcing, and giving. The taking symbolizes the assumption 
of our nature, " the mystery of the holy incarnation." The blessing signifies separation 
from a common to a special purpose, from an ordinary to a sacred use, ax also thanks- 



CH. xi,v. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 287 

giving to God for the unspeakable gift of his Son, for the means of salvation thus made 
available, and for this solemn ordinance itself as a sign and seal of the benefits bestowed 
— in a word, for all the mercies of his covenant, for all his love to our souls, for all his 
faithfulness to his promises, for all he has done, is doing, and has promised to do. The 
breaking is expressive of the breaking and bruising of his body ; that is, the painful 
death on the cross, the pouring out of his life unto death, the making of his soul an 
offering for sin to satisfy Divine justice, to pacify Divine wrath, and purchase salvation 
for us. The giving denotes the gift of the Father, who " so loved the world, that he 
gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but 
have everlasting life ; " the gift of the Son, of whom the believer can say, " He loved 
me, and gave himself for me ; " every needful gift, for " he that spared not his own Son, 
but delivered him up for us all, shall he not with him also freely give us all things ? " — 
the gift of all things, for " all things are yours, because ye are Christ's, and Christ la 
God's." The Christian's inventory is as fol'ows : — " Paul, or ApoUos, or Cephas, or the 
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come ; " all are yours, because 
Christ is yours — Christ, in the glory of his Godhead, in the dignity of his person, in the 
suitability of his of&ces, in the perfection of his work, in the sufficiency of his atone- 
ment, in the power of his resurrection, in the prevalency of his intercession, in the 
preciousness of his promises, in all the blessedness of his benefits ; no benefit kept back, 
no blessing withheld, and no promise excepted. Thus he is "made of God to us 
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption;" and thus we are 
" complete in him." There are also sacramental actions on the part of the recipients — 
taking, eating and drinking, dividing. These also are significant. Our taking implies 
intelligent acceptance of Christ and cordial reception of him. We embrace him fully 
as he is offered freely. We take him in all che capacities pertaining to his person or 
identified with his work. We take him as our Teacher, to be taught to know and believe 
and do the truth; as our Sin-bearer, who bore our sins in his own body, suffering, the 
just for the unjust, to bring us to God ; as our King, to rule in us and over us and for 
us. We take him as our Saviour and Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob, that we may 
be saved from the guilt and filth of sin, from the pollution and power of sin, from the 
defilement and dominion of sin; we take him as "the Lord our Righteousness" and 
Strength ; as the Beloved of our soul — the chief among ten thousand in our esteem. 
We take his laws for our direction, his lOve for our consolation, his precepts to guide 
us, his promises to gladden us ; his cross in time, his crown in eternity ; for if we bear 
the cross now, we shall wear the crown hereafter. Thus St. Paul says, " God forbid 
that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ ; " and again, " Hencefortli 
is laid up for me a crown of glory, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give 
me at that day." By eating and drinking we understand the necessary application. 
Bread must be eaten in order to nourish, and wine drunk that it may refresh. The 
elements thus entering our bodies incorporate with our system and become part of our 
frame. As the application of Christ by faith unites us with Christ, so by this symbolic 
appliciktion of his body and blood that union becomes still closer. By such sacramental 
action, too, we profess publicly our union with Christ, and proclaim to the Church and 
to the world that Christ is one with us and we with him — Christ formed in our heart 
the hope of glory, and our life hid with Christ in God. By eating and drinking we sav 
in action what Thomas said in words, " My Lord and my God ; " we claim sacramentally 
that mutual relationship which the Spouse in Canticles claims verbally when she says, 
" My Beloved is mine, and I am his." The dividing, according to the direction in St. 
Luke, " Take this and divide it among yourselves," is expressive of practical communion 
with each other in the charities and amenities of life; consequently of hallowed fellow- 
ship. Christian affection, and brotherly love ; of the widest, yet tenderest, sympathies 
with all followers of our common Lord, with all fellow-travellers to the heavenly home, 
and with all fellow-heirs of the future glory in our Father's house above. 3. T/ie 
sacramental words. These comprise an injunction, an explanation, and an obligation. 
The injunction or command is comprehended in the fuUuwing terms :— " Take, eat ; " 
" This do in remembrance of me ; " " Drink ye all of it ; " " This do ye, as oft as ye 
armk il, in remembrance of me." The exi'lanation consists of the two following 
sentences : — " This is my body, which is broken for you ; " " This cup is the new 
covenant in my blood, which is shed for many for the remission of sins." Hero there 



SM THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oH. xiv. 1—78. 

ia an obvious reference to the words of Moses, " Behold the blood of the covenant, 
which the Lord hath made with you" (Bxod. ixiv. 8). The obligation or enforcement 
applies to the whole, and is contained in the single sentence, " For as often as ye eat 
this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show [' ye proclaim,' Revised Version] the Lord's 
death till he come." 4. Concluding observations. The Lord's Supper is thus not a 
sacrifice, but a feast after a sacrifice, and a feast upon a sacrifice. It is a wellspring 
in the wilderness, a green spot in the desert, a feast to refresh us on our pilgrimage, 
and a foreshadowing of that feast above, where "many shall come from the east, and 
west, and north, and south, and sit down [recline] with Abraham, Isaac, and Jasob in 
the kingdom of heaven." We are constrained, somewhat reluctantly, to pass over 
several interesting topics in this connection — the reasons for partaking of this sacra- 
ment, the uses to be made of it, the benefits to be derived from it, as also the qualifloa- 
tions for worthily observing it. Here we may just notice in regard to the latter 
(1) that a man must prove himself, and so partake ; (2) discern or discriminate the 
Lord's body by faithful apprehension and spiritual appreciation ; and (3) discern or 
discriminate himself and his relation to his Lord. Failing these he incurs judgment, 
viz. judicial visitation. Yet mercy mingles with such judgment, for it is the chastening 
of our heavenly Father for our good, and to prevent our final condemnation with the 
ungodly world. — J. J. O. 

Vers. 26 — 42. Parallel passages: Matt. xxvi. 30 — 46; Luke xifl. 89 — 46; John 
xviii. 1.— 2%« agony in Qethsemane. I. Scene and sevbbai, cibci7Mstance3 oon- 
NKOTED WITH THE AOONT. 1. Anticipation, From the entrance of our Saviour upon 
his public ministry his life was one of continued trial. All along symptoms of the 
approaching crisis appeared, all along the bitter cup was steadily filling, all along the 
clouds were gradually gathering. At length, towards the close of his career, the storm- 
clouds in all their fury burst upon him. After his last entrance into Jerusalem the 
bitter cup became brimful, and he was now to drink and even drain it to its very dregs. 
The anticipation of those sufferings he was to undergo had made a deep impression on 
his mind ; forebodings of them had frequently disturbed his repose, dread of them over- 
whelmed his spirit. He foresaw all, he anticipated all, be in a measure foretasted all ; 
accordingly, several days before his passion, he cried out, " Now am I troubled ; and what 
shall I say ? Father, save me from this hour : but for this cause came I to this hour ; " 
or, as some erroneously read it, " What shall I say ? Shall I say this. Father, save me 
from this hour ? " 2. Preceding circumstances. On examining the circumstances that 
precede the agony, we find that the Wednesday and the Thursday before the Passover 
our Lord himself spent at Bethany, while on the latter day his disciples went to 
Jerusalem to engage an apartment and prepare a lamb for the coming solemnity. 
When the evening of the day was come, Jesus also repaired to Jerusalem. Having 
there joined the disciples, he sat down with them to the sacred feast which had been 
prepared, and which he purposed to render still more sacred by engrafting thereon 
(as we have seen) the <\ew festival to be observed in remembrance of himself, as a 
memorial of his death, and in exhibition of his body broken and blood shed for many 
for the remission of sins. Such were the order and connection of events. The Passover 
had been observed — that Passover which he had desired so earnestly to eat with his 
disciples. The sacrament of the Supper had been instituted by our Lord, and kept for the 
first time in company with his faithful followers. Subsequently he had delivered that 
touching and pathetic, yet most consolatory and truly sublime discourse recorded in the 
fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth chapters of the Gospel of St. John. He had poured 
forth, out of the fulness of his heart, that fervent and beautiful prayer contained in the 
seventeenth chapter of the same Gospel. He had warned the disciples against deserting 
him in the hour of temptation. He had selected three of them specially to attend him in 
his sorrows. Then, late at night, after delivering the discourse and praying the prayer 
and making the arrangements referred to, he left the city for the scene oi his ai^ony. 
3. The scene. The place where this occurred was a spot often frequented by our'Lord 
and his disciples. On this account St. Luke does not designate the place by name ; he 
merely says, " When he was at the place." St. John accounts for the traitor's know- 
ledge of the place from its being a frequent resort of the Saviour : " Judas also," h# 
■ayi^ " knew the place : for Jesus ofttimes resorted thither with hi« disciples." Tha 



sn. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 289 

place was a garden, little more than half a mile &om the city of Jerusalem, and only a 
■tone's throw from the brook Kidron, situated on the western slope and near the foot 
of the Mount of Olives. That garden had not been laid out for the production of 
herbs, but as an olive plantation. The name of that garden, as given by St. Matthew 
and St. Mark, was Gethsemane, so called from two words meaning " oil-press." Ab just 
intimated, it appears to have been a frequent and favourite resort of our Lord and his 
disciples. To that spot he often went as a meeting-place with his disciples scatteied 
through the city during the day, according to the meaning assigned by some to 
the term a-vmjxeri, rendezvoused. Thither the Saviour often retired from the world, 
and to be alone with God. Thither he often repaired for prayer and meditation. 
There he often spent the night in intercourse with Heaven. There, amid the deep 
gloom of that solitary plantation, was the place of the memorable and most affecting 
scene to which this section refers. That garden, i£ tradition has rightly marked the 
site, remains to the present day. That enclosure still stands, surrounded by a wall 
formerly of loose stones but now plastered and whitened, and contains eight large and 
venerable olive trees. Up to the present time it is a gloomy and forsaken place, yet 
from its associations it must ever be to the Christian a sweet and sacred spot. To this 
day it is a peculiarly sombre as well as solitary place, with that rude stone wall enclosure 
and those grey old olive trees. It was here an event took place the full purport of which 
eternity perhaps can alone reveal. At all events, for suffering and sorrow it ranks next 
to the Crucifixion itself. But sad and sorrowful as are the memories associated with 
Gethsemane, it is invested with a sacreduess that makes it unspeakably dear to every 
Christian heart. 

" Gethsemane can I forget. 

And there thine anguish see. 
Thine agony and bloody sweat, 

And not remember thee?" 

Let us imagine ourselves, then, in that sombre and solemn enclosure on the eve of 
man's redemption, in company with our Lord and along with Peter and James and 
John. The same three had been spectators of the Transfiguration. The same three 
had stood by while their Master restored to life the ruler of the synagogue's daughter. 
The same three are now privileged to be witnesses of that fearful struggle of the 
Redeemer's soul, called in this passage his agony. And as we stand in that society 
and on that spot, eastward rises high above us the lofty summit of Olivet. Westward 
we are overshadowed, or at least our view is shut in, by the gigantic walls of the holy 
city. Below us lies the valley of the Kidron, with the little freshet from which it 
takes its name. Yonder at a distance, amid the gloom of the overhanging olive trees, 
is seen the Saviour's person dimly revealed by the pale light of the silvery moon. It 
is a chilly night, but chilly as is the night-air, the warm perspiration bursts forth 
from every pore, moistens every limb, and falls like big drops of blood down to the 
ground. 

II. The BTBuaoLB and its severity. 1. Meaning of the term. The word " agony " 
is due to St. Luke, and employed by him only in the record of this transaction ; while the 
use of this word helps considerably to the right understanding of the whole. The idea 
of pain so usually associated with agony is not the exact sense of the word. It rather 
means conflict or struggle. It was a word which the Greeks applied to their games. 
Thus the runner in the race, the pugilist in the combat, and the wrestler in the contest, 
were properly said to agonize. Fain connected itself with the word only as a secondary 
and subordinate notion. But what was the nature of this struggle ? It could not he 
with sin, for he had no sin; he was "holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from 
sinners." It was not with the development of any unholy tendency or the uprising of 
any evil passion ; from all such his humanity was exempt. Nor yet are we without a 
hint respecting the source whence the struggle proceeded. If we compare an expression 
at the close of the temptation with another in the narrative of the agony we may arrive 
at a tolerably safe conclusion. In the first-named passage Satan is said to have left 
our Lord for a season, or rather until a convenient season; while in this passage the 
subject of prayer, which he suggests to his disciples, was the avoidance of temptation. 
Putting these two things together, we have good ground to believe that the suitable 

MABK — II. * 



290 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1- 



Beason for another onslaught of the evil one had arrived ; that the attack was renewed ; 
ihat Satan had returned ; that the tempter, though foiled once and again before, had 
resumed with increased faoilitieis, or from a vantage-ground, or at a more favourable 
opportunity, the terrific trial. A passage in the Epistle to the Colossians favours this 
view. It is there (Col. ii. 15) said that he stripped off or put away from himself the 
hostile principalities or powers that clung to him like a deadly Nessus-robe. The 
thrice-repeated assaults of Satan in the wilderness had been repelled, and the tempter 
defeated, but only for • time. The attack was renewed in Peter's effort to dissuade the 
Saviour from suffering ; and unconscious as the apostle was of the source whence the 
suggestion sprang, it was none the less a device of the great enemy, as we may infer 
from the sternness of our Lord's rebuke when he said, " Get thee behind me, Satan." 
But the tempter was again baffled and beaten. Once more, however, the prince of this 
world mustered all his forces for the last and fiercest onslaught. This was the hour 
and power of darkness, beginning with the agony and ending with the Crucifixion. 
And now Satan and the powers in league with him are not only vanquished, but Jesus 
" made a show of them openly, triumphing over them," as we read in that passage of 
Colossians ; that is, they were boldly exhiljited as trophies by the Victor, and led in 
triumph as captives bound to the Conqueror's car. 2. Point of attack. Still curiosity 
would desire information with respect to the particulars of the present trial, or the 
character of the struggle in which the Saviour is now engaged. What was its turning- 
point? Was he pressed to repudiate the responsibility he had assumed for sinners, 
and did the stru^rgle consist in resisting such pressure ? Was he tempted to renounce 
the great work of man's redemption ? Was there a shrinking of the flesh from the 
terrible ordeal that was fast approaching, while the spirit drew in the opposite direction ? 
1 1 can be no matter of surprise that the pure humanity of our Lord should recoil from 
what was coming in the near future, for he foresaw it all — the sneer, the scorn, the 
spitting, and smiting ; the robe of mockery, and the thorn crown, together with the 
scourging and suspension on the cursed tree. We cannot wonder that the anticipation 
of aU this, and vastly more, should produce a struggle of no ordinary kind in the breast 
of the Son of GJod. But whatever the exact nature of the struggle was, from whatever 
caase he agonized, one thing is perfectly plain, and that is the extreme intensity of the 
agony. 3. Evidence of its intensity. So unspeakably intense was its severity, that he 
sweat as it were great drops or clots (6p6iifioi) of blood which ran down to the ground. 
With reference to this proof of its severity, several similar instances of sweating blood 
have been adduced. Ancient authors and modern writers alike record cases of it. 
Diodorus of Sicily mentions bloody sweat as resulting from the bite of Indian serpents. 
Aristotle speaks of it as caused by a diseased state of the blood. Some recent medical 
authorities reckon it among the consequences of excessive terror or extreme exhaustion. 
But by far the most striking case of all is one narrated by the infidel Voltaire. In his 
essay on the civil wars of Prance, he says that the king, Charles IX., soon after the 
Bartholomew Massacre, was attacked by a strange malady, which carried him off at the 
end of two years. His blood was always oozing out, forcing its way through the pores 
of the skin — an incomprehensible malady, against which the art and skill of the 
physicians were unavailing. This, he adds, was regarded as an effect of the Divine 
vengeance ; but elsewhere he attributes it to excessive fear or violent agitation, or to a 
feverish and melancholy temperament, admitting that other cases of the same have 
occurred. 

HL The Savioub's sobrow and its boubob. 1, The deteription of his sorrow. 
There is a climax in this description. He began to be sorrowful ; his soul was sorrowful, 
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. He was amazed, and very heavy. One of the 
words here employed is peculiar. It denotes, according to one derivation, satiety, but 
according to another a state and consequent feeling of strangership — a sort of home- 
sickness. How applicable to the Saviour's sorrow I He must have been more than 
satiated with earth, and homesick, if we may use the expression, for heaven. But, looking 
deeper down, we find three words descriptive of the Redeemer's sorrow, which require 
closer and more cartful consideration. The original word for being sorrowful (\virfT<reat) 
is in this narrative peculiar to St. Matthew ; that for being sore amazed or stunned 
{4K9an$(7aeai) is only used by St. Mark ; while those equivalent to very heavy {iarnioyetv), 
and to the soul being exceeding sorrowful (nepiAviros) even unto death, are common to 



oa xiT. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. HARK. 291 

both. The first expression is one of frequent occurrence, but is here intensified by a 
subsequent compound and several adjuncts. Further, while the seat of this sorrow is 
the soul, the sorrow itself is exceeding and overwhelming, and enwraps the soul, the 
soul being distressed all round — grieved on every side (vept). Nor is that all ; it is so 
•icessive that soul and body seem ready to part, or actually to part, under the pressure 
and the death-pang to be anticipated. If it be not the fulfilment of, it is at least in 
correspondence with, the words of the psalmist — 

** The pains of hell took hold on me, 
I grief and trouble found." 

The next term, that peculiar to Mark, imports a complex state of feeling made up 
of horror and amazement, or extreme alarm and consternation, approaching to stupe- 
faction or being stunned, while here, again, an augmenting particle increases the notion to 
the highest degree. Once more, the former of the two words employed by St. 'Matthew 
and St. Mark in common, whatever origin is assigned to it, is used to denote a 
state of distress that combines at once defection of mind and disquietude of spirit, or 
anxiety and anguish. 2. TTie cause of this sorrow. Now, those words and phrases 
employed in describing the Saviour's sorrow, weighty as they are in themselves 
separately, when taken together represent an extreme of sorrow and a weight of woe 
which no utterances of human speech appear adequate fully to express. To this sorrow 
may be applied the words of the prophet, " Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? 
behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, 
« herewith Jehovah hath afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger." It is now time to 
inquire into the cause or causes from which such sorrow sprang. To what must we 
attribute this sorrowfulness, this sore amazement, this extreme heaviness and exceeding 
snrrowfulness of soul even unto death? We may answer (1) negatively. To attribute 
it to fear of death would be a glaring outrage on all probability, and the gravest libel on 
the Son of God. Who has not heard of that Athenian sage who philosophized so calmly 
and conversed so pleasantly with his friends till the poison-cup did its work ? Many a 
suldier, both in ancient days and modern times, has faced death fearlessly and unshrink- 
ingly. Many a soldier of the cross has displayed equal, and in cases not a few still 
greater, heroism. Not only men, but delicate matrons and tender maidens, have heroically 
braved the persecutor's rage, and bidden him do his worst. In the days of the martyrs, 
many courageously and cheerfully encountered death in its most ghastly form. Some 
endured the most cruel tortures without complaint. Some were torn to pieces by wild 
beasts. Some were left to look at the ocean's tide as it approached nearer and nearer, 
rising higher and higher till they sank in the gurgling wave. Some were sawn asunder. 
Some were crucified with the head downwards. Some went upward from the stake in 
a chariot of fiery flame. And is it possible that the Founder of our faith had less 
fortitude in the near prospect of death than many of his weakest followers ? Many, 
supported by a good cause and a good conscience, have despised death, and surrendered 
life unhesitatingly and unfalteringly. Many, of different ranks and different ages and of 
both sexes, have submitted to a death of cruellest torture, undaunted and undismayed. 
Hundreds have in their last moments illustrated the words of the poet — 

" Besting in the glorious hop* 
To be at last restored, 
Yield we now our bodies up 
' To earthquake, fire, and sword." 

Is it, then, for a moment supposable that the servant should so far surpass his Mastei , 
and the disciple his Lord, that what caused the latter such agony and anguish was 
matter oJ exultation and triumph to the former ? We answer (2) affirmatively. What, 
then, was the cause of the Saviour's sorrow ? Was his case different fi:om any or all of 
those referred to ? Yes, most certainly ; they were wide as the poles apart. Those 
illustrious heathens, those great and good men, those noble martyrs, those death-defying 
followers of the Saviour, stood each in his own lot in the end of the days. Not so the 
Saviour : his was a representative capacity ; he was the second Adam — his people's federal 
Head. He came to givu his life a ransom for many, to bear the sin of many, and to be 
numbered with the transgressors. He came to take the place of the guilty, and to stand 



292 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. £ch. xrsr. 1—72, 



in the stead of millions. Then the sword of justice was to be unsheathed against th« 
Shepherd, the man that was God's Fellow. The Shepherd must lay down his life for th« 
sh«ep, else they muft perish, and perish entirely, and perish everlastingly ; " for the wagea 
of Bin i* death," and " all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God." 

" Die man, or justice must 
Except some other as able and as willing pay 
The rigid satisfaction — death for death." 

The exact relation of the Saviour's sufferings to the penalty incurred we need not dwell 
on here. "Whether it is a relation of diversity (aliud pro quo), as Giotius maintained ; 
or oi equivalence (tantundem), according to others; or ot identity (idem), in accordance 
with the view of a third class, we shall not attempt to determine further than to lejeot 
the first, and exirfess our preference for the second rather than for the third. Further, 
as his life -had been stainless, his death must be sinless. Holy and harmless as that 
life had been, his death must be equally free from sin and separate from sinners. But 
now came the severest test and sorest trial. If the awful sufferings in near prospect 
should weaken his purpose ; if, foreseeing the shame and pain and torture, his resolu- 
tion should give way; or if, what would equally defeat his undertalting, his heart 
should conceive or cherish any feeling of revenge ; or if the burning sense of wrong 
should provoke complaint, or any word of impatient murmuring should escape his 
lipa ; if, in a word, any sin were to mingle with thought or feeling, or find utterance 
in speech, his life-work would miscarry and the whole would end in irreparable 
failure. No wonder, then, that, in view of all this mighty burden which he bore — 
in view of the dread responsibility laid upon him, in view of that mountain-load of sin 
he was to transfer to himself and bear away, in view of that great sacrifice which he 
was to offer, in view of the great satisfaction he was to make, in view of that great 
salvation he was to effect, the Saviour's humanity began to shrink. If we turn to the 
fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, a passage written more than seven hunrired years before 
the time of our Lord's agony, we find at once a comment on that agony and a key to ita 
cause : " The Lord hath laid on him the iniquity of us all," or, more literally rendered, 
" The Lord hath made the iniquities of us all to meet or fall on him," or, more 
strictly still, " The Lord hath made the iniquities of us all to rush on him." In those 
words thus understood our sins are figuratively represented as beasts of prey, and Jesus 
is their Victim ; or as cruel enemies, and Jesus is the Object on which their vengeance 
vents itself. Like bulls of Bashan, they beset him round. Like ravening and roaring 
lions, they gaped upon him with their mouths. Other adversaries, less powerful but 
more vexing, compassed him like dogs. It was as though fiercest foes of every kind and 
on every hand assailed him. 

IV. "The supplication and the strength thereby secured. 1. The meaning of 
this cup. No wonder he prayed, " Let this cup pass from me." The meaning of " cup " 
here is obviously suffering and sorrow — a bitter mixture to be drunk. Thus Isaiah (li. 17) 
says, " O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the hand of the Lord the cup of his fury ; 
thou hast dmnken the dregs of the cup of trembling, and wrung them out ; " while in 
the seventy-fifth Psalm we read that " in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the 
wine is red ; it is full of mixture ; and he poureth out of the same : but the dregs 
thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them." A similar 
figure ia found in Homeric poetry (' Iliad,' xxiv. 528) — 

"Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood( 
The source of evil one, and one of good. 
From thence the oup of mortal man he fills; 
Blessings to these, to those distributes ills. 
To most he mingles both : the wretch decreed 
To taste the bad unmix'd. is cursed indeed." 

Bnt while the figure itself is clear, the fact underlying it is not so clearly or easilT 
understood. 2. Tlie mixture in this cup. What elements mingled in this cup ? What 
weru the bitter ingredients in the mixture it contained ? It was not, as already seen, 
the mere shrinking of our Lord's humanity from death, however painful and shameful, 
though we do not by any means exclude this element. Neither was it an apparition pi 



OH. XIV. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 298 

the evil one in some form specially dreadful and terrible, as some have conjectured. 
There was something worse than all this — something more and bitterer still. There can 
be little doubt, though some seem to think otherwise, that the assaults of the Prince of 
darkness were peculiarly powerful at this juncture, and went to make up part of th^ 
bitterness of this cup. Of this we are not without some intimation from our Lord him- 
self, for before entering Gethsemane he says, " The prince of this world cometh," and 
before leaving the scene of the agony he adds, " This is your hour, and power of daru- 
ness." From all this, and from the circumstance already adverted to, that Satan nad 
relinquished his attempt only until another and more suitable season arrived, we have 
reason to conclude that Satan was again at work during the agony, that he was 
renewing with redoubled energy his fiery darts, deterring from the work that was being 
done, and at the same time in every way depreciating its worth. The conflict foretold 
in the garden of Eden was to be fought out in Gethsemane; the heel of the Seed of the 
woman was to be bruised, and the head of the old serpent to be crushed. It was not 
strange, then, that the serpent should hiss most horridly, while his head was thus being 
crushed. It were strange indeed if, when the spoiler was to be spoiled, the captor 
deprived of his prey, and captivity led captive, Satan should not rouse himself to one 
fearful, final effort to retain at once his power and his prey. His temptation then 
mingled in and embittered the draught which the Saviour was to drink and drain to 
its dregs. Whatever the nature of Satan's suggestion may have been, whether resist- 
ance to the Divine will, or refusal of the destined draught, or desertion of the post 
assigned, or something yet more shocking, it is needless to inquire. It is enough to 
know that when our Lord tasted the cup he turned aside, so exceedmg bitter was that 
mixture ; a dark cloud passed over the serene spirit of the Son of God ; his inward 
vision was obscured ; the Father's will became invested in mystery, and the cross in 
blackness. 3. Other ingredients in the cup. Another ingredient in that cup was the 
withdrawal of the Divine presence — the hiding of his heavenly Father's face. Sin shut 
man out of Puradise ; sin excludes man from the favour of God. The Saviour took our 
sin upon him ; he became our Substitute ; he acted as our Surety ; he stood in our 
stead, and eventually offered himself a Sacrifice for us. He thus exposed himself to 
the temporary withdrawment of the light of the Divine countenance. Nor can any- 
thing be more trying or more painful to a child of God than the loss of the Divine 
fellowship for a season. When deprived of the sensible enjoyment of Divine com- 
munion, he is comfortless. It was thus with Job (xxiii.): " Behold, I go forward, but he 
is not there ; and backward, but I cannot perceive him : on the left hand, where he doth 
work, but I cannot behold him: he bideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see 
him." Similar is the complaint of the psalmist in the eighty-eighth psalm : " Lord, 
why easiest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted 
and ready to die from my youth up : while I suffer thy terrors I am distracted. Thy 
fierce wrath goeth over me ; thy terrors have cut me off." If a child of God, a sinner 
saved by grace, feel so acutely the hiding of God's countenance, how unspeakably more 
the sinless Son of God I This withdrawal of God's presence — favourable presence — is one 
element, perhaps a main element, in the misery of the world of woe, and forms no 
small part in the punishment of the lost. But this part of the Saviour's distress had a 
positive as well as a negative side. Not only was there deprivation of the joys of 
Divine favour and fellowship, the overclouding of his heavenly Father's face ; there 
was in all probability some actual infliction of chastisement, as may fairly be inferred 
from the strong language of the prophet, when he says, " It pleased the Lord to bruise 
him ; he hath put him to grief." But of all the bitter ingredients in the cup of the 
Baviour's suffering, nothing would pain him more than the sense of our sins being laid 
upon him, that he might be made sin for us ; and the sight of that accursed thing, so 
abhorrent to his pure nature, as the burden he was to bear ; together with the con- 
sciousness of the close connection of sin and death and heU. It was then that sorrow 
arose on every side ; sufferings, with concentrated bitterness, overwhelmed him. The 
hatefulness of sin, God's indignation against it, that loathsome load of human guilt he 
was to bear, the work he was to go through in order to remove it, the wrath of Heaven 
manifested against it,— all these ingredients mixed together in that bitter cup. i. His 
supplication. It was then he prayed, " my Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass 
fcom me : nevertheless not as I will, but as thou wilt." Here we find, side by tide 



294 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIKG TO ST. MARK. [ch. xiv. 1—72, 

with the deepest suffering, the meekest submission. The prayer is conditioned by 
possibilities. If justice can be satisfied, if redemption can be effected, if tlie government 
uf God c»u be upheld, if, consistently with all this, sinners can be saved without such 
excess of sorrow, so let it be I The prayer was prayed three times. He went away 
and prayed ; he kneeled ddwn and prayed ; he fell on his face or on the ground and 
prayed. Thus he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears. Hia 
prayer was heard and answered, and yet the cup did not pass away. He was "heard in 
that he feared" ("for his godly fear," llevised Version); or, according to another rendering 
of the words, "htt was heard, and delivered from the fear of death." Though the cup 
was not removed, the dread of death was thus taken away ; at all events, strength was 
impai'ted. 5. The strength secured by his supplication. " There appeared an angel unto 
him, strengthening him ;" literally, infusing strength {lyurxi"' axir6v). The immediate 
consequence of this increased or renewed stren^^th was more earnest and energized 
supplication: "He prayed more earnestly {iKTevea-Tepoy)." Strictly speaking, he con- 
tinued praying (irpoo-ijilxcTo), and that more intensely ; the tense (imperfect) of the 
verb and the qualifying adverb imply prayer sustained and intensified. But intensely 
earnest as his supplication for the lemoval of the cup had been, it was equalled by the 
entire surrender of his own will to that of his heavenly Father. He had said, " my 
Father, if it be possible, let this cup ]iass from me: nevertheless not as I will, but 
as thou wilt " (so St. Matthew) ; he had said, " Father, if thou be willing, remove this 
cup from me: nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done" (so St. Luke) ; while here, 
according to the record of St. Mark, he says, "Abba, Father, all things are possible unto 
thee ; take away this cup from me : nevertheless not what I will, but what thou wilt." 
And once more, as we read in the Gospel of St. Matthew, he said, " my Father, if 
this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done." As though 
he had said, — 1 feel it may not be ; I know I must drink it ; and as I must I will. Not 
as I will, but as thou wilt. Thy will be done. 6. His example. He was in all things 
an Example for us. We may pray, and with perfect propriety, for deliverance frcni 
danger, or disease, or difficulty, or distress of any kind. If the answer come directly 
and as desired, it is well ; if not, succour of some sort will be brought us, strength 
suitable and grace sufficient will be given us ; in either case, our duty is submission to 
a will that is wiser than our own, and a full surrender of ourselves into the hands of 
our heavenly Father, who, in disposing all things to his own glory, disposes them at the 
same time for our good. The address, as reported by St. Mark, repeats the word for 
"Father;" thus "Abba" is the Aramaic for "Father," and to it is added the Greek word 
of the same signification. It may be that (1) St. Mark, as frequently, explains the ver- 
nacular Syiiac of Palestine in our Lord's day by the equivalent Greek word ; or (2) the 
repetition may imply intensity of feeling and strong emotion, just as the thrice-prayed 
prayer imports intense earnestness of spirit ; or (3) it may be that by this conjunction of 
two terms. Oriental and Occidental — the one used by the Jew, the other by the Greek — 
our Lord meant to exp-ess his interest on behalf of both Jew and Greek. Further, it 
has been questioned whether the shrinking of our Lord's humanity on this occasion 
was in view of all the sufferings as a whole which, in the capacity of our Surety, he was 
to endure, or only of those apparently incidental and possibly unessential sufferings, 
occasioned, for example, by the treachery of one disciple, the denial by another, the 
desertion of them all, the Jewish trial and the Roman trial, the scourging, spitting, 
scoffing, and such like. We can hardly thus separate the essential from the unes- 
sential, the indispensable from the incidental, in our Lord's sufferings. As a man, he 
shrank from the wrath of God ; but his ultimate submission to that sorest of all trials 
showed triumphantly his obedience to his heavenly Father's will. Thua, in order to 
save his people, his endurance was complete and his example perfect. 

V. The sleepiness of the disciples and the sadness that caused it. 1. Object 
of the disciples' watching. The Saviour had selected three disciples, as already seen, to 
he with him. No doubt one object, perhaps the primary object, in view was that they 
might be eye-witnesses of his agony, and bear testimony thereof to his Church. But 
another object, and one little if at all less in importance, was that they might be near 
him for sympathy and support. It was with this view, no doubt, he had said, " Tarry 
ye liere, and watch vvitli me." But even of this human succour he was deprived, for evei 
.IS he came to them — once and again and a third time in the interval of prayer he found 



ea. XI r. 1— ?2.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MARK. SBS 

them asleep ; so Jesus was left alone in his agony. 2. Nature and cause of their sleepi- 
ness. And yet it was not a sleep of stupidity, or insensibility, or want of sympathy, in 
any sense. The cause was the very opposite. And here it is noteworthy that whila 
the other evangelists record the fact, Luke, the beloved physician, alone assigns the 
cause. How characteristic of his profession ! From his skill in physiology be here telU 
us that " he found them sleeping for sorrow ; " just as afterwards, from his knowledge of 
psychology, he accounts for disbelief from joy where he says, " While they yet believed 
not for joy." And so it was from very sorrow that they slept. It is not an unusual 
experience that sorrow acts the part of a narcotic, and sadness causes sleep ; thus the 
psalmist says, " Reproach hath broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness." And a 
merciful arrangement it is that men imder such circumstances can sleep for a season and 
forget their sorrows. 3. Different explanations. The words which Jesus addresso- 
to his drowsy disciples have been variously understood. Some take them (1) interro- 
gatively, — Do ye sleep now and take your rest ? This seems favoured by the parallel 
in St. Luke, " Why sleep ye ? " As though he said, — Is it a time for indifference or indul- 
gence of this sort ? Is a time of present distress and apjjroaching danger a suitable 
season for sleep ? Others take them (2) as a soi-t of sorrowful irony, as if he said, — Sleep 
on now if ye can, and if that be possible, in such perilous circumstances. But (8) many 
prefer taking them as a permission slightly tempered with reproof, viz., — Sleep for the 
interval that remains. I can now calmly watch and wait alone ; the season of needful 
sympathy is past. He thus implies, moreover, according to Chrysostom, that he has no 
need of their help, and that he must by all means be betrayed. We may suppose that 
between this and the following verse some interval of time elapsed, and that then Jndas 
and the band approached when Jesus roused the disciples with the words, " Rise, let us 
be going." The whole is thus, no doubt, perfectly consistent and clearly intelligible. 
Intermediately, however, occurs another difficult expression, airdxfi, which in the active 
voice refers sometimes to local distance, and sometimes signifies to have back, or get 
again, or receive in full, and so to be satisfied. According to the first signification, the 
word is here rendered by some personally and with reference to Judas — (a) he isfa/r off ; 
or (6) in relation to the crisis of the agony — it is past ; while (c) the great majority 
of interpreters, in accordance with the second meaning of the word, translate it imper- 
sonally — it is sufficient, or enough. Thus understood, if taken in close connection with 
what precedes, the sense is, — Sleep on now and take your rest : it is enough ; your 
watching is no longer required ; but, if connected with what succeeds, it signifies, — It is 
enough : you have had sufficient deep ; the hour is come. By combining (3) and (c) we 
get what on the whole is most in agreement with both text and context ; that is to say, — 
Sleep during the rest of the interval that may be allowed you, and take your rest ; I 
require you to watch no longer. Then, after the lapse of a short interval, or even as an 
after-thought occasioned by the sight or sound of the enemy's approach, he checks 
himself in the additional words, " The hour is come . . . rise up, let us go." 

VI. The chief object of the agony. 1. Preparation. One great object of the 
agony was, as we conceive, preparation for the final, fearful struggle near at hand. The 
Saviour was to brace himself for the conflict. Hence the difference between the agony 
and crucifixion was this : The agony was, if we may so say, the prelude, the crucifixion 
the performance ; the one was — with reverence be it spoken — the rehearsal, the other the 
reality ; the one was the anticipation, the other the accomplishment ; the one was tha 
will, the other the work. The language of the one is, — I am wiUiog — I am going to 
suffer and so put an end to sin ; that of the other is, — I have already and actually 
suffered and so put away sin for ever. The grand issue of Gethsemane was preparedness 
for future and final suffering, and, if put in words, it would be, — I am ready, and in 
nj way reluctant to suffer; while from Calvary proceeds a shout of triumph over 
suffering endured to the uttermost and attainment of finality as expressed in the words, 
" It is finished." In the agony we see the sinless human nature of our Lord shuddering 
in sight of sin, and on the brink of fearful suffering because of sin, though not his own ; 
in the crucifixion we see the same nature sustaining the load of human sin, and 
succumbing under the consequent suffering and sorrow, yet victorious even when 
vanquished, and conquering by being slain. The agony was a forecasting of the final 
struggle ; it was going over all beforehand — going over all in mind, in spirit, and in bod> 
too • the crucifixion was the successful realization of the same. Once the agony wai 



296 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIiSG TO ST. MARK. [oh. xiv. 1— 72, 



over, the bitterness of death was to some extent past. 2. The loneliness of our Lord in 
hit tufferinga. In all tkis the Saviour was alone — as much alone in the garden as on 
the cross, in his agony as in his crucifixion. Sleep on now, he said ; you have let the 
opportunity of sympathizing with and sustaining me pass by. Such, at least, is one not 
unnatural interpretation of the words. Miserable comforters ye have been, yet I blame 
you not; the spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak. Sleep on now — it matters 
not ; for the struggle is over, and over without your co-operation ; of the people 
there was none with me. I have trodden the winepress alone, from first to last. They 
had been saddened by the prospect of losing their Lord and Master, by his pathetic 
'Uscourses, by his touching intercession, and by his present supplication, and in 
jonsequenoe they slept. 3. Summary. In summing up the lessons lo be learnt from 
this subject, we are taught (1) the terrible nature and fearful evil of sin. It was the 
cause of our Lord's agony — of the intense struggle, the overwhelming sorrow, the 
bloody sweat. The three chief ingredients in that bitter cup were, first, the unspeakable 
and indescribable load of human guilt ; for though guilt in its moral demerit is not 
transferable, yet in liability to punishment it is. On the Lamb of God was laid the 
sin of the world, and he took it away ; on our great High Priest were laid the iniquities 
of us all ; the pressure of our transgressions rested on his head, as the sins of Israel on 
the head of the scapegoat. But another element entering into the cause of his agony 
was the temptation of Satan. The hour of darkness had come, the powers of darkness 
were doing their worst, the hosts of darkness rushed to the conflict. What fiendish 
power they exerted, what fiery trial they occasioned, what foul temptations they 
suggested, what fearful struggle they engaged in, we cannot even conjecture. A third 
element, and the worst of all probably, was the hiding of his heavenly Father's face ; it 
commenced in the a«;ony, continued during the crucifixion, and culminated in those words 
of awful import, " My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? " But (2) the next 
great lesson is connected with prayer. And here we find several important particulars 
suggested by the prayer of our Lord in his agony — the matter of prayer, the manner 
of it, the posture in it, the spirit of it, the intensity of it, and the success of it. From 
the mcUter of the Saviour's prayer we learn the allowaldeuess of supplicating relief from 
circumstances of distress or disaster, as far as is consistent with God's will and expedient 
for us. The manner sauctions not vain repetition, but only such repetition as great 
earnestness frequently employs. The posture was kneeling, then prostration even on the 
cold and clammy ground. The sjairit was that of perfect submission to the Divine will, 
with devout and holy resignation to his Father in heaven : " If it be possible, let this cup 
pass from me." The intensity included increasing earnestness ; it was the outpouring 
of the heart with continued importunity and augmented fervour. The sttccess consisted 
not in the removal of the cup but of the fear, and in communicated strength and 
encouragement fortifying for the coming ordeaL Again, (3) there is an affecting 
contrast. While all within was storm, all without was calm. Nature all around was 
tranquil ; the moon was shedding her mild radiance over the top of OUvet, the Garden of 
Gethsemane, and the valley of the Kidron ; no wind was blowing, no leaf was stirring, 
and no ripple movin?. All was hushed in silent awe and wrapt in profound astonish- 
meai at the bloody baptism with which Jesus was baptized that night.— J. J. Q-. 

Vers. 53 — 72. Parallel passages : Matt. xxvi. 57 — 75 ; Luke xxii. 54—62 ; John 
iviii. 13—27. — 3%e denial by Peter. I. The causes that led to Peter's srtf. 1. 
The first cause of Peter's sin. The first cause, as we may infer from this very chapter, 
was idf-confidence. Our Lord foretold the smiting of the Shepherd, as predicted long 
before in ancient prophecy — of himself the good Shepherd, appropriating the title ; and 
along with the smiting of the Shepherd, he foretold, as a consequence, the scattering of 
the sheep. Peter, yielding to the impulses of his own ardent and impetuous nature, 
repudiated the notion of desertion thus implied. He did so in a manner that involved 
an invidious comparison of himself with others, and an overweening opinion of his own 
strength of will and purpose of fidelity. " Although " (woi «', equivalent to "even if," 
viz. a supposed case not likely to exist; fl kcH read by Tregelles, equivalent to "although," 
viz. a case really existing) " all shall be offended, yet will not I," were his somewhat 
boastful or egotistical words. The smiting of the Shepherd may be a stumbling-bluck 
ifi others— to all of them, but not to me j the others may fall over it, yet wiil'not 1 j 



m. xrz. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 297 

the rest may act the cowardly, unmanly part indicated, breaking and scattering like 
feeble sheep soon as the wolf is seen to approach, but not I. I will prove myself the 
rock-man, and stand my ground in face of all danger, and in spite of all enemies. 
Thus Peter exalted himself at the expense of others ; he also presumed too much on 
his own strength, and took too much credit for his own courage. Peter possessed 
physical courage, we have good reason to believe, but he lacked moral courage; nor do 
these two qualities always go hand in hand. There may be great physical courage 
with but little moral courage, and much moral courage where physical courage is 
defective. Peter was courageous enough— or rash enough, some might be disposed to 
say — to cut off the ear of a manservant of the high priest ; but he was cowardly 
enough to quail before the glance of one of the maids of the high priest. He had 
physical courage enough to do the deed of violence, but not moral courage enough to 
tell the truth to an inquisitive, intermeddling, though perhaps light-hearted, thought- 
less girl. If we contrast the conduct and character of two comrade apostles, John and 
Peter, we shall find a confirmation of our view. As compared with Peter, John had less 
physical courage, for on a subsequent occasion, as we read, " Peter therefore went forth, 
and that other disciple, and came to the sepulchre. So they ran both together: and 
the other disciple did outrun Peter, and came first to the sepulchre. . . . Yet went he 
not in. Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre." This 
is a very interesting and instructive statement. They both ran, in their eagerness and 
expectancy, to the rifled sepulchre ; but John, being the younger and therefore swifter 
man, outran Peter, and reached the sepulchre before him. But there he paused ; he 
had not the physical courage to enter that gloomy abode ; a sudden awe arrested him. 
At length Peter came up, and as soon as he arrived at the place, without fear, or dread, 
or hesitancy, without stop, or stay, or a moment's pause, lie dashed in. " Then went 
in also that other disciple which came first to the sepulchre." On this occasion Peter 
proved himself the physically bold, courageous man ; while John, though younger and 
stronger probably, was the physically timid and hesitating. The scene shifts to the 
palace of the high priest ; and these two apostolic men change places. John is now 
the bold, courageous man — morally so, for he " went in with Jesus into the palace of 
the high priest ; but Peter stood at the door without." John was known to the high 
priest, and known to him as a disciple of Jesus, and yet he went boldly into the 
palace, neither ashamed nor afraid to acknowledge his discipleship. Not only so, he 
spoke to the portress, and got Peter admitted. But now came Peter's turn and time 
of weakness. Though John, a man of much less physical courage, had gone in boldly, 
and then gained admission for his companion, yet Peter, with far less moral courage, is 
frightened into sinful denial of his discipleship in the first instance by the brusque 
boldness of a somewhat pert maid. And yet, notwithstanding all this, a certain cause, 
or at least somewhat of an excuse, may be found for Peter's moral cowardice, as com- 
pared with the moral courage of John at this juncture. Peter was conscious of a 
crime with which John had no complicity or connection — a crime that might shape 
itself into a constructive charge of an attempt at rescue. He had cut off the ear of 
Malchus, and so he may have dreaded the consequence of that act, or the more serious 
charge of interfering with the officers in the discharge of their appointed duty, in 
order to prevent the capture of his Master. These considerations may have increased 
the apprehensions of Peter, and added to the supposed danger of his position. The 
fact of discipleship of itself did not involve peril of any kind, and so John breathed 
more freely and moved about at large in the palace of the high priest without dread of 
danger. 2. A second cause leaiiing to Peter's sin. A second cause leading to Peter's 
sin was iinwatchfulness and neglect of prayer. When our Lord, in the Garden of 
Gethsemane, found the three disciples sleeping, he addressed himself specially to Peter, 
with the words, "Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour?" and then 
he spake words of warning to all: " Watch ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation." 
A curious incident, in a certain respect the converse of this, though generally over- 
looked, deserves well, we think, to be noticed in this connection. In the warning just 
referred to, our Lord passed from the particular to the general, from the singular to the 
plural — from Simon to the associated apostles. In the warning recorded by St. Luka 
(xxii. 31, 32), and which introduces the passage of that Gospel parallel to oh. xiv, 
37, 38, of the Gospel before us, our Lord passes in reverse order from the plural to tli< 



296 THE GOSPEL ACCORDISra TO ST. MAEK. [ch. xiv. 1— 7a 

singular — from the whole of the apostles to Peter; thus : "The Lord said, Simon, Simon, 
behold, Satan asked [or 'demanded'] to have you, that he might sift you as wheat : 
out I made supplication for thee, that thy faith fail not," where it is remarkable that 
Satan's demand comprehended all the apostles — the rest as well as Peter, as seems 
clearly implied in the plural iiiaii, while our Lord's supplication embraced him in 
particular, as must be inferred from the singular <roS. Just as Satan had demanded all 
the apostles, including Peter, so our Lord prayed for all the apostles, but for Peter in 
particular. It was not without reason that our Lord thus individualized in hie 
supplication for Peter, for he it was that stood in greatest peril. The most confident 
of them all was the most imperilled of them all. Some, like Judas, were soon to be 
hliwn away, or had already been blown away, as chaff, and had been separated from 
the good grain ; but the word " wheat" applied to the remainder had in it both comfort 
and encouragement, while the Saviour's great intercessory prayer was a guarantee of 
safety. The fact, moreover, that he prayed for Peter specially and individually, 
affords strong consolation to all the children of God in every age and clime. Not one 
of all is forgotten by him who ever lives to intercede ; not one of all is forsaken by the 
all-prevailing Intercessor. No doubt some may be disposed to object, and say that 
after all, and notwithstanding all, Peter fell. How is this reconcilable with the 
prevalence of the Saviour's prayer ? He fell, but he rose again ; he fell, and fell far, 
but did not fall away ; he fell sadly for a time, but he did not fall finally and for ever. 
And thit is the very thing implied in the form of the word rendered " fail ; " for it is 
not the simple verb, but iKhdmi, or, according to the critical editors, iKXiirf), which 
signifies to fail out and out, utterly, or finally. Thus this utter and final failure 
was exactly the thing prevented by the Saviour's intercession. But, reverting to 
Peter's want of watchfulness, we can find no hint nor indication of any kind in all 
this chapter, or in the parallel sections of the other Gospels, that would lead us to 
believe that Peter' paid proper, or indeed any, attention to the warning of our Lord. 
We seaich in v^in for proof that he watched against going into the place of tempta- 
tion, or that hf watched against the company where he might expect to be assailed 
with temptation. There is no evidence whatever that he either watched against the 
approach of temptation, or that he prayed for grace to resist the tempter or strength 
to overcome his temptations. He seems, in fact, to have had no idea whatever of the 
danger that was drawing near him so stealthily and so suddenly, and no suspicion of 
the snares which Satan was so subtly drawing round him ; neither does he seem to 
have used the means which his Master had urged on him as necessary for safety and 
defence. He appears to have let the warning entirely slip, or for a time to have let it 
sink into oblivion. Accordingly, we find that, when years afterwards he called to mind 
his fearfnl neglect and its well-nigh fatal consequences, he addresses to others a most 
solemn warning, in words that echo his own mistakes, and the means he should have 
taken to avoid it; for in his First Epistle (v. 8) he writes, "Be sober, be watchful: your 
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour." 
3. A third cause of Peter's sin. A third cause of Peter's sin was his following Christ 
afa/r off. This, of course, refers literally to the fact that Peter followed our Lord at a 
distance, keeping considerably aloof. He followed him, but at a long interval between ; 
he followed him, hut not close or near at hand. Instead of walking side by side, or 
close behind him, he kept away and afar off. It was, doubtless, the fear of man that 
kept Peter at this distance; it was the fear of man that thus unnerved him; it was 
the fear of man that prevented him coming immediately after his Master, as he should 
have done. He wished to be near his Master, but his heart failed him. He wished, 
we are sure, to be with his Master, but he lacked moral courage to share the reproach 
of Jesus of Galilee. It was not the personal risk so much as the ridicule he shrank 
from. This physical distance was a sign of moral distance, and a symbol of the 
condition of others as well as Peter, when they follow Christ afar off. Peter's duty 
was to have been ai his Lord's side, or close behind him, or in some way near at hand. 
So with ourselves. Instead of following Christ afar off, we are bound by privilege as 
well as duty to follow him closely ; instead of following him afar off, we must follow 
him faithfully ; instead of following him fitfully, we are to follow him fully ; instead of 
foUowiui; him sneakingly, we are to follow him fearlessly ; instead of following him 
by couitraint, we are to follow him freely and of a ready mind ; instead of foUowiua 



ot,.xtv. 1— 72.] THE GOSPEL AC'COKDING TO ST. MARK. 299 

him for a short space of time, we are to follow him all our life, and so always. From 
Peter's disastrous fall and foul denial of his Master, we learn the important lesson of 
following Christ freely, fully, fearlessly, faithfully, and for ever. Distance from Christ 
is real danger, nearness to him is true safety. Distance from the Sun of Eighteousness 
is coldness, darkness, and spiritual death; nearness to him is love, light, and life. 
In Canticles the question is asked, " Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, 
leaning npon her Beloved ? " K this refer to the Church, as we are of opinion it does, 
it is a picture of her true attitude. The world is the wilderness through which the 
Christian is passing, and from which he is ascending to a better and promised land ; 
while it is on the arm of Christ that he leans. Thus leaning on Christ, looking to 
Christ, and living by the faith of Christ, we journey safely from the wilderness 
of earth to the promised land of heaven. Away from his presence, away from his 
power, we are every moment in greatest peril ; away from the range of his protec- 
tion and the guidance of his providence, we expose ourselves to the temptations of the 
evil one, and speedily become his easy prey. 4. The fourth cause of Peter's sin. The 
fourth cause of Peter's sin was bad company. " He sat," we read, " with the ser- 
vants" of the high priest, "and warmed himself at the fire." What was this but 
going into the company of his Master's enemies? This was mixing, and without 
necessity, with the enemies of the Saviour. He thus went with his eyes open into 
the place of peril, among the attendants of the high priest and the adversaries of his 
Lord and Master. Here there is every reason to believe he would hear little good of 
any kind spoken; while he would be sure to hear his Master's name vilified, his 
character slandered, and his cause reproached. In all this contempt and reproach 
there is too much cause to believe Peter must for the time have concurred. Possibly 
he not only agreed with them, but acted as they did, the better to conceal his real 
connection with Christ. It is shocking even for a moment to suppose that Peter was 
80 weak and so wicked, during the short space he consorted with such company, as to 
join them in reviling his Master. Suspecting him, as they did, of being Christ's 
disciple, and finding him thus readily uniting with them in heaping scorn upon his 
Master, what must they have thought of that Master? What estimate could they 
form of either disciple or Teacher? Must they not have concluded that Christ's 
discipleship was neither happy nor honourable? Must they not have inferred, and 
inferred with reason, that the disciple of such a Master was knave, or fool, or villain? 
When, on the other hand, we consider what Peter should have done and what he 
might have done at the time of his Master's difficulty and danger, we almost blush 
for the name of disciple so degraded and disgraced ! Had he been true to his con- 
fession of the Christ, had he been staunch in his adherence to his Master, he would 
either have kept out of the company which he knew consisted of his Master's bitter 
enemies, or, if he found it necessary to stand by or sit among them, he would have 
defended him at whatever risk. 

II. The aggravations op Peter's bin. 1. Ingratitude. Peter had been on the 
most familiar terms with his Master, and had been highly favoured by him. Of the 
chosen, he was one of the choicest ; of the elected, he was one of the elite. With 
James and John he shared the Saviour's closest intimacy. Like them, he was with 
him on the Mount of Transfiguration, and was privileged to witness that wondrous 
scene and see that glorious sight. Like them, he was admitted to the solemnities of 
the death-chamber, and was present at the restoration to life of the daughter of Jairus. 
Like them, he had been invited to accompany his Lord in the Garden of Gethsemane, 
and to watch with him during the agony and bloody sweat. Still more, our Lord had 
commended his good confession of the Christ the Son of God, and traced it to heavenly 
revelation ; he had bestowed on him the honourable surname of "Eock-man," in acknow- 
ledgment of his firmness and the foundation he should help to lay ; besides, be had 
promised him a high position and also distinguished privileges in his kingdom. Peter 
had walked to him on the water, and been kept from sinking by his Master's hand. Yet 
BOW, for all these special marks of friendship and favour that had been lavished on him, 
he shows himself utterly and basely ungrateful. He turned his back on his best and 
kindest Friend, denying all knowledge of him. Now, when a return of friendship was 
most needed, he not only failed to act the part of a friend in need, and reciprucate tha 
kiudness he had received, but actually consorted with bis bitterest enptiiis. 2, FailMf 



300 THE (JOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [oh.xiv. 1— 72 

hood. When our Lord stood in most need of sympathy, Peter, as we have seen, stood 
aloof or ranged himself on the side of his enemies. When he might have given 
valuable testimony in favour of his Master, silence sealed his lips, and he refused to 
acknowledge him. Nor was this all ; he falsified to the most fearful extent and in the 
foulest manner. He denied all or any knowledge of Jesus ; he repeated the denial in 
the most positive way ; he backed fis repeated falsehood with an oath. When chal- 
lenged the third time, he " began to curse and swear, saying, I know not the man." 
Surely one falsehood of the kind indicated would have been bad enough and wicked 
enough, but its repetition once, again, a third time, greatly aggravated the lin and 
augmented Peter's guilt. The violence of language which was prompted by, and which 
gave expression to, his virulence of feeling is difficult to account for. There was fear of 
detection and imagined danger, but there must have been rage as well, to explain his 
violent and passionate language. Several of the bystanders recognize him ; a kinsman 
of Malchus is there who had seen him in the garden; his Galilean dialect bewrays 
him ; accusations crowd upon him ; proofs multiply against him. Peter gets irritated, and 
completely loses his temper and self-control. At the supposed discrepancy, or at least 
difficulty, in Peter's denial of his Master we can only glance. The place of the first 
denial was by the fire in the high priest's hall, or quadrangular court under the open 
air {av?cti), while that of the third is not specified. The place of the second was in the 
npoaihtov according to St. Mark, and the irvXava according to St. Matthew; while 
St. John tells ua that he was standing and warming himself. Now, the fire was in the 
open court {a.v\i\), the pasisage from this to tha stieet was irpoai\tov, and the portal or 
entrance door of this passage was ■7rv?uii/. He had removed to a short distance from the 
fire, but not so far as to lose the influence of its heat or warmth. With respect to 
the persons, the first question that called forth his denial was put by the portress. 
On the occasion of the second denial the same maid addressed the bystanders, who 
echoed her words, so that several persons (male Irepos) and (lemale SaXij) another maid 
different from the portress — al^flTOK, phiral) assaik'd Peter with their inconvenient and 
unwelcome questions. In replying to or repelling these, Peter kept denying (iiprtiro, 
imperfect). At the third denial more of the bystanders (oi lo-TtDres of St. Matthew, and 
01 wapea-TUTes of St. Mark), with some other different person (&Wos t« of St. Luke) as 
ringleader, drew attention to his being a Galilean; while the relative of Malchus 
confirmed this by alleging that he had seen him in the garden. There is thus neither 
real difficulty nor discrepancy of any kind. 3. Profanity and perjury. By this time 
Peter is excited and enraged. Goaded to madness, he breaks out into language of shocking 
profaneness. The falsehood already repeated he backs by an imprecation. He also 
swears the lie, invoking the name of Jehovah and calling the omniscient One to witness 
his reiterated untruth, and thus lays foul perjury on his soul. He began, we read, to 
anathematize, that is to say, he used a formula of imprecation such as " God do so 
to me and more also," thus cursing himself if what he said was untrue ; but, besides 
this, he employed the customary formula of an oath, invoking God as witness of his 
words, false as he knew them to be. Naturally impetuous and passionate, and in youth, 
or before his discipleship, perhaps addicted to profane swearing, he relapsed into his old 
sin in order to corroborate his statements and to force credence on the incredulous. 
One sin leads to another ; one lie especially needs another to support it. The by- 
standers must have known little of Jesus' character and teaching, or Peter's profanity 
of itself would have convinced them that he knew not that Teacher — nothing, at least, 
of his spirit and doctrine. Could it be possible that Peter, in the madness of his rage 
and fear, meant by his profanity to leave this impression on his questioners, and that 
there wap thus a method in his madness? At all events, he spoke as one who was 
a stranger to the fear of God and the ordinary dictates of religion, not to speak of 
discipleship to a Teacher who said, " Swear not at all . . . but let your communication 
be. Yea, yea; Nay, nay." 4. Other aggravating circumstances. There were several 
other circumstances of aggravation which we can only indicate, and may not dwell on, 
among them the following : — The faithful and frequent warnings he haid received, and 
had received so recently ; his own vehement protestations of loyalty and fidelity to hi* 
Master — that if all others should be offended he would not, that if he should die with 
him he would not deny him in any wise. There were also other considerations connected 
with the denial that greatly added to the sin : there were the ciroumstancea and time— • 



ta. xnr. 1—72.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 801 

our Lord being now deserted, delivered into the hands of cruel enemies, and dragged 
before inexorable judges ; there were the persons to whom the denial was addressed, 
namely, servants and other humble ofiBcials, with little influence and less power, not 
magistrates or functionaries invested with authority ; there were the flagrant breaches 
of Peter's own positive and repeated promises. All are forgotten or falsified I Alas, 
what is man 1 At the strongest but weakness, and at the best but imperfection 1 

IIL Peteb'b bepbntanob. 1. Extenuating circumstances. We may just notice, 
very briefly, in conueotion with Peter's repentance, certain extenuations of hii sin. Hij 
sin, largely the outcome of his own impulsive nature, came on him with the suddenness 
and strength of an unexpected impulse. There had been no premeditation, no deliberatt 
plan, and no deceitful design, as in the case of Judas. His plans and purposes had all 
been of the very opposite character; his determination and resolutions had all tended 
in the very contrary direction. He did not remain in liis sin, nor ever aftervvarda 
repeat it. The sin was exceeding great and the guilt enormous, but it would have been 
still more so had he continued it, or persevered in it, or subsequently returned to it. 
Satan took him by surprise, as though asleep or (rff his guard; but once roused from 
the lethargy into which he had fallen, or brought back to the post which he had 
abandoned, he never again wandered from the path of duty or sank in sin. 2. How he 
was recalled to duty. Two circumstances were the means externally, or the occasions 
of reminding Peter of his sin and recalling him to duty. But, while all the evangelists 
record Peter's sin, St. Mark alone records the second crowing of the cock, which was 
one of the two circamstanoes referred to; and St. Luke alone records our Lord's look 
at Peter, saying, " And the Lord turned, and looked upon Peter." The first crowing 
of the cock had passed unheeded. St, Mark, who gives us such an exact transcript of 
Peter's fall and feelings, probably from Peter's own lips, informs us that it was not till 
the second or regular morning cockcrow that Peter was brought to the recollection 
of his Lord's warning and his own sin. It was then he awoke as from a troubled 
dream or terrible nightmare ; while much about the same time our Lord, either from 
the open front of the chamber in which the trial had been proceeding, or as he passed 
acrosti the courtyard from the apartments of Annas to the palace of Oaiaphas, turned 
towards Peter and looked him into repentance. 3. Sis repentance. The same evidence 
of repentance is found in the words, " He went out, and wept bitterly " (^kXcuc, he 
continued weeping aloud ; not iSditpue, he shed tears). The participle {iiriPa\iiv') 
attached to this verb is variously rendered. The most usual and probable meaning 
assigned to it is that of our version, " When he thought thereon," that is, cast (his mind) 
on it. Some explain it, " He began to weep," as in the margin of the Revised Version, as 
well as of the Authorized Version ; others, " He flung his mantle over his head ; " others, 
again, " He flung himself forth [i.e. on the ground] and wept." Further, it is understood 
by others in the sense of abundantly, that is, " He wept abundantly," also in the margin 
of Authorized Version; while a more interesting explanation, if well founded, is, " He 
cast his eyes on him and wept," as if Peter reciprocated his Lord's look, and consequent 
compunction of soul vented itself, not in a transient outburst, but in a long-continued, 
copious flood of tears. Thus, while the Evangelist Luke records the look of Christ ou 
Peter, the Evangelist Mark, if this rendering be at all tenable, records the corresponding 
look of Peter on Christ ; so that, when eye met eye, Peter was overpowered by strong 
emotion, and gave way to his deep grief by bitter (nucpas, St. Matthew and St. Luke) 
weeping. 4. Beal repentance distinguished from remorse. It is very important to 
distinguish true repentance from mere regret or remorse ; while a contrast of the case 
of Peter with that of Judas will mateiially help us to see and clearly comprehend the 
aiSerence. Curtain elements are common to both, and these we must eliminate before 
we can rightly distinguish them. On the part of Judas there was sorrow of the 
intensest kind — remorse of the most distressing nature ; there was the fullest and 
most ingenuously candid confession; there was also the strongest possible desire to 
make any and all the reparation that was possible. All these elements are found in 
true repentance ; but as they are found also in the remorse of Judas, they are common 
alike to genuine repentance and mere remorse. The first material point of difference is 
that the sorrow of the true penitent is caused by the sight of sin in itself, apart alto- 
gether from its consequences ; the sorrow of remorse is occasioned chiefly, if not entirely, 
\>j those cviueguenoes. Judas did not foresee the terrible consequences of hig tin ; bf 



802 THE aOSt-EL ACOOEDING TO ST. MARK, [oh. xiv. 1— Ti 

little dreamt, perhaps, that it would lead to Jesua being evil entreated, condemned, and 
crucified. When he pocketed the reward of iniquity, he felt satisfied with the bargain 
and sure that the Master would find some way of escape. Had this been the case ; 
had no ill consequences resulted from his treachery ; had nothing beyond the arrest ot 
Jesus taken place, and no worse results followed ;--^udas, there is reason to believe, 
would have felt neither sorrow nor shame at what he had done ; nay, he would have 
had a feeling of satisfaction rather than a sense of sin. He would scarcely have shrunk 
from the society of the apostles ; he would have beea able to fiud some pretext or 
frame some excuse for all that had happened. But the consequences of his treachery— 
the terrible consequences — made all the difference. Greedy as Judas was, and mean as 
he was, and treacherous as he was, he was by no means a cruel man or a man of blood. 
When, however, contrary to his expectation, the most appalling consequences were 
certain to ensue ; when a judicial murder and a cruel death awaited the Master whom 
he had betrayed ; then Judas for the first time saw his sin in its consequences, and was 
overwhelmed with the sight. It was quite different with Peter. His sin, heinous as it 
was, did not produce any such fearful effects as the sin of Judas. His denial of his 
Master did not lead to his apprehension ; it had nothiug to do with his condemnation ; 
it did not cause his death. Peter saw it not in any such consequences, but in its own 
baseness and sinfulness. He saw the iniquity of his sin as committed against his loving 
Lord, as a sin against truth and righteousness, as a sin against goodness and justice, as 
a sin by which he wronged conscience and hurt his own soul. The sight tilled his heart 
with sorrow and shame, while his eyes brimmed over again and again with salt and bi tter 
tears. The next point of difference is that the true penitent seeks mercy, but the subject 
of remorse sinks in despair. Of this also we have a striking illustration in Judas and 
Peter respectively. The former confessed his guilt, acknowledged the innocence of his 
Master and the injury he had done him ; not only so, in self-abhorrence and loathing 
he flung back the price of blood. But all this sorrow and remorse fell short of 
repentance ; true penitence was as far off as ever. He had no heart to pray ; no heart 
to seek God's face and favour free ; no heart to sue for mercy. His heart was hardened, 
not softened, by sin ; the blackness of despair enveloped him ; blank ruin stared him in 
the face. Not so Peter : he sorrowed, but after a godly sort ; instead of giving himself 
up to despair, he sought mercy. He was humbled, not hardened ; the tears he shed 
washed his eyes, and his spiritual vision became clearer ; he saw the blackness of his 
sin, but he saw also the benignity of the Saviour. That look of his Master had 
pierced his heart with a feeling of his guilt, but brought withal a sense of Divine 
grace ; he was fully alive to the misery of sin, as also to the mercy of the Saviour. 
After the terrible storm which had swept across the horizon of his soul, the rainbow of 
hope remained upon the cloud, reflecting the sunshine of heaven on the tears of sorrow 
shed by the penitent. He saw his iniquity to be very great, yet he sued for pardon. 
He looked not away from, but to, the Saviour whose heart his sin had pierced, and 
mourned in bitterness. 

IV. Pbaotioal lessons. 1. A picture. Our Lord and his apostles are often seen 
grouped together in a picture ; the Gospels exhibit a moral picture of the group. In 
this picture there is much dark shading ; but this dark shading helps to bring out more 
clearly the bright and brilliant colours of the picture and to enhance its beauty. If 
there were no dark shading in it, it would represent angelic life in heaven rather than 
human life on earth ; in that case, the very perfection of the figures would diminish its 
fitness for our warning or comfort. 2. Good educed from evii. Peter, when restored 
(tjrHrTpei(/or), was better fitted to help others. His own weakness became by grace a source 
of strength to others. When he had turned again, and been restored (as those referred to 
in iirtaTfa^tiTe, 1 Pet. ii. 25) to the Shepherd and Bishop of souls, he was better able 
from his own experience to keep other sheep from straying, or rcBtore them from their 
wanderings. 3. A lesson never forgotten. The circumstances connected with Peter's 
sin were so engraven on the tablet of his memory as never to be forgotten, as is evident 
Irom several passages of his Epistles and his speech as recorded in Acts, When 
he would warn men against one of those mistakes which caused his sin, he says 
(1 Pet. y. 8), " Be vigilant," or " watchful " (Revised Version). When he charged the 
Jews with the foulest crime, he expresses that charge in words that echo his own dark 
deed : " Ye denied the Holy One and the Just ; " " Ye denied him in the presence id 



CH. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



803 



Pilate," as we read in Peter's speech (Acts iii. 13, 14). When he pictured the highest 
state of spiritual prosperity, he describes it as freedom from falling ; " If ye do thesa 
things, ye shall never fall " (2 Pet. i. 10). His most solemn warning is, " Beware lest 
ye also . . . fall from your own steadfastness " (2 Pet. iii. 17). The change that was effected 
ir Peter after the descent of the Holy Spirit is wonderful, for in the early part of Acts 
we find him possessed of moral courage equal to his natural physical courage, and on 
all occasions acting a bold, manly, and courageous as well as prominent part. Whatever 
grace we need, we are thus encouraged to seek the Spirit to supply. 

V. The omitted portions or this chapter. 1. For section vers. 61, 62, peculiar to 
St. Mark, see Introduction. 2. For section vers. 55-65, containing the account in part of 
the Jewish trial, see beginning of next chapter, where that trial is concluded. — J. J. G, 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XV. 



Ver. 1. — ^And straightway in the morning 
the ohief priests with the elders and scribes, 
and the whole council, held a consultation, 
and hound JesuB, and carried him away, and 
delivered him up to FUate. Straightway in 
'fc« morning (eufltws irpaif). The proceedings 
recorded in the last chapter terminated 
probably between five and six ; the cook- 
crowing helps to fix the time. Now came 
the more formal trial. The whole Sau- 
lierlrim united in consultation. All the 
proceedings hitherto had been irregular 
and illegal. Now, for form's sake, they tried 
him afresh. But iheve was another law 
wliich was also violated. It was now 
Friday. In capital cases, sentence of con- 
demnation might not legally be pronounced 
on the day of the trial. Yet our Lord was 
tried, condemned, and crucified on the same 
day. They " bound him," that he might 
be impeded in any attempt to escape. They 
" carried him aw.ay " (dTtiiveyKai'), with the 
semblance of force ; although we know 
that he went " as a lamb to the slaughter." 
How truly miglit it be said of these chief 
priests and elders, " Their feet are swift to 
shed blood 1 " And delivered him up to 
Filate. Judsea now was added to the pro- 
vince of Syria, and governed by procurators, 
of whom Pontius Pilate was the fifth. It 
was necessary for the Jews to deliver Christ 
over to the Roman power ; because the 
power of life and death had been taken 
from them since they became subject to the 
Romans. " It is not lawful for us," they 
say (John xviii. 31) " to put any man to 
death ; " that is to say, tbey could not put 
to death without the authority of the 
governor. Our Lord predicted of himself, 
" They shall deliver him to the Gentiles." 

Ver. 2.— Art thou the King of the Jews 1 
It appears from St. Luke (xxiii. 1 — 5) that 
when Pilate demanded particularly what 
the charges against Jesus were, on account 
rif which the Jews urj^ed that he should be 
oruoified, they alleged these three things : 



(1) that he perverted the nation ; (2) thai 
he forbade to give tribute to Csssar ; (3) 
that he said that he was Christ, a King. 
Whereupon Pilate, who had heard by many 
of the blaiiieless life, the pure doctrine, and 
the famous miracles of Jesus, goes at once 
to the puint, and asks him, " Art thou the 
King of the Jews?" — a question which, of 
course, affected the position of Ctesar. Our 
Lord's answer, Thou sayest (^ab \4ysts), was 
in the affirmative, amounting to this — 
" Thou sayest that which is true." 

Ver. 3. — And the chief priests accused 
him of many things. The wordi in the 
Authorized Version, " but he answered 
nothing," are not to be found here in any of 
the best manuscripts or versions. But they 
are to be found in St. Matthew (xxvii. 12) ; 
and Pilate's question in the next verse 
confirms St. Matthew's statement, and 
makes the sentence unnecessary here. Our 
Lord answered nothing, because all that 
they had to say against him was manifestly 
false or frivolous, and unworthy of any 
reply. St. Augustine says on this, " The 
Saviour, who is the Wisdom of God, knew 
how to overcome by keeping silence." 

Ver. 4. — It would seem that Pilate had 
led Jesus out of his palace, into which the 
Jewish priests could not enter (John 
xviii. 28), lest they should be defiled by 
entering a house from which all leaven 
had not been scrupulously removed. This 
would have been a violation of their re- 
ligious scruples ; and therefore he went 
out into the open court, and there heard 
the accusations of the chief priests. It is 
supposed that the building occupied by 
Pilate was the palace built or rebuilt by 
Herod near the gate of Jaffa, north-west of 
Mount Zion. It was doubtless occasionally 
occupied by Filate, and it wae conveniently 
situated, being near to Herod's palace — the 
old palace of the Asmoneans, between it 
and the temple. 

Ver. 5. — Pilate marvelled. He marvelled 
that the innocent Saviour, wise and eloquent, 
standing before him in peril vf his life, 



304 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. xt. 1—47. 



■honld remain silent trhen thus vehemently 
acoased by the leading mea of the Jews. 
Pilate marvelled at his forbearance, his 
ealmness, his contempt of death ; from all 
of which he argued his absolute innocence 
and holiness, and resolved to do everything 
in his power to deliver him. The silence 
of a blameless life pleads more powerfully 
than any defence, however elaborate. 

Ver. 6. — St. Mark omits here what took 
place next in the order of events, namely, 
the sending of our Lord by Pilate to 
Herod (Luke xxiii. 5). This was Herod 
Antipas, ruler of Galilee ; and Pilate, 
apparently convinced of onr Lord's inno- 
cence, hoped to escape the responsibility of 
condemning an innocent man, by handing 
him over to Herod ; for Pilate had heard 
that our Lord was a Galilean. Moreover, he 
hoped to accomplish another good result, 
namely, to recover the favour of Herod, 
which was desirable on political grounds. 
The first intention failed; for Herod seat 
our Lord back to Pilate in mockery, " array- 
ing him in gorgeous apparel" (irepi/SoAii' 
eVfliJTo Kaimpav) . But the second succeeded : 
" Herod and Pilate became friends with 
each other that very day " (Luke xxiii. 12). 
There was now, however, another resource. 
At the feast (koto loprJii')— literally, at fea»U 
time — he used to release unto them one 
prisoner, whom they asked of him (^imp 
T)Tovvro). In St. John (xviii. 39) we read 
that Pilate said, " Ye have a custom, that 
I should release unto you one at the 
Passover." 

Ver. 7. — And there was one called 
Barahbas, lying bound with them that 
had made insurrection, men who in the insur- 
rection had committed murder. Pilate 
appears to have thought of Barabbas, not 
doubting but that, by limiting their choice 
between him and Jesus, he would secure 
the liberation of our Lord. But Pilate 
little knew the temper of the chief priests 
and scribes, and their bitter hostility to 
Olirist. The word "Barabbas," better 
written " Bar- Abbas," means " sou of 
father." 

Ver. 8. — ^And the multitude went up and 
began to ask him to do as he was wont to 
do unto them. Went up {&va$h.s). This is 
the reading to be preferred to the old 
reading, " crying aloud " (oca;3o^(ror). The 
reading i.m$as is supported by the Sinaitic, 
the Vatican, and the Cambridge manu- 
■oripts ; also by the Old Italic, the Gothic, 
and other versions. The .ffithiopio Version 
combines the two, " going up and crying 
aloud." The geographical position of 
Pilate's residence quite justifies the use 
of the term i,fa0iLs. 

Ver. 9. — Pilate doubtless hoped that 
they would ask for Jesu*. He know that 



the chief priests had delivered our Lord tot 
envy. That he could not help observing, 
as a shrewd Roman judge, from their 
gestures and manner. And then he knew 
also, at least by report, cf the purity of 
Jesus, and of the holy freedom with which 
he rebuked their vices. So he thought, 
reasonably enough, that if the chief priesti 
wished to destroy him for envy, the people, 
who had experienced so many kindnesses 
from him, would desire that he should live. 
Ver. 10. — Envy was the low passion that 
influenced the chief priests. They saw 
thai Jesus was gaining a great and in- 
creasing influence over the people by the 
sublime beauty of his character, by the 
fame of his miracles, and the constraining 
power of his words. And hence they con- 
cluded that, unless he was arrested in hig 
course, and put out of the way, their own 
influence would soon be gone. The whole 
world was going after him. Therefore ha 
must be destroyed. 

Ver. 11.— But the ohief priests stirred up 
the multitude {ayetreia-av rbv iix^v)f that 
he should rather release Barabbas unto 
them. St Matthew (xxvii. 20) says, " They 
persuaded the multitudes " {^veurcw rotis 
ix>^ovs). St. Mark's word (avsa-eurav) im- 
plies a rousing of their bad passions ; agitat- 
ing them to a blind zeal for his crucifixion. 

Ver. 12. — And FUate again answered and 
said unto them. What then shall I do unto him 
whom ye call the King of the Jews t The word 
" again " has the support of three great 
uncials, and the best of the cursives. Pilate 
did not give way without many an inward 
struggle. And now at last he puts the 
matter, so to speak, in their own power ; so 
that it might be an act of their clemency, and 
that they might have the honour of saving 
our Lord's life. But it was all in vain. For 
the chief priests had resolved to press for 
his crucifixion, little dreaming that they 
were doing what " God's hand and God's 
counsel had before determined to be done." 
Pilate puts the question before them with 
much shrewdness and tact. He speaks of 
our Lord as one whom " they called tt« 
King of the Jews." He appeals to their 
national pride and their national hopes. 
Would they degrade themselves, and ex- 
tinguish their hopes, by giving up to the 
most ignominious of deaths one who had 
established such claims upon theii reverence 
and their love ? 

Ver. 13.— And they cried out again, Cmoify 
him. These words might seem at first to 
justify the old reading in ver. 8, adopted 
in the Authorized Version, " crjing aloud." 
But there the word was arajSo^a-oj, here it 
is tKpaJoj'. Moreover, in ver. 14, it is not 
(irepiiriroTepajs) " the more exoeeflingly," but 
{irepura lis) " they cried exceedingly." 



OH. XT. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



SOB 



Ver. 15. — And Pilate, wishing (;8ou\(5|Uevos) 
to content the multitude, released unto them 
Barabbas, and deUvered Jesns, when he had 
scourged him, to be oruoifled. St. Luke and 
St. John are more full in details here. 
From their narratives it appears that when 
Pilate found- that his attempt to rescue our 
Lord, by putting Barabbas in contrast with 
him, had failed, he next hoped to move the 
multitude to pity by the terrible punish- 
ment of scourging, after which he trusted 
that they would relent Scourging was a 
vile punishment, inflicted on slaves. But 
it was also inflicted upon those who were 
condemned to death, even though freemen. 
This scourging, whiuh was a part of the 
punishment of crucifixion, was of frightful 
severity. Horace ('Sat.' i. 3, 119) sneaks 
of it as "hoiribile flagellum." But it 
appears from St. John (xix. 1) that the 
scourging of Jesus took place before his 
formal condemnation to be crucified ; we 
may therefore suppose that it was not a part 
of the ordinary punishment of crucifixion. 
At all events, there is nothing, upon a care- 
ful oomparioon of the narratives, to lead us 
to the conclusion that our blessed Lord was 
scourged twice. In fact, Pilate anticipated 
the time of the scourging, in the vain hope 
that he might by this means save our Lord 
from the capital punishment. A comparison 
of the narratives of St. Matthew and St. 
Mark with that of St. John will make this 
clear; for they all three refer to one and 
the same scourging. Becent invebtigatious 
at Jerusalem have disclosed what may pro- 
bably have been the place of the punish- 
ment. In a subterranean chamber, discoveied 
by Captain Warren, on what Mr. Fergnsson 
holds to bti the site of Antonia, Pilate's 
prsetorinm, stands a truncated column, no 
part of the structure itself, but just such a 
dwarf pillar as criminals would be tied to 
to be scourged. The chamber cannot be 
later than the time of Herod (see Professor 
Westoott on St. John xix.). 

Ver. 16. — And the soldiers led him away 
within the oonxt, which is the Praetorium; 
and they call together the whole band. 
This was the principal court of the palace, 
where a large number of soldiers were 
always quaitered. "The whole band" 
would be the "oohors prsetoria" of Cicero; 
Pilate's body-gruard. 

Yetr. 17. 18. — And they clothe him with 
purple, and plaiting a orown of thorns, they 
put it on him; and they began to salute him. 
Hail, King of the Jews I Tkey clothe him 
with purple (^ey5{iovtrtf avrhv vopipipauy So 
also says St. John (xix. 2, Ifianov Trop(f>vpovv). 
St. Matthew says (xxvii. 28), " They put on 
him a scarlet robe (TtepteBTjKay avr^ x^^f^^^^ 
KoKKivn")" Purple and scarlet are not such 
Terj dissimilar colour* Purple is a royal 
MARK — n. 



colour ; and the chlamys of St. Matthew wai 
a short military cloak of scarlet, intended 
to be a kind of royal livery. St. Cyril says 
that the purple cloak symbolized the king- 
dom of the whole world, which Christ was 
about to receive, and which he was to obtain 
by the shedding of his most precious blood. 
It was designed in mockery of his claim to 
be a King, and it proliably Lad a reference 
to his supposed insurrection against Caesar. 
All this was permitted by Pilate, in order 
that he might the more easily, after this 
ignominious treatment, deliver Christ from 
the extreme sentence. And plaiting a crown 
of thorns, they put it on him. The crown of 
thorns wiis in all probability woven from 
the Zizyphus spina Ghristi (the rmhh of the 
Araba), which grows abundantly in Pales- 
tine, fringing the banks of the Jordan. 
This plant would be very suitable for the 
purpose, having flexible branches, with 
leaves very much resembling the ivy leaf 
in their colour, and with manj sharp thorns. 
The pain arising from the pressure of these 
sharp thorns upon the head must have been 
excruciating. And they began to salute him. 
Hail, King of the Jews 1 (Xaips, ^atrAev t&v 
'lovSalcvv). This word, x^v^, was an ancient 
form of salutation; here used by the sol- 
diers in bitter mockery of his claim to be a 
king. 

Ver. 19. — ^And they smote Ms head with a 
reed — the same reed, according to St. Mat- 
thew (xxvii. 29, 30), which they had first 
put into liis right hand as a sceptre, to com- 
plete the mocking symbolism — and did spit 
upon him {^veTrruoy out^). The verb is in 
the imperfect ; they did it again and again. 

Ver. 20. — And when they had mocked him, 
they took off from him the purple, and put 
on him his garments. The silence of out 
blessed Lord during these wanton and 
aggravated insults is very remarkable, and 
also the total absence of any legal grounds 
for his condemnation. And they lead hint 
cat to crucify him. Assuming the palace 
of Pilate to have been near the gate of Jaffa, 
north-west of Mount Zion, and the place >< 
crucifixion that now assigned to it, withm 
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, — the dis- 
tance would be about one-third of a mile. 

Ver. 21 — And they compel one passing by, 
Simon of Cyrene, coming from the canntry, 
the father of Alexander and Eufus, to go 
with them, that he might hear his ortss. 
It seems from St. Matthew (xxvii. 32) that 
our Saviour bore his own cross from the 
palace to the gate of the city. The tablet, 
with the inscription afterwards attached to 
the cross, would be carried before him; 
and a certain number of soldiers would be 
appointed to go with him to the place of 
execution, and to see the sentence carried 
out. Having passed out through the gat« 



sou 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK, [c^ xv. 1— 47. 



of the city, they met one Simon of Gyrene, 
coming from the country, nnd they compel 
him (ayyapfiovai) ; literally, they imprest 
kim. The Cyrcnians had a synagogue in 
Jerusalem (Acts vi. 9), and this Simon may 
probably have been one of those who had 
come up to keep the Passover. He must 
have been a Hellenistic Jevf, a native of 
Oyrene, on the north coast of Africa. AIbx- 
ander and Eufus, his sons, were no doubt, 
at the time when St. Mark vrrote his Gospel, 
well-known disciples of our Lord. St. Paul, 
writing to the Romans (svi. 13), sends a 
special salutation to Eufus, "chosen in 
the Lord, aud his mother, and mine ; " a 
delicate recognition by St. Paul of some- 
thing like maternal care bestowed upon him 
by the mother of Bufus. It ia probable 
that his father Simon, and perhaps his 
brother Alexander, may have been dead by 
this time. Kufus is also honourably men- 
tioned by Polycarp ia his Epistle to the 
Fhilippians. There is a tradition, men- 
tioned by Cornelius ^ Lapidc, that Eufus 
became a bishop in Spain, and that Alex- 
ander suffered martyrdom. To go tcith them, 
that he might bear his cross. St. Luke 
(xxiii. 26) adds the touching words, "to bear 
it after Jesus (^cpepeij' omaSev toS 'Vqirov)." 

\ez. 22.— And they bring him (tpipovair 
outJc) ; literally, they hear him. At ver. 20 
another word has been used {i^dyovtriv), 
" they lead him out." It seems as though, 
when they had reached the gate of the city, 
they saw symptoms that our Lord was 
fainting under his burden; and so they 
pressed Simon into the service, that he 
might be ready to assist. At first our Lord 
carried his own cross. Tradition says 
(Cornelius & Lapide) that the cross was 
fifteen feet long, the transverse limb being 
eight feet; and that he so carried it that 
the upper portion rested on his shoulder, 
while the foot of the cross trailed on the 
gronnd. When they saw that he was break- 
ing down under the weight of the cross, 
they laid it on Simon, that they might the 
more quickly reach the place of crucifixion. 
The place Golgotha, which is, being in- 
terpreted. The place of a skull. "Golgotha" 
is a Hebrew, or rather Chaldaie, word, ap- 
plied to the skull on account of its round- 
ness, that being the idea which lies in the 
root of the word. The Greek equivalent 
to the word is Kpavlov; and this is rendered 
in the Vulgate, Calvaria, a skull, from calva, 
bald. Bt. Luke is the only evangelist in 
whose Gtoipel (xxiii. 33) this word [Kpavlov) 
is rendered "Calvary." In the Bevised 
Version it ia rendered "the skulL" The 
place was so called, either from its having 
been the spot where executions ordinarily 
took place (though in this case we might 
have expected to find it called riwos Kptwtay 



rather than Kpaviov); or, more probably, it 
was derived from the configuration of the 
place itself, perhaps a round-like mound, 
or knoll, sufficiently elevated to be seen at 
a little distance and by a large numbe*. 
As to the actual site of Golgotha, recent 
researches seem to have done much to con- 
firm the ancient tradition. The Bordeaux 
pilgrim, a.d. 333, says, "On the left side 
of the original Church of the Holy Se- 
pulchre is the hillock (inonticulus) Golgotha, 
where the Lord was crucified. Hence, 
about a stone's throw distant, is the crypt 
where his body was deposited." St. Cyril 
of Jerusalem alludes to the spot frequently, 
and there was no doubt about it in the time 
of Eusebius, a.d. '315. Professor Willis 
says that the rock of Calvary still stands 
up, some fifteen feet above the pavement. 
" It appears likely," he says, " that in it»( 
original state this rock was part of a little 
swell of the ground that jutted out from 
the slope of Sepulchre Street, and probably 
always formed a somewhat abrupt view on 
the west and south sides" (see ' Speaker's 
Commentary' on St. Matthew). Captain 
Conder (^Palestine Exploration Fund, Quar- 
terly Statement July, 1882) thinks that 
he shall be able to show that the traditional 
Golgotha is the site of the original temple 
of Ashtoreth, and that this temple was the 
Jebusite sanctuary before David took Jeru- 
salem, and round which the sepulchres of 
the kings were hewn after the worship 
of Jehovah had consecrated the temple 
hill. 

Ver. 23. — And they offered him wine 
mingled with myirh : hnt he received it not. 
There were two occasions on which drink 
was offered to our Lord during the agonies 
of his crucifixion. The first occasion is that 
mentioned by St. Matthew (xxvii. 34), when 
they offered him wine mingled with gall. 
This was a kind of stupetying Uquor, a 
strong narcotic, made of the sour wiue of 
the country, mingled with bitter herbs, and 
mercifully administered to dull the sense 
of pain. This was offered before the actual 
crucifixion took place. It is to this firs4 
occasion that St. Mark here refers. The 
words in the original are (ko! 4SlSovv aiir^ 
lar/ivpvKTfifvov olvov), " they were giving, 
they offered him." But he received it not. 
He would not seek alleviation of the agonies 
of the crucifixion by any drugged potion 
which might render him insensible. He 
would bear the full burden consciously. 
The second occasion on which drink was 
offered to him was after he had been some 
hours on his cross, and when the end was 
drawing near; and it was then given in 
answer to his exclamation, " I thirst." This 
drink does not appenr to have been mingled 
with any stupefying drug • and we do net 



BH. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



SOT 



read that he refused it. St. Mark does not 
record this second occasion. 

Ver. 24. — And they eruoily him (koI a-Tav- 
povcriv avriv). Such is the most approved 
reading. The evangelist states the fact 
without staying to dwell on the painful cir- 
cumstances connected with the act of nailing 
him to the cross ; and passes on to the men- 
tion of other things. They part his garments 
among them, casting lots upon them, what 
each should take. The outer robe and the 
tunic would have heen removed previously 
to the crucifixion. St. John (xix. 23) here 
goes into details. "They took 1 1 is garmi nts, 
and made four parts, to every soldier a part ; 
and also the coat : now the coat was with- 
out seam, woven ffom the top through- 
out." His garments (ri iiiaTia). This 
would be the loose, flowing outer dress with 
girdle. The tunic (xiTiilc) was a close- 
fitting dress, worn underneath the i/viTiov. 
There were foui soldiers employed for 
each crucifixion. St. Cyril refers to the 
clothes of criminals as the perquisite of 
the executioners. Here was another ingre- 
dient of bitterness in our Lord's cup, that he 
BBw before his eyes his garments torn by the 
soldiery, and his tunic divided to them by 
lot But he divested himself of these gar- 
meats of mortality, that he might clothe us 
with life and immortality. 

Ver. 25. — And it vras the third honr, and 
they oruoifled him. The third hour would 
literally be nine o'clock. But we gather 
from ver. 33 that our Lord was on his 
OToss, and still alive, at the sixth hour, that 
is, at twelve o'clock. The simplest mode of 
solving the chronological difficulty seems to 
bo this : The Jews dividu d their day into 
four parts, which they called hours, namely, 
the first, from six to nine; the third, from 
nine to twelve ; the sixth, from twelve to 
three; and the ninth, from three to six. It 
was. then, within the third hour, that is, 
between nine and twelve, that they crucified 
htm ; and it was from the sixth to the ninth 
hour that he was actually upon his cross. 
St. John employs the Asiatic mode of com- 
puting time. 

Ver. 26. — And the superscription of hia 
accusation was written over, THE KING OB' 
THE JEWS. This would probably be the 
shortest form of inscription, and in Latin, 
" Rex Judseorum." All the evangelists men- 
tion the inscription ; but no two of them in 
precisely the same words. It appears by • 
comparison of them that the whole title was, 
" "This is Jesus of Nazareth, the King of the 
Jews." In the case of remarkable prisoner* 
the accusation was written on a white tablet, 
and carried before them as they went to the 
place of execution. It was then placed over 
their heads when the cross was erected. St. 
John tell* na that our Lord's title was 



written In three languages — Hebrew, Latin, 
and Greek. Such appears to be the proper 
order of the words, namely, the national, the 
ofiSoial, and the common dialect. St. Mark, 
writing at Rome, would naturally mention 
the Latin title. It is quite possible that the 
superscription may have varied in the dif- 
ferent renderings in which it was given. It 
is evident from St. John (xix. 19—22) that 
the title was much canvassed by the Jews 
and the chief priests. Bede says that this 
title was fitly placed over his head, because, 
although he was crucified in weakness for 
us, yet he shone witli the majesty of a King 
above his cross. The title proclaimed that 
he was after all » King ; and that from 
henceforth he began to reign from his 
cross over the Jews. And therefore Pilate 
was divinely restrained from making any 
alteration in tlie title, so that it should mean 
anything less than this. 

Ver. 27. — And with him they omoify two 
robbers (AijffTai) — not " thieves " ((cAeWai) ; 
St. Luke (xxiii. 32) shows that these two 
robbers formed a part of the procession to 
Calvary; but they were crucified after our 
Lord — one on his right hand, and one on his 
left. We know from St. Luke (xxiii. 40) 
■ that one of these malefactors was saved ; 
while it would appear that the other died in 
hia sins. And thus Christ upon his cross, 
between these two men, and with the title 
of King over his head, presented a stiiking 
and awful picture of the final judgment. 
Such is the view of St. Ambrose on St. Luke 
xxiii., and of St. Augustine, who says, " This 
cross, if you mark it well, was a judgment- 
seat. For the Judge being placed in the 
midst, the one who believed was set free; 
the other who reviled him was condemned ; 
and thus he signified what he will do with 
the quick and the dead. Some he will place 
on his right hand, and some on his left" 
(Augustine, Tract. 31 in S. Johan.). 

Ver. 28. — This verse is omitted in the 
oldest manuscripts. It is supposed to have 
been taken from St. Luke (xxii. 37). 

Vers. 29, 30. — And they that passed by 
Tailed on Iiim, wagging their heads. Here 
was another fulfilment of prophecy, and an- 
other aggravation of the misery of Christ. 
" All they that see me laugh me to scorn : 
they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, 
saying. He trusted on the Lord that he would 
deliver him ; let him deliver him, seeing he 
delighteth in him " (Ps. xxii. 7, 8). The tor- 
ment of orucifixiou itself was terrible ; but it 
was a stiU greater torment to the Crucified to 
be insulted in his agony. Our Lord may well 
have had these words in his mind, " They 
persecute him whom thou hast smitten, 
and they tell of the sorrow of those whom 
thou hast wounded " (Ps. Ixix. 26), They thai 
passed by. Calvary was probably near ta 



106 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIN& TO ST. MARK. [ch. xv. 1— 4T. 



one of the thoroughfares leading to the city ; 
BO that there would be a continual stream of 
persons passing to and fro ; more especially 
at this time, when Jerusalem was thronged 
with visitors. And no doubt the words of 
the accusation against him in its incorrect 
form woul i pass freely from mouth to mouth, 
Ha ! thou that destroyest the temple, and 
buildest it in three days, save thyself. If 
you could make such a boast as this, show 
your power by coming down from the cross. 

Ver. 31. — The chief priests and the scribes 
are more bitter than the people. In fact, 
they had all along endeavoured to rouse the 
bad passions of the people against our Lord. 
And now they take advantage of this his 
present degraded condition to renew the old 
charge that his miracles of healing had been 
wrought by Beelzebub, because, if they had 
been wrought by God, God would have 
interposed in this his sore extremity and 
have set him free. He saved others. They 
cannot deny this fact. But tney now try to 
turn this fact against him, by alleging that 
he who pretended to work miracles upon 
others, wrought them, not by the finger of 
God, but by Beelzebub, seeing that, if tliey 
had been wrought by a Divine power, the 
same power would now be exercised for his 
deliverance. They desired to take advantage 
of this public opportunity of exposing him 
»s an impostor, and so they hoped to get rid 
of him, and at the same time to blot the 
very name of Christianity from out of the 
•arth. 

Ver. 32. — Christ might have come down 
from the cross ; but he would not, because 
it was his Father's will that he should die 
upon the cross to redeem us from death. 
So he despised 'the taunts of the wicked, 
that he might teach us by his example to do 
the same. If he had chosen to descend from 
the croiss, he would not have ascended. He 
knew that the death upon the cross was 
necessaiy for the salvation of men ; and 
therefore he would go through the whole. 
He withheld the exercise of his power. His 
omnipotence restrained the natural longings 
of his suffering humanity to escape from 
these unutterable torments. So lie would 
not come down from the cross, although 
within three days he would rise from tlie 
grave. And yet there was no word of indig- 
nation against his tormentors. On the con- 
trary, he proclaimed mercy ; for as he hung 
on his cross he said, " Father, forgive them; 
for they know not what thoy do." 

Ver. 33. — And when the sixth honi wai 
oome. This would be midday, twelve 
o'clock:; and the darkness continued until 
the ninth hour, that is, three o'clock. This 
■upernatural darkness came when the day 
Is wout to be at its brightest. The moon 
WM Mw at the fnll so that it oonld not have 



been caused by what we call an eclipse, fol 
when it is full moon the moon cannot in- 
tervene between the earth and the sun. 
This darkness was doubtless produced by 
the immediate interference of God. An 
account of it is given by Plilegon of Tralles, 
a freedman of the Emperor Adrian. Euse- 
bius, in his records of the year a.d. 83, 
quotes at length from Phlegon, who says 
that, in the fourth year of the 202ud Olym- 
piad, there was a great and remarkable 
eclipse of the sun, above any that had 
happened before. At the sixth hour the 
day was turned into the darkness of night, 
so that stars were seen in the heaven ; and 
there was a great earthquake in Bithynia, 
which overthrew many houses in the city of 
Nicsea. Phlegon attributes the darkness 
which he describes to an eclipse, which was 
natural enough for him to do. The know- 
ledge of astronomy was then very imperfect. 
Phlegon also mentions an earthquake. This 
brings his account into very close cone- 
•pondenoe with the sacred narrative. There 
was darkness over the whole land {i<p' o\t]v 
riiv 77)1'). "Land" is a better rendering 
than "earth." We are not informed pre- 
cisely how far the darkness extended. 
Dionysius says that he saw this phenome- 
non at Heliopolis, in Egypt, and he is 
reported to have exclaimed, "Either the 
God of nature, the Creator, is siffering, or 
the universe is dissolving." St. Cyprian says, 
" The sun was constrained to withdraw his 
rays, and close his eyes, that he might not 
be compelled to look upon this crime of the 
Jews." To the same purpose St. Obrysostom, 
"The creature could not bear the wrong done 
to its Creator. Therefore the sun withdrew 
his rays, that ho might not behold the deeds 
of the wicked." 

Ver. 31. — Eloi, Eloi, lama sabaothani 1 St. 
Mark here uses the Aramaic form EXiut 
St. Matthew refers to the original Hebrew. 
St. Mark in all probability took his form 
from St. Peter. It seems from hence that our 
Lord was in the habit of using the Temaoular 
speech. Why hast thon forsaken me 1 (eis t1 
lie iyKareMires ;). This might be rendered, 
Why didst thou forsake me ? It is generally 
supposed that our blessed Lord, continually 
praying upon his cross, and offering himself a 
sacrifice for the sins of the whole woild, re 
cited the whole of the psalm (xxii.) of which 
these are the first words, that he might show 
himself to be the very Being to whom the 
words refer ; so that the Jewish scribes and 
people might examine and see the cause 
why he would not descend from the cross ; 
namely, because this very psalm showed 
that it was appointed that he should suffef 
these things. 

Ver. 35. — Notwithstanding the inpei^ 
natural darkness, there were those vh« 



m. IV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL AOOORDING TO ST. MARK. 



aoi 



lingered abont the cross. Indeed, the dark- 
ness would add greatly to the awfulness of 
the place. It was out of that darkness that 
the voice of Jesus was heard ; and inasmuch 
as Elias, or Elijah, was believed to hold 
some relation to the Messiah, it was natural 
for some of those who stood by to under- 
stand the words to mean that oui Lord was 
actually calling for Elias. 

Ver. 36. — There is a slight difference here 
in the narratives. St. Matthew (xxvii. 49) 
says, " And the rest said, Let be ; let us see 
whether Elijah cometh to save him." Here 
in St. Mark the words are recorded as having 
been spoken by him alone who offered our 
Lord the vinefiar. According to St. John 
(six. 28), the offering of the vinegar followed 
immediately upon the words of our Lord, 
"I thirst." This drink was not the stupe- 
fying potion given to criminals before their 
crucifixion, to lull the sense of pain, but the 
■our wine, the ordinary drink of the soldiers, 
called poaea. The reed was most probably 
the long stalk of the hyssop plant. Dr. J. 
Forbes Koyle, in an elaborate article on the 
subject, quoted in Smith's ' Dictionary of the 
Bible ' (vol. i. p. 846), arrives at the conclu- 
sion that the hyssop is none other than the 
eaper plant, the Arabic name of which, asuf, 
bears a strong resemblance to the Hebrew. 
The plant is the Capparis ejiinosaof Linnaeus. 
Th«) apparent difference between the nar- 
ratives of St. Matthew and St. Mark may be 
reconciled by weaving in the narrative of 
St. John with those of the synoptists — the 
"Let be" of the soldiers in the one case 
being intended to restrain the individual 
from offering the wine ; and the " Let be " of 
the individual, corresponding to our " Wait 
a moment," while he answered our Saviour's 
cry, " I thirst." 

Ver. 37. — And Jesns uttered a loud voioe, 
and gave up the ghost. The three synop- 
tists all mention this cry, which appears to 
have been something different from the 
words which he uttered at or about the time 
of his death. It was evidently something 
supernatural, and was so regarded by the 
centurion who stood by ; and who had 
no doubt been accustomed to scenes like 
these. Usually the voice fails the dying, 
more especially when the natural forces have 
been weakened by long agony, as in the 
ease of our Lord. It seems, therefore, the 
right conclusion that he cried out, just 
before he expired, by that supernatural 
power which his Godhead supplied to him ; 
>nd thas he showed that, although he had 
gone through all the pains which were 
sufficient in ordinary cases to produce death, 
yet that at length he did not die of neces- 
sity, but voluntarily, in accordance with 
what he had himself said, " No one taketh 
Biy life from me. ... I have power to lay 



it down, and I ha re power to take it again " 
(John X. 18). Victor Antiochanus, in com- 
menting upon this chapter, says, " By this 
action the Lord Jesus proved that he had 
his whole life, and his death, in his own 
free power." 

Ver. 38. — ^And the veil of the temple was 
rent in twain from the top to the bottom. 
There were two veils— one before the holy 
place, and the other before the holy of holies. 
The holy place would correspond to what 
we call the nave of the church, in which the 
priests were continually present ; the holy of 
holies would correspond to our chancel choir 
— ^the holiest part of the building. This was 
always kept closed ; nor might any one enter 
it but the high priest, and that only once in 
the year, on the day of expiation. The veil 
which was rent at our Lord's death was that 
which was placed before the holy of holies ; 
it was called the )coT07rero<r/«t. The outer veil 
was called Kd\vfifia. It was the duty of the 
ofSciating priest, on the evening of the day 
of preparation, at the hour of evening prayer, 
which would correspond to the time of our 
Lord's death, to enter into the holy place, 
where he would of course be between the 
two curtains, or veils, the outer veil, or 
KaKvti.)xa, and the inner veil, or Karmciraaita. 
It would then be his business to roll back 
the KoAu^iua, or outer veil, thus exposing 
the holy place to the people, who would be 
in the outer court. And then and there 
they would see, to their amazement, the 
KoTaiTEToffiOio, the inner veil, rent asunder 
from the top to the bottom. These veUs or 
curtains, according to Josephus, were each 
forty cubits in height and ten in breadth, 
of great substance, very massive, and richly 
embroidered with gold and purple. Now, this 
rending of the veil signified (1) that the 
whole of the Jewish dispensation, with its 
rites and ceremonies, was now unfolded by 
Christ ; and that thenceforth the middle wall 
of partition was broken down, so that now, not 
the Jews only, but tlie Gentiles also might 
draw nigh by the blood of Christ. But (2) 
it further signified that the way to heaven 
was laid open by our Lord's death. " When 
thou hadst overcome the sharpness of death, 
thou didst open the kingdom of heaven to 
all believers." The veil signified that 
heaven was closed to all, until Christ by his 
death rent this veil in twain, and laid open 
the way. 

Ver. 39. — And when the oentnrion, which 
stood by over against him (i TtafKHTiiKiis ^( 
^vavjlas avrov) saw that he so gave up ths 
ghost. The words, " so cried out," are not in 
the most important authorities. It was ths 
business of the centurion to watch all that 
took place, and to see that the sentence was 
executed. He must have been standing 
close under the cross ; and th»e weig tVn^ ia 



SIO 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xt. 1—47. 



the whole demeanour of the dying Sufferer, 
BO different from anything that he had ever 
witnessed before, that it drew from him the 
Involuntary exclamation, Truly this man was 
the Son of God. He had observed him 
through those weary hours ; he had noticed 
the meekness and the dignity of the SuHerer; 
he had heard those words, so deeply im- 
pressed upon the faith and reverunce of 
Christians, which fell from him from time 
to time as he hung there ; and then at last 
he heard the piercing cry, so startling, so 
unexpected, which escaped him just before 
he yielded up his spirit; and he could come 
to no other conclusion than this, that he 
was in very deed God's Son. It has been 
supposed by some tijat this centurion was 
LonginuB, who was led by the miracles 
which accompanied the death of Christ, to 
acknowledge him to be the Son of God, and 
to be a herald of his resurrection, and was 
ultimately himself put to death for the sake 
of Christ in Cappadocia. St. Chrysostom 
repeats the common report, that on account 
of bis faith he was at last crowned with 
mutyidom. 

Vei. 40. — And there were also women be- 
holding from afar (airh fiaKp6B^v S^tapovuai). 
St. Matthew (xxvii. 55) says that there were 
many. Amongst them were Mary Magdalene, 
and Mary the wife of Clopas, or Alphseus, 
and mother of James the less and of Joses, 
called brethren of our Lord, and the mother 
of Zebedee's children, that is, Salome. The 
mother of our Lord had been there until the 
time when, having with iSt. John crept as 
near the cross of Jesus as she miglit venture, 
she was consigned by our Lord to St. Jolin'a 
care, and taken away by hira. St. Mark 
mentions this to show the faith and love of 
these holy women, because in the very pre- 
sence of the enemies of Christ they dared 
to stand by his cross, and shrank not from 
testifying their piety and devotion. St. John 
says that they stood near. He must have 
known ; for at one time at least he was stand- 
ing near. St. Matthew and St. Mark speak 
of them aa at a distance. They were at a 
distance, no doubt, for the most part, as 
compared with the soldiers, whose duty it 
was to be in close iittendance and to keep 
the people off. But these devoted women 
came as near as they could, so as to see 
and hear their Lord. Perliaps they were 
sometimes further oil' and sometimes nearer, 
as they saw opportunity, or as the humour 
uf the officials suffered tliem. 

Ver. 41. — From this verse we learn that 
these women followed him, and ministered 
unto him when he was in Galilee ; and that 
many other women came up with him unto 
Jerusalem. The sublime beauty of his 
character, and the spiritual influence which 
he wielde4, attrvoted them ; and they were 



able to minister to the varions needs of hii 
humanity. 

Ver. 42. — And when even was now oome. 
The sabbath commenced on the Friday 
evening at six o'clock. The evening com- 
menced at three o'clock. Out Lord must 
be buried before six o'clock. 

Ver. 43. — Joseph of Arimathsea. St. 
Jerome says that this city was called 
Kamathaim-Zophim (the lofty place), where 
dwelt Elkanah and Hannah of old, and 
where Samuel was born. Joseph was most 
probably a native of Ariinathsaa; but he 
was now a citizen and counsellor of Jeru- 
salem. He was an honourable counsellor 
(fiax'hpw"' $ov\€UTiis), a coundUor of honour- 
able estate (Revised Version). St. Matthew 
says he was a rich man. It is evident that 
he regarded himself as a settled inhabitant 
of Jerusalem, since he had thus provided 
himself vrith a place of sepulture. He was 
waiting for (Trpoo-SexV^""*) — literally, hoh- 
ingfor — the kingdom of God. St. Matthew 
(xxvii. 57) says that he was a disciple of 
Jesus. These circumstances explain his 
desire to bury our Lord. He boldly went in 
(ToAfi^o-ai eiVijXSe) — literally, he took courage 
and went in — ^nnto Filate, and asked for the 
body of Jesus. A poor man would not have 
dared to approach Pilate for such a purpose 
as this. St. Chrysostom says, " The courage 
of Joseph is greatly to be admired, in that, 
for the love of Christ, he exposed himself 
to the danger of death." The fact that he 
was " looking for the kingdom of God " 
explains his conduct. It shows that he 
believed in Chiist, and through his grace 
hoped for everlasting salvation ; and in this 
hope he thought little of showing his rever- 
ence for Christ, and so " boldly went in unto 
Pilate, and asked for the body of Jesus." 

Ver. 44. — And Pilate marvelled if he were 
already dead: and calling unto him the 
centurion, he asked him whether he had 
been any while dead. It must have been 
somewhat early in the afternoon,, probably 
not long after three o'clock, when Joseph 
went. The day being the Preparation, the 
Jews were anxious to satisfy the letter of 
the Law (Deut. xxi. 13), and that, more 
especially, because the coming sabbath was 
a " high day." So they had gone early to 
Pilate to obtain permission to accelerate 
the deaths of the sufferers by the terrible 
additional punishment called <rKeAoKoir(o. 
This violence was not inflicted upon cur 
Lord, because he was already dead; acd so 
another Scripture was fulfilled, "A bone 
of him shall not be broken." But it was 
necessary that Pilate should be assured <it 
the fact that death had taken place before 
he gave up the body ; and thus, in the pro- 
vidence of God, another evidence was given 
of the reality of Christ's death. Jotepfa 



CH. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



311 



asked for the body (o-S/tn). Then Pilate 
asked the centurion " whether he had been 
Bny while dead." The verb here is iq the 
aorist, and the adverb means "formerly" 
(ei W\at ajr48av€) ; literally, if he died some 
time ago. 

Ver. 45. — And when he learned it of the 
centurion, he granted (ISup^iraTo) the corpse 
(t5 irrafia) to Joseph. 

Ver. 46. — And he bought a linen cloth 
(ffu'Si^ra). This was a fine linen garment, or 
shrond, something like that in which the 
yonng man fled the night before (ch. xiv. 
51, 52). And taking him down (Kae€\i)i' 
aurhv). It appears from these words that 
Joseph himself, assisted probably by 
Nicodemus and others, actually took the 
body of our Lord down from the cross, 
wrapped the sindon round him, and laid 
him in his own new tomb, which had been 
hewn out of the rock. The word rendered 
" tomb " is uvQUftov, as being intended to be 



a memorial of the departed. And he rolled 
a stone against the door of the tomb. The 
door here means "the opening," or "en- 
trance." Thus, while our Lord died with 
the wicked, he was with the rich in hia 
death (Isa. liii 9). 

Ver. 47. — ^And Slary Kagdalene and Uary 
the mother of Joses beheld where he was laid 
{eeidpovvTrovTiBsTai); literally, were behold- 
ing where he was laid. These women were 
two of the group mentioned at ver. 40. They 
remained, iifter the body of our Lord had been 
deposited, in sad and silent contemplation. 
The women appear to have broken up into 
two groups. One group went alone to 
purchase spices and ointments, which it was 
necessary for them to do before six o'clock, 
when the sabbath commenced ; in readi- 
ness for the embalming. Mary Magdalene 
and Mary the mother of Joses and Salome 
appear to have bought them after aiz 
o'clock on the Saturday night. 



HOMILETICS. 

Vers. 1—15. — The trial he/ore Pilate. How true it is that " God spared not his own 
Son, but delivered him up for us all " 1 Jesus was first examined by Annas, then tried 
before Gaiaphas, the high priest, then formally condemned by the Sanhedrim. But 
these mock-trials, with all their injustice md their indignities, were not enough to exhaust 
the appointed humiliation and suffering. Christ must needs be brought before the 
Roman governor, who had come up from Csesarea to Jerusalem to attend the Feast of 
the Passover. In order that he might endure the curse attaching to every one that 
haugeth on a tree, in order that he might fulfil his own prediction that he should die 
by crucifixion, he must needs be sentenced, not merely by a Hebrew, but also by a 
Roman tribunal. The passage before us exhibits the several agencies by which the 
condemnation of Christ was brought about. 

I. The malice and envy op the peibstb. Pilate " perceived that for envy the chief 
priests had delivered him up." They both hated the spiritual teaching of the Prophet 
of Nazareth, go much at variance with their own ; and they were jealous of the influence 
which he had acquired over the people, not only in Galilee, but in Judaea. The hatred 
and envy of the priests, Pharisees, Sadducees, and scribes, had been abundantly shown by 
their treatment of Jesus for some time past, but was made more apparent by the events 
of the past night. Their apprehension of him in the garden, their treatment of him 
before the high priest, had been flasitiously malicious and unjust. And now their 
charge against him at the bar of Pilate— a charge virtually of political treason against 
the authority of the Roman empire— was a jiroof of the length to which their hatred 
and hypocrisy could proceed. They brought this charge, simply because they thought 
that this would tell most against him in tlie estimation of the procurator, 

IL The fickleness and the unprincipled choice of the multitude. But a few 
days a^o the crowds in the streets of Jerusalem had welcomed the Prophet of Nazareth 
with the cry, " Hosanna to the Son of David ; blessed is he that cometh m the 
name of the Lord." Of those who thus hailed the triumphal entry of the Nazarene, 
probably the greater part were Galileans. And the apprehension of Jesus had been 
effected at ni^ht ; the trial of Jesus had been hurried on before the day, probably with 
this intent, that the pilgrims from the north of Palestine, who were so largely adherents 
of Jesus, might be prevented from taking any steps to rescue the Prisoner, or at all 
events from making a demonstration on his behalf. Yet the populace inhabiting and 
soiourning in the city cannot be acquitted of proverbial fickleness. The immons of the 
priesthood, no doubt, led the way, and raised the first shouts of popular outcry against 
Jesus. The multitude were instigated by the sacerdotal party and their adherent* U 



«ia THE GOSPEL ACCOnDINQ TO ST. MAPlK. [ch. iv. 1—47. 

this position of hostility, this ferocious howl for the blood of the Innocent. The infamom 
choice of the populace, who preferred Barabbas to Jesus, is one of the most distressing 
incidents of the awful martydom. A rioter and murderer was apparently represented as 
a cliampion of national independence, whilst " the Holy One and the Just" was charged 
with being the enemy of the temple and its services and solemnities. In this way the 
])eople were wrought upon to demand the death of the precious and the liberation of 
the vile. 

III. The weakness, selfishness, and fear of the Piomas qovbrnob. Aftor all, 
the responsibility of capital pimishment lay with Pilate. Had he stood firm for justice 
and right against lawlessness and violence, Jesus would have been saved. But so it was 
not to be. The governor's own conviction of the innocence and excellence of the 
accused are evident, both from his language, " Why, what evil hath he done ? " "I 
find no fault in him," and also from his repeated though unsuccessful, because irresolute, 
efforts to save his life. It is clear that Pilate admired and respected the Prisoner, 
whilst he despised the accusers and the mob. Yet he yielded to the savage outcry, 
from a desire to content the Jews, with whom it was bis interest to stand well, and 
from fear lest, if he acquitted the Prisoner, his conduct might be misrepresented to the 
emperor to his disadvantage, and so might prove the occasion of his ruin. Desire of 
popularity, fear of the tyrant's frown, — these were the two motives which, in the mind 
of the cynical and selfish procurator, outweighed all considerations of righteousness and 
humanity. So it came to pass that Jesus " suffered under Pontius Pilate." 

IV. The confession and the dembanohb of Christ himself. The demeanour of 
Jesus was dignified and honourable, but far from fitted to procure his release. Silence, 
when false witnesses testified against him, only infuriated his foes. Before the Jewish 
tribunal he acknowledged that he was the Messiah and the Son of God. Before Pilate 
he confessed himself a King — a confession which, however explained as a claim to 
spiritual dominion, was an embarrassment to his well-wisher and judge. And his 
reminder that there was a higher, because a Divine, authority, to which all earthly 
authority is subordinate, was itself irritating to a proud and absolute ruler. There was 
a marvellous mingling of boldness and meekness in the conduct of the innocent and 
holy Prisoner. Morally, this demeanour exculpated him ; but legally it was to his dis- 
advantage. And his confession of royalty became his sentence of condemnation ; 
written upon his cross for the apjiarent vindication, but fur the real and eternal 
censure, of those who accused and of him who sentenced him. Thus did Jesus " witness 
a good confession before Pontius Pilate." 

Application. 1. Observe the force and virulence of sin taking possession of human 
nature, and corrupting and degrading it. The malice, bigotry, and falsehood of the 
priests, the fickleness and unreasoning fury of the mob, the selfishness and cowardice 
of the governor, — all illustrate the length to which sin can go. The innocence and 
benevolence of the Victim render more conspicuous the enormity of his foes. 2. Observe 
the faultless and beautiful spirit displayed by the Sufierer, the absence of all resentment 
or complaint, the meek submission to all that he needs must sufi"er. A Being so morally 
perfect demands our admiration and our worship, invites our confidence and our love. 
3. Consider the price of our redemption. Jesus bore all this injustice, these insults, 
for man. He was condemned that we might be acquitted; he was slain that we 
might live. 

Vers. 16 — 20. — Christ mocked. During this awful night and morning our Lord 
thrice underwent the suffering and indignity of public and vulgar derision. First 
before the high priest, at the hands of the officers and servants of Caiaphas ; then 
again when he was set at nought and mocked by the brutal soldiery of Herod An tipas • 
and now yet once more, when Pilate delivered him into the keeping of the Eoman 
soldiers, a company of whom were about to lead him forth to crucifixion. Insult wa« 
idded to insult, and his bitter cup ran over. 

I. The mockers. The whole band or cohort are said to have joined in the ribald 
■port in the Prajtorium. What they did, it must be remembered, they did largely in 
ignorance. Those l!oman legionaries knew nothing of a Messiah, and were probably 
utterly unacquainted with the character and career of him whom Pilate had delivered 
over to them. Their insensibility to human sufl'ering was equal to their indifference t« 



cH. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARS. 811 

human innocence and virtue. All they knew was that their master, though professedly 
convinced of Jesus' blamelessness, was yet content to give him up into their hands to 
ill treat and to put to a shameful death. We cannot, therefoie, wonder at their insolence 
and cruelty. I'et we cannot read the sad story without feelings of shame and of sorrow, 
as we remember that persons belonging to our race, and sharing our nature, should have 
in6icted such iiidignities upon "the Holy One and the Just," upon the world's Friend 
and Saviour. 

IL The mockerie3. These were many, base, and repeated. 1. Jesus was invested 
with a purple robe. Probably this was a military cloak, whose crimson hue might 
render it an emblem of the imperial purple. 2. He was crowned with a circlet of thorns, 
another symbol of royalty, doubtless roughly woven from the stem of a prickly shrub. 
3. He was addressed as " King." Utterly incapable of understanding a moral sovereignty, 
a spiritual sway, tliese coarse soldiers, to whom force was all, insulted the meek and 
unresisting Sufferer by the use of a title which from their lips could he only derisive. 4. 
He was saluted with the semblance of honour and homage ; tliey " bowed the knee, and 
worshipped him." 5. They smote his sacred head with the sceptre-reed. How affecting 
this treatment 1 The very fact which should have been Christ's claim to respect, con- 
fidence, and adoration — his royal authority over the conscience and heart of humanity — 
was turned into a ground of reproach and a matter of reviling. Thus men treated their 
Divine and rightful King. 

UI. The' STERN bealitt to which the mockebt was a pkbltjdb and a contbast. 
Knowing what was before the Condemned, decency and humanity should have led them 
to spare him these insults. But when they were over, there was worse to come. The 
purple was stripped from his form ; his own garments were placed on him ; the beam 
of the cross was laid upon his shoulders ; he was thrust into his place in the rude pro- 
cession ; and then was led away to crucifixion. 

Application. 1. Admire the meekness of him " who, when reviled, reviled not again ; 
when he suffered, threatened not." Never was sorrow like his sorrow, and never patience 
like his patience. 2. Recognize the true royalty which a spiritual judgment may 
discern underlying the mockery and derision here recorded. See in Jesus a King, though 
crowned with thorns. 3. Learn to confide in a Saviour whose purpose to save was so 
resolute and so benevolent, as is apparent here. A salvation procured at such a cost is 
a salvation of which none should hear unmoved, and which none who needs it should 
hesitate or delay to accept. 

Vers. 21 — 32. — The crucifixion. The bigots and the mob have gained their end, and 
now have their own way with " the Holy One and the Just." The power of Rome is brought 
into the service of Jewish fanaticism and malice. All evil influences have conspired 
together. Now is their hour and the power of darkness. The world's sin has culminated 
in the rejection of the world's Saviour. All happens as has been foreseen in the counsels 
of God, and foretold by inspired prophets and by the Son of man himself. The Christ 
of God is crucified. 

L The peepakations fob the cbucipixion. The story is very simply told ; there 
is no endeavour to excite feeling by any other means than by the clear and artless 
relation of the facts. But this is enough to awaken the sympathy of every mind capable 
of realizing the injustice of Christ's enemies, and the meekness, compassion, and forti- 
tude of the Suflerer. 1. Hie hearing of the cross. That Jesus, exhausted by the events 
of the past night and of this morning, by the wakeful hours, the scourging and the 
insults he had endured, should now be incapable of carrying the instrument of his final 
sufferings, is natural enough. The soldiers, indisposed themselves to bear the burden, 
beneath which they see the Sufferer sinking, impress into the service a Cyrenian 
Israelite, who has come to the Passover now celebrating at Jerusalem, and who has 
been sleeping in one of the villages near the city, but is on his way to the scene of the 
sacred solemnities. What seems to the soldiers and to the mob a degradation, is to 
become an honourable and happy memory to Simon, whose family is destined in after 
years to hold a high place in the regard of the Christian community, and whose name 
is henceforth to be linked with that of the Redeemer by this sacred and touching asso- 
ciation. 2. The approach to Golgotha. Imagination has filled the void wisely left by 
the evangelists ; and the via dolorosa has been marked by " stations," each of which h»» 



3U THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [oh. vr. a— 47 

been signalized by some episode of suffering, mercy, or sympatiiy. The spot whore th« 
execution of the iniquitous sentence took place may have been to the north-west of tho 
city, and the name — " the place of a skull "—may have been derived from its form, 
rounded and bare. It needs no fanciful legends to endear a spot so memorable to the 
heart of Christendom ; the pathos of the plain fact is enough. Calvary — " lovely, 
mournful Calvary " — was the scene of Immanuel's passion. 3. 77ie offering of myrrh- 
mingled wine. The compassion of the ladies of Jerusalem is said to have provided a 
soporific, stupefying, narcotic draught, to be administered in humanity to the criminals 
who were condemned to die a painful and lingering death. It seems to have been in 
conformity'' with custom and from motives of sympathy that the draught was offered 
to JesuB. 

" Fill high the bowl, and spice it well, and pon» 
The dews oblivious : for the cross is sharp ; 
The cross is sliarp, and he 
la tenderer than a lamb." 

His refusal wm owing to his determination to accept to the full the lot of nnde- 
served pain and anguish appointed for him. " Thou wilt feel all, that thou may'st 
pity all." He had already exclaimed, " The cup which my Father hath given me, 
shall I not drink it?" and it would seem that this cup of woe could not be drunk 
except by the retention of his faculties to the very last. 4. Imparting of his garmenti. 
These were the perquisite of the executioners, who divided amongst themselves some 
of his raiment, and who cast lots for the seamless robe. This was not only the fulfil- 
ment of a prediction, but it was an element in the humiliation and self-sacrifice of the 
Son of man. 

II. The ORUOiraioN and its aocompantino oiboumstanoes. " They crucified 
him ; " such is the brief notification of the most stupendous crime committed in the 
history of mankind. Every circumstance recorded in such a connection is worthy of 
attention. 1. There is a note of time. It was the third hour, i.e. nine o'clock in the 
forenoon. From this we infer how hurried had been the proceedings since the break of 
day, and how prolonged were those sufferings, which did not close until three in the 
afternoon. 2. There is o memorandum of the superscription. 'I'his was the accusation, 
upon which, unproved and misrepresented, Pilate had been induced to sanction this 
legal murder. A King crucified, and crucified by his subjects ; no wonder that such a 
crime should be disowned, or rather such a stigma resented, by the priests and elders. 
When Pilate persisted that the inscription should remain, he bore witness uncon- 
sciously alike to the spiritual royalty of Jesus and to the flagitious rebellion of the 
leaders of the Jewish nation. The cross was in truth Christ's earthly throne, the 
symbol of a world-wide empire. He had said, " I, if I be lifted up from the ^rth, 
will draw all men unto me." 3. There is an account of his companions upon the 
crosi. If anything could possibly add to the ignominy of our Saviour's death, it was 
the society in which he suffered. Barabbas had, indeed, been released; but there 
were two robbers condemned to death, and awaiting the execution of their sentence. 
Accordingly, advantage was taken of the opportunity to carry out the sentence against 
the Christ and the criminals upon the same occasion. Thus was he " numbered with 
the transgressors," and an additional stigma attached to him by liis association with the 
vilest of the vile. No wonder that the ignorant and unspiritual made this a ground 
of reviling against Jesus, and of reproach against his followers. 

IIL The mockbbt that followed the ORtrciFixioN. To add to the insults, the 
jeering, the soofBng, which Jesus had endured during his trials, it was permitted that 
his dying hours should be disturbed, and his dying agonies intensified, by the mockery 
of various classes of his foes. 1. The passers-hy railed on him. With the customary 
contempt for the fallen and deserted, those passing in and out of the city insulted the 
Crucified, with gestures of derision and tones of contempt, recalling the language in 
which he had asserted his authority, and contrasting it with his pitiable condition, 
terrible sufferings, and apparent helplessness. 2. The chief priests and scribes, who 
had been foremost in effecting his downfall, were promineut in glorying over the 
work of their hands, and in scofiSng at him upon whom they had wreaked their 
vengeance. From their lips came the language which, intended to be a reproach, wai 



cit. X*. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 818 

really, and has ever been deemed, one of the most glorious tributes ever paid to the 
Redeemer: "He saved others; himself he cannot save!" When they asked that he 
should come down from the cross upon which their malice had raised him, and pro- 
fessed their willingness upon such evidence to believe in him, we cannot doubt that 
their words were hollow, vulgar mockery. 3. That no element of misery might be 
wanting in the Saviour's anguish, it was permitted that the very thieves should join in 
the raillery with which Jesus was encompassed and tortured. This, indeed, only gives 
an additional touch of pathos to the story of the penitent thief which St. Luke tells 
so exquisitely, and shows, in the brighter colours of contrast, the powerful gentleness 
and unselfish pity of the dying Saviour. 

Application. 1. Admire the submission and meekness of Christ's demeanour. 2. 
Consider with gratitude the redemptive purpose which animated and sustained tha 
Sufferer. 3. Learn to glory in that cross, which, from an emblem of shame, has by 
Chrigt been transformed into a symbol of salvation. 

Vers. 33 — 41. — The death of Jeau$. Jesus had, in the conrse of his ministry, raised 
the dead to life. Three such instances are recorded in the Gospels ; and it is intimated 
that there were other cases which have not been circumstantially related. And now 
the time came for himself to die, to accomplish at Jerusalem the decease he had fore- 
seen and foretold. That he might have avoided this fate is obvious; and he had 
himself declared that no man took his life from him. The time, however, had arrived 
for him to lay down that life of himself, in submitting to be, "by wicked hands, 
crucified and slain." 

L The evangelist relates circumstances PKBCEniNO Christ's death. 1. The dark- 
ness which broocled over the city, and over the whole land, for the spnce of three hours 
(from 12 until 3 p.m.), was apparently supernatural, and has usually been regarded 
as a manifest token of Nature's sympathy with her Lord. It was an appropriate 
accompaniment to the sikI and awful event that was transpiring. 2. The utterance of 
desertion and of woe. The dying Saviour's cry has ever been regarded as affording a 
glance into the innermost, the sacied, the unfathomable mysteries of his soul. Explain 
it we cannot ; disregard it we dare not. Surely, this cannot be regarded as a mere 
exclamation of distress 1 Surely, it cannot have been wrung from the Redeemer by 
the severity of bodily pain and anguish I It has been well said that the sufferings of 
his soul were the soul of his sufferings. The only explanation of the cry, " My God, 
why hast thou forsaken me?" is that furnishsd by the mental agonies which the 
world's Redeemer was enduring, which clouded his sense of the Father's favour. On 
the one hand, we cannot suppose this language to have been a mere cry of distress ; 
on the other hand, we cannot conceive that the Father had withdrawn his favour from 
his well-beloved Son, who was now proving himself to be obedient unto death, even 
the death of the cross. The fact is that the burden of the world's sins and sorrows 
pressed like a dense cloud upon his soul, and obscured from his view the shining of 
the Father's face. 3. The ministry of pity. Although at the commencement of the 
crucifixion Jesus had refused the stupefying draught which had been offered him, now 
that he had hung six hours upon the cross he was consumed with an intolerable thirst. 
The expression of his distressing sensation seems to have followed upon the cry of 
desertion. A bystander, doubtless in pity, offered him a sponge filled with the sour 
wine which was the soldiers' ordinary drink, and it would seem that he did not now 
refuse the alleviation offered. It is not easy to understand who could have so misap- 
prehended his cry as to suppose the dying Sufferer to invoke, the ministry of Elijah ; 
though it is easy to believe that some would jeeringly propose to wait for the pro- 
phetic intervention. 4. The dying cry. Mark gives no words ; but from the other 
Gospels we learn that, immediately before his expiring, Jesus uttered aloud two ever- 
memorable sayings : viz. " It is finished 1 " and " Father, into thy hands I commend 
my spirit 1 " It is clear, therefore, that the cry was not an inarticulate utterance of 
pain. There was an expression of his conviction that his ministry of humiliation was 
ended, that the purpose of his incarnation was completed, that nothing more remained 
for him to do on earth. And in addition to this utterance, which was ministerial, wrs 
another, which was personal. As he had said " My God," so now he says " Father,' 
<tn addiou which proved his possession of the assurance of his Father's imdi'iiinished 



ftH THE GOSPEL ACCORCING TO ST, MARK. [oh. it. 1— 4'f 



and undimtned approval. The hour of agony and dissolution was thus an hour o) 
triumph: Christ's wurk was completed, his obedience was perfected, his acceptance 
was assured, his victory was achieved. 

TI. The evangelist records the taot of Ohkist's death. How simply is it 
related ! — " He gave up his spirit." In one word is recorded, without exaggeration, 
without a word to heighten tiie effect, without a comment of any kind, the most 
stupendous, pathetic, and momentous event which this world has witnessed. The 
Being who was " the Life" bowed his head in death. He who, whilst his hour was 
not yet come, had eluded his foes, now submitteil to the felon's doom. The Lord of 
immortality, who was to hold the keys of death and of the unseen world, saw and 
tasted dissolution, though not corruption. He knew, though the spectators, friends 
and foes alike, were ignorant of the fact, that his death was destined to be the life of 
the world. He had foretold that, when lilted up from the earth, he should draw all 
men unto himself; that the grain of wheat should fall into the earth and die, and 
should bring forth much fruit. And the events which have followed have verified the 
Saviour's words. Even those who have no disposition to regard Christ's character and 
work as supernatural cannot be blind to the fact that the cross has proved a tree 
whose fruits have been for the satisfaction, and whose leaves have been for the healing, 
of the nation*. But, to us Christians, the death of Christ was the redemption of our 
goulg. 

"Oh, never, never canst thon know 

What then for thee the Saviour bore, 
The pangs of that mysterious woe 

Which wrung his bosom's inmost core. 

Yes, man for man perchance may brav« 
The horrors of the yawning grave ; 
And friend for friend, or son for sire. 
Undaunted and unmoved expire, 
From love, or piety, or pride ; 
But who can die as Jesus died?" 

ni. The evangelist puts upon record certain oihcumstances followtho tjwh 
Chbist's death. 1. One incident occurs which is typical of the influence of our 
Saviour's death upon the elder, the Jewish, dispensation : the rending of the temple 
veil. This curtain screened off the holiest place, which was representative of the 
Divine indwelling, and at the same time of the necessity of a mediatorial scheme by 
which God can admit men to his fellowship and favour. And when this veil was 
rent, it was signified that by the death of Jesus, the true High Priest, the way was 
made open into the presence of a holy God. The distinction between Jews and 
Gentiles was abolished, and a Divine mediation was declared available for all mankind. 

2. The witness of the centurion was an earnest of the world's witness to the crucified 
Eedeemer. It was the manner of Jesus' death — the demeanour and the language of 
the innocent, uncomplaining, forgiving Sufierer, the darkness and the general awe — 
which together produced upon the mind of this Roman officer the impression that this 
was, not merely no criminal, but no ordinary mortal ; that he had been superintending 
the crucifixion of a Son — the Son — of God. It is significant that, in his death, our 
Lord effected the conversion of a sinful fellow-sufferer, and the enlightenment, to say 
the least, of one so little likely to be prepossessed in his favour as this Roman officer. 

3. Mention is made of the gaze of some of those who had been, and still were, tha 
faithful friends of Jesus. The mother ol the Lord had been led away from the painful 
scene by the disciple to whose care she had been entrusted by her dying Son. Bui 
Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and Salome the wife of Zebedee, 
are mentioned as, with others, lingering at some distance from the cross, and yet within 
sight of it, to behold the end. Whilst their services could be of use to him, they had 
attended his steps and supplied his wants ; and now that they could do no more for 
their beloved and revered Master, they remained near his dying form, to watch with 
him, to sympathize with him to the last, to hear his dying words, to keep him in sight 
until the lifeless body should be disposed of, and hidden from them in the earth. Sweet 
Ui the thought that, when his disciples forsook Jesus and fled, when he had to endiin 



ra. XT. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. Si: 

the anguish caused by the treachery of one, the denial of a second, and the desertion ot 
others, there were devout and attached women who would not leave the sacred .spot, 
or take their eyes from off the hallowed form. Even by human devotion and lov« 
Jesus was not utterly forsaken, was not left utterly alone. Some there were whc had 
proved his kindness, tested his wisdom, profited by his authority during his ministry, 
whose hearts changed not towards him in the hour of his darkness, anguish, sind woe. 
Memorable is the ministry of those holy and affectionate women, who are recorded to 
have been " last at the cross, and earliest at the tomb." 

Application. Christ's death is : 1. To sinners the means of salvation. The Lord 
paid on the cross the ransom-] irice of the souls of sinful men; he bore our sins; he 
redeemed us with his precious blood. Here is pardon, healing, and life, for those who 
receive the good tidings with sincere faith. 2. To suppliants the assurance of the 
gracious answer of Heaven to their prayers. "If God spared not his own Son, but 
delivered him up for us all, will he not with him also freely give us all things? " 3. 
To struggling souls the inspiration of resistance and endurance, the earnest and pledge 
of victory. "Our old nature is crucified with him;" "Reckon ye yourselves dead 
unto sin." 4. To Christian teachers and preachers the theme of their ministry. In 
this Paul is an example to us all, who exclaimed, " We preach (Jhrist crucified ; " 
" God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ." 

Vers. 42 — 47. — The burial of Christ. The reality of the death of our Lord Jesus has 
been questioned, at various times and upon various grounds. Some have denied the 
possibility of a resurrection from the dead, and have absurdly supposed that Jesus only 
fainted or swooned, and that his recovery from a swoon was reputed among iiis followers 
to be a resurrection. Against all such unreasonable and incredible assumptions the 
record of the evangelists, who relate his burial, and that in the most minute and circum- 
stantial manner, ought to be regarded as definitely and certainly conclusive. 

I. The applicant. Of Joseph of Arimathsea we know only what is recorded in 
connection with Christ's interment. In circumstances he was rich. His rank was that 
of a member of the Sanhedrim ; his character is described in the words, "a good man 
and a just ; " his religious position may be inferred from the two facts, that he waited 
for the kingdom of God and that he was a disciple of Jesus, though secretly, from fear 
of the Jews, whilst his view of what had taken place with respect to Jesus is expressly 
put upon record in the statement that he had not consented to the counsel and deed of 
the priests and elrlers. His coming forward on this occasion is an instance of the way 
in which circumstances may bring out virtues, such as courage and fidelity to convic- 
tion, which have long been latent. 

II. The application. The boldness with which Joseph asked for the body is 
mentioned as something to his credit, fur such a step would certainly not commend him 
to his fellow-citizens and fellow-councillors. As the Jews approved of the burial of the 
dead in every case, and as it was not considered decent that the bodies of the crucified 
should be exposed upon the coming sabbath of Paschal solemnities, there was the more 
obvious ground for this appeal. And it was seemly and honourable in Joseph to wish 
to rescue his Master's corpse from the indignity of a criminal's interment. The pro- 
curator had no ill will to Jesus, and perhaps took a pleasure in what would offend the 
priests. At all events, he was ameuable to bribery. His surprise was excited by the 
tidings that Jesus had already expired, concerning which he required to be satisfied by 
an official report. Whether or not he received money from Joseph, he readily gave 
permission to him to take possession of the body. In the case of Joseph, who begged 
the body of Jesus, and of Nicodemus, who purcliased the spices and aided in the 
interment, we see a remarkable instance of the power of the cross — of the death and 
love of Jesus — to overcome the fears excited by a regard to the world's opinion, and by a 
wish to stand well with the world. The cross brings out latent love and undeveloped 
courage, and leads to boldness and confession. 

III. The entombment. In preparation for this the body was taken down from the 
cross, was wound in linen bought for the purpose, being eniblded in fragrant myrrh and 
aloes. Joseph was the owner of a garden near to Calvary, where in the solid rock was 
hewn a tomb, destined probably for the reception of his own remains — what we might 
term • Cunily vault. In this suitable and peaceful sepulchre Joseph, aided (as John 



318 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MAEK. [ch. xv. 1—47, 

tola ub) by Nioodemus, laid the sacred form in which the Lord of life and glory had 
laboured and suffered for mankind. Against the entrance of the gnivu a huge stona 
was rolled, to secure the resting-place from intrusion. Thus, as in a j^ardea Christ had 
endured his agony, in a garden lie rested in the repose of death. H"W cherished in tha 
memory and heart of Christendom were and are these sad and sacred scenes, none can 
be ignorant. Christ's " precious death and burial " have been celebrated in Christian 
hymns, commemorated in Christian ordinances, embalmed in Christian liturgies of 
prayer and intercession. The crucifixion, the descent from the cross, the mourning 
of the faithful women (the pieta), the entombment of the Saviour, — all these have 
been favourite and congenial themes with Christian [jainters. Aud of all subjects of 
Christian preaching, none are so pathetic, so melting, so fltteei to awalien contrition for 
sin, so fitted to produce contempt for the world, as the topics sug'^ested by these 
mournful incidents. It is solemnly affecting to think of this earth as being, during 
those sacred hours, the sepulchre of the Son of God. 

IV. The witnesses of Cheist's burial. It is observable that the holy and faithful 
women, who had ministered to Jesus in his public career, who had stood in the neigh- 
bourhood of the cross, and who had seen him die — they who were to be the first witnesses 
of his resurrection, — these were present at the entombment, as loth to part from the 
Lord whom they honoured and loved, as lingering for the last look upon the form of 
him to whose words they had so often listened with joy, and at whose hands they had 
received blessings priceless and immortal. 

Application. 1. The moment when sin seems triumphant is the moment when 
Divine Providence is preparing for its confusion and destruction. To Christ's enemies 
his death appeared simply the end of his holy ministry, and when his lifeless form was 
committed to the grave they deemed his influence for ever at an end. Yet, in truth, 
now was about to commence the reign of him who tasted death for every man, but was 
about to ascend to the throne of spiritual empire. 2. 'I'he burial of our Saviour is to 
us the token of his love and of the completeness of his mediatorial work. That he did 
not shrink from even the ignominy and the weakness of the grave should be to us an 
assurance of his perfect humanity, his complete sympathy, and a pledge that the 
salvation which he did and suffered so much to secure shall be thorough and complete, 
shall be sure and everlasting. 3. The burial of Christ is to be, in a spiritual sense, 
shared by all his believing and renewed people. We are one with Christ, in his death 
and in his resurrection. And, as if to show how thoroughly we participate in our 
Saviour's deatli unto sin, we are represented as even buried with him. By baptism or 
consecration unto his death we are said to enter, as it were, his tomb ; that, dying unto 
sin, we may rise again and live unto righteousness, holiness, aud God. 4. The inter- 
ment of our Lord seems to cast most precious and ci msolatory light upon our own and 
our friends' mortality. That there is naturally a repulsiveness in the grave and in dis- 
solution is not denied. Yet to know that our gracious Lord deigned to taste death for 
every man, and to be laid to rest in a cave of the ea-th, is to be fortified against the 
unpleasing and distressing associations which are all thit unbelievers connect with 
dissolution. When the lifeless form of a good man is borne tr the grave, let us think 
of such an event in close connection with the burial of him who was and is the Lord ol 
life. 5. Secret disciples should take encouragement from the conduct of Joseph and 
Nicodemus. Remember this, that whilst you have less excuse ihan they had for con- 
cealing your faith and disguising your attachment to Jesus, you have more reasons and 
stronger inducements to open confession. The Lord Jesus has not bidden his love tor 
you ; he has expressed it in words, and proved it by sufferings as well as actions. And 
he expects that you should boldly avow yourselves his, that you should confess him 
before men. Then he wiU not be ashamed of you before his Father and the holy 
angelo. 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHOBM. 

VerB. 1 — 6. — Jesus at the bar of the Roman power. In its ofScers and agents repre- 
■eutative of the whole Gentile world; so that the whole human race is involved in his 
condemnation and death. 

I. The pubfosb of the fubtheb bepebenoe. To obtain authority for carrying oal 



cu. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCOKDINQ TO BT. MARK. 319 



the death-sentence. Tills would not be allowed to a simple Jewish tribunal. The «tep 
taken was, therefore, a practical abdication of their theocratic pretensions. Hatred 
drives men into inconsistency ard hypociisy. 

II. The chabge made. Not the same as that upon which they themselves con- 
demned him, but such an interpretation of it as would most readily render him liable 
to the judgment of the Roman government. 

III. His beply to Pilate. An idiomatic equivale^^t for " Yes," " I am so." The 
question is understood as an assertion put interrogatively, " Thou art the King of the 
Jews ? " " The rationale of the idiom is that when the interrogative form is withdrawn 
from the dass of interrogations referred to, the saying that remains is the reality" 
(Morison). A similar purpose to that which animated the reply to the high priest is 
here apparent. The Eoman world was certified as to the dignity of Christ. In Joht's 
Gospel (xviii. 36 — 38) the true interpretation of this title as a moral and spiritual one 
is recorded as having been given by Christ to Pilate. It involved no treason, therefore, 
against the Roman power. 

IV. The general demeanotth or Christ towards nrs accusbbs. Silence. 1. A 
marvel. The calmness of the Prisoner was unlike the behaviour of prisoners generally, 
and appeared supernatural. 2. It was equivalent to an appeal to a higher Mhunal. 
3. An impressive moral victory. — M. 

Vers. 6 — 15. — Christ or Bardbhas. T. A bbvblation of the hatred of the 
NATtTBAL MIND FOR TRUTH AND GOODNESS. Several aucicnt authorities are in favour of 
readings here and elsewhere which would give us, " Jesus Barabbas " (t.e. son of a father 
or rabbi), as the full name of the " robber " who was here the favourite of the populace. 
If this be so, there would be two of the name Jesus, and the choice would thus be 
Btrikingly emphasized. The character of Barabbas as a rioter and murderer is glossed 
over by the semblance of patriotism, as he is said to have been engaged in the insur- 
rection caused by Pilate's appropriation of the corban of the temple for building an 
aqueduct. In any case the personal character is utterly subordinated, and motives of policy 
prevaiL The season of the Passover recalled the historic sparing of Israel's firstborn and 
the destruction of Egypt's. The positions seemed now to be reversed, or Israel delibe- 
rately assumed the character of Egypt, preferring that the guilty should be set free. We 
have here the self-conviction of: 1. Perverted religious instincts. In the case of the 
chief priests and people of the Jews. Their whole religious training ought to have 
prepared them to receive Christ. 2. Popular opinion unguided by the Spirit of Qod. 
A prey to unscrupulous influences, to false sentiment, and to passing excitements. 
3. Spiritual indifference, in the person of Pilate, in whom it lent itself readily to 
unprincipled diplomacy and the surrender of innocence. 

II. A PABABLB OF THE CHOICE EVBBY MAN IS CALLED UPON TO MAKE. 1. In daily 

life. Minute occurrences in which the contrasts may not seem so striking, or the 
choice 80 final. Their ultimate influence in the determination of character and destiny. 
2. In the great crises of religious decision. It is well at such times to consider carefully 
the respective ends of the courses of conduct that present themselves. 

III. A SYMBOL OF THE CENTRAL MYSTERY OF REDEMPTION. In the gOSpel the method 

of salvation is that the innocent shall suffer for the guilty. Jesus the Christ thus 
became the substitute of Barabbas the robber. The latter only gained the prolongation 
of his earthly life thereby ; a questionable benefit. But those who believe in Christ 
as the vicarious Sacrifice and voluntary Self-sacrificer for sinners will receive eternal 
salvation. — M. 

Vers. 16 — 20, 29 — 32. — The mockery of Jesut. The scene, the courtyard of the 
governor's residence ; the actors, the Eoman soldiery and the Son of God ; and th« 
awful fate that awaited the Sufierer, render this mockery one of the most impressive 
incidents in human history. It was deliberate, brutal, and inhuman. 

L What it was in him that was mocked. The crown and the purple and the 
sham homage are interpreted by the cry, " Hail, King of the Jews ! " 1. It was his 
kingly pretensions they ridiculed. So the Jews had laughed to scorn his prophetic 
office. To those Eoman soldiers, impressed with the grandeur of the power they them- 
geives represented, the claim to be king of a small and subject laud like Palestine was 



330 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xv. 1—47. 



rery petty. They could afford, so they thought, to laugh at it ; even as Pilate waa 
not afraid to have releasod him who preferred it. 2. But even more did they despise 
his title as a theocratic King. How far these citizens of the empire of law were from 
realizing the true character of the kingdom of righteousness 1 Had he even been 
recognized by the Jews themselves as their ruler, the nation was too small, too insigni- 
ficant in a political or military point of view, to be of any coasequence. There was no 
suspicion in their minds of danger to the Roman empire, or of the influence which his 
moral and spiritual character was to wield in the new ages of the world. It is, 
although they knew it not then, by virtue of this same moral majesty and power that 
he, in turn, has become the Conqueror of mankind, and is maintaining and extending his 
sway in regions where mouldering ruins and obsolete statutes are all that remain to witness 
to Rome's vanished greatness. It is the mockers themselves that are now ridiculous. 

II. How MEN MAT MOOK HIM STILL. There is a feeling of human tenderness that is 
outraged as we imagine the meek Sufferer amidst the brutal throng. But the true 
sentiment that ought to be awakened is that which concerns the principles of righteous- 
ness and truth, of which he was the embodiment and representative. It is for them 
he would have us solicitous even to jealousy. Men still wound and mock Christ : 
1. When they render to him a merely nominal homage. " When we pervert the truth 
of the Word for our own evil ends, we scourge the Son of man ; when to justify our 
evils we fabricate a system of ingenious error, and thus exalt our own wisdom above 
the wisdom of Jesus, we plait a crown of thorns and put it on his head ; when we 
substitute our own righteousness for the righteousness of Christ, we clothe him with a 
purple robe ; when we are inwardly worshippers of self and outwardly worshippevs of 
the Lord, our worship of him is a mocking salutation of ' Hail, King of the j&ws I ' 
while every presumptuous sin we commit is a stroke inflicted on the Son of man" 
(W. Bruce). 2. XVhen they ignore the moral nature of his power, relying on material 
and external means instead of spiritual. When they use the methods of business in a 
business spirit, or even the arts of diplomacy, to advance his kingdom. So mea clothe 
Christ in the insignia of Herod. " The kingliest King was crowned with thorns I " 
3. When they would accept the advantages of his kingdom without observing its con- 
ditions. As when persons profess to enjoy the preaching and ordinances of tlie gospel, 
but do not carry its doctrines into practice ; or when they are " straightway offended " 
at the tribulations and privations which true discipleship involves. — M. 

Vers. 31, 32. — The Saviour's helplessness. A paradox. The situation as regarded by 
those who surrounded the cross was manifestly in contradiction with the pretensions of 
Jesus. This prima facie impression was not accidentally produced, but belonged, so 
to speak, to the very essence of the gospel as a " mystery ; " and it had its ends to 
serve in the inscrutable wisdom of God. That it tended at first to crmceal the true 
character of the Saviour's sufferings there can be no doubt ; but as certainly it prepared 
the way for subsequent spiritual revelation. It served — 

I. To EXCITE ATTENTION. This apparent self-contradiction in the caieer of Jesus was 
a matter of public notoriety. Had it been overlooked by any, the emjmies of the truth 
were eager to point it out. There is something piquant to the curinsity and specula- 
tion of men in a matter which wears such an aspect. 

XL As A MEANS OF AVENGING THE TBUTH UPON ITS ADVERSARIES. HoW quick they 

were to seize upon it and turn it to the best advantage 1 For a little while they had it 
all their own way. So infatuated were they, that they put the seeming contradiction 
in the strongest possible form ; the antithesis is all but perfect. Not quite so, how- 
ever. They had to confess that he had " saved others." The monuments of his work 
remained, and facts are hard to discredit. There was something in the very goTmd 
which would recall histories of gracious sympathy and help ; miracles of saving power. 
It was precisely this element of stubborn matter of fact which could not be accounted 
for on the theory of mere pretension, and which in turn vitiated their argument. A 
thousand presumptions will not disprove, but must yield to, a single fact. Now, the 
fact of Christ's miraculous works is certified to us by those who sought to discredit and 
disprove them. Out of their own mouths are they condemned. They are self-sentenced 
to a vicious mill-round of mere logic. The natural man cannot understand the heavenly 
mjstery. 



CH. XT, 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 821 

III. As A MEANS OF DISCIPLINING AND BEWARDIN& FAITH. 1. That the disoiplej 

tliemselves did not comprehend it at first is evident from the Gospel narrative. It must 
have been hard for them to see what appeared the falsification of their hopes ; harder 
SI ill to he taunted by those who had so cruelly slain their Master. What part may it 
nut have had in the " cup " the Saviour -himself had to drink ? 2. But by this very 
discipline it prepared them for the inner and spiritual " discerning of the Lord's body " 
Tlieir spiritual susceptibilities were awakened, and they began to realize the meaning 
of the mystery. Gradually they were to emerge from the bewilderment and perplexity. 
Peter and the rest of the disciples travelled far ere they reached Pentecost, but each 
step in the journey of their faith was a revelation of the secret of Jesus. It was not to 
human force he had submitted, but to his Father's will. The necessity that bound 
him to the cross was a spiritual one. It was because he wished to save others abso- 
lutely that he would and could not save himself. — ^M. 

Vers. 40, 41. — Women watching the cross. The prominence of women in the Gospel 
narrative suggests the fact that Christianity has done more to awaken the spiritual 
nature of women, and to furnish them with a sphere for the exercise of their special 
gifts and graces, than any other religion. For the first time the gospel gave to woman 
dienity and recognized position in spiritual thinijs. In the gospel, the feminine as well 
asthe masculine aspects and phases of morality are represented. Why were they at 
the cross ? 

I. A PKOOJ' OF THEIR ATTACHMENT TO Chkist. 1. TTiei/ had already shown this. 
They were, some of them, of good social standing, and had command of considerable 
means. This advantage they had employed in the interests of Christ and his work — ■ 
" they ministered unto him " when he was in Galilee. And the service they rendered 
involved a certain inconvenience and trouble, for they had to follow him almost as 
much as his apostles. 2. Now they gave even more signal evidence. Modestly retiring 
to the outskirts of the rabble, they persistently watched him. They might have been 
excused by ordinary scruples from witnessing the horrible scene, but they could not 
allow themselves to go away. He still represented their highest spiritual interest, and 
they were willing to brave anything for his sake. 

II. A TRIAL OF their LOVE. It Tose ioto heroic resolution and sacrifice. 1. How 
typical their experience was of that whifth their sisters have had to go through in all 
ayes I They stood by helpless, unable to render any further service. It was not for 
them to attempt a rescue when brave men had forsaken him and fied. But they could 
show the virtue of passive endurance. They could prove to the Sufferer that their love 
was unabated, their faith forlorn, but not dead. So many a noble wife, sister, or 
mother has had to stand by when loved ones have been done to death, or ruined by 
great concerns in which they might not interfere. They have been able only to trust 
and wail and pray, to comfott wlien they could not deliver. One consolation remained 
to them — they had done wliat they could. 2. To so try it was the grandest recognition 
of its genuineness. They were accounted worthy to suffer with Christ. Their afieo- 
tion was to pass through the fires seven times refined. Peter might be faithless, and 
the rest of the disciples sadly fail, but they could watch with the Saviour as his spirit 
sank beneath its accumulated woe. — M. 

Vers. 42 — 47., — The burial of the Grudfied. I. Provided for by God. There are 
several striking proofs of providential arrangement in the burying of the Saviour. He 
iiu\ or stipulated as to where or how he should be buried ; his mind was too much occupied 
as to how he should die. Yet were great thinp;s to turn upon the manner, the time, and 
the place of his burial. He whose angels hid the grave of Moses, was equally careful 
to make known the place where his Son lay. "The sepulchre was new, and in the 
midst of a garden, therefore isolated from other graves. The identity of the risen One 
is thus secured against all possibility of mistake. In inspiring the agents through 
whom the burial was effected, God fulfilled his own cterual appointment. The death, 
hastened by the unusual delicacy of the Sufferer, and the intervention of the sabbath, 
secured on the one hand that " not a bone should be broken," and, on the other, that he 
should be buried on the day before the sabbath, his rest iu the grave cuinoiding with 
the sabbatic rest of the Creator, fulfilling the week, so to speak, of the old ecuuomy, 

MARK D. K 



822 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDIN(J TO ST. MARK. [ch. xv 1-47 

md ending with the beginning of the first day of the next week, thus ushering in a 
new economy, a new creation. The garden-tomb of Joseph a fit resting-place for him 
who was to be the Pirstfruits of the resurrection. If the cross was shameful, the tomb 
was honourable. " They had appointed him a grave with the despised ; and among 
the honoured (did he obtain it) in his death " (Isa. liii. 9, Lange s translation). 

n. VoLUNTAEiLT EFFECTED BY MEN. 1. A victory of faith. A " councillor ol 
honourable estate " is moved by an inward impulse to make this his own special con- 
cern. The tragic circumstances of the last few hours had touched his heart and kindled 
his enthusiasm ; and he and his friend Nicodemus — " the same who came to Jesus by 
night " — casting off all secrecy or fear of man, vied with one another in paying the last 
tribute of respect to the illustrious Dead. His simple request was an act of faith; the 
boldness which rendered it so effectual was a victory of faith. Already the power of 
the cross was being felt. The centurion, the governor, Joseph, and IMioodemus alike 
confess to its influence. 2. A tribute of love. How carelul are the two in their prepara- 
tions 1 The linen cloth and the spices are the offering of affection, which follows its 
object even to the tomb. As in Mary's spikenard, the question of expense is put wholly 
out of sight. The richest and best that they may offer are brought forth for the occa- 
sion. 3. In token of undying hope. The spices arrested the process of corruption, and 
witnessed to the expectation of the resurrection. — ^M. 

Vers. 11, 12. — Hie foes of Jesus. It is remarkable that the evangelists speak of their 
Lord's enemies with such unrufSed calmness. If our dearest friend had been subjected 
to inhuman treatment, ending in his death, we should have held up the names of his 
oppressors to the execration of the world. But in the Gospels we look in vain for a 
strong epithet, or a burst of indignant declamation. This was not because the evange- 
lists were deficient in love to their Lord, but because they had caught something of the 
spirit of him " who, when he was reviled, reviled not again," and because they had 
learnt that amid these strange, sad scenes the Divine purpose was being fulfilled, and 
that he who was the Victim of sinners was the Sacrifice for sin. Hostility to the Lord 
Jesus Christ is the irrefragable proof of man's antagonism to goodness and truth. The 
cross of Calvary, stained by his blood, is a witness at once to the depravity of man and 
tlie infinite love of God. Hatred to goodness was never more pronounced and desperate, 
for goodness was now both incarnate and aggressive. It was no longer an abstraction, 
but a Person ; no longer inert, but active. The Jews were generally left immolested, 
because they were content to dwell as a peculiar and separate people, without assailing 
idolatry in others. But our Lord and his disciples endeavoured to make the truth 
known and felt. Moses said in effect, " Keep yourselves from surrounding peoples, lest 
ye be defiled." Christ said, " Go ye into all the world, and preach the gospel to every 
creature." The old economy was represented by the temple, which was compact, 
perfect, kept free from the defiling tread of the heathen ; the new was represented by 
the mustard seed, which would grow under the open sky till it became a tree, and 
many nations found rest under its shadow. It was partly because Jesus Christ was 
aggressive in his work that the world rose in arms against him. Lot us study the 
characteristics of some of his foes, and discover their motives, that we may be on our 
guard against becoming their modern representatives. In the two verses we have 
chosen we have glimpses of the priests, of the people, and of Pontius Pilate. 

I. The PEIB8TS WBEE HOSTILE TO CUB LoBD FROM PRIDE. They should hare been 
the first to welcome him. As Jews they were familiar with the utterances of the 
prophets, and as priests they should have known the meaning of the saciifioes they 
offered. They had heard the preaching of John when he announced Messiah, and 
they had again and again had evidence respecting the work and teaching of Jesus. 
But pride summoned prejudice to build up an obstacle impervious to all assaults. Their 
social dignity refused to recognize this peasant Teacher; their intellectual culture 
spurned the utterances of the Prophet of Nazareth ; and their ecclesiastical prestige 
held it to be incredible that a carpenter's Son should be " the Light of the world." In 
our day, too, pride has such disabtrous influence. Many admit that Jesus Christ was 
a pattern of benevolence and of moral purity ; but when he declares himself to be an 
infallible Teacher of Divine truth, when he claims superhuman power, when he 
de?nands submission to hig will, they rise against him, as those did who once exclaimed, 



OH. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. «2J 

" For good works we stone thee not, but for blasphemy ; because thou, being a man, 
makest thyself God." 

II. PiLATK WAS HOSTILE TO ouK LoRD PROM POLICY. He saw at a glance the vindic- 
tiveness of the priests, and the innocence of him they accused; and, after a few 
minutes' conversation, frankly said, " I find in him no fault at all." But this was 
fuUowed by a pitiful struggle and fall. He tried to rid himself of responsibility by 
sending the Galilean to Herod ; he offered to release him, not on the ground of inno- 
cence, but as an act of grace, usual at the Passover; he cruelly scourged him, in tha 
hope that this would satisfy the bloodthirsty mob. But when these devices failed, and 
the people threateneii Pilate himself, as a traitor to the emperor, he delivered Jesus 
to be crucified. He fell through moral cowardice, brought about by former crimes, 
feitring lest he should lose office and honour unless he fell in with the demands of this 
bi iital crowd. Things seen rule the man who has no faith in things unseuu. Personal 
ir.terests seemed more to him than the life or death of one poor Prisoner. He yielded 
to clamour ; and though at the time he knew it not, he crucified the Christ. 

ILL The people were hostile to our Lord from passion. " The chief priests 
moved the people." They would urge that Jesus had been condemned by their own 
orthodox court, and that it was the duty of every patriot to induce the Romans to 
support its decisions ; and they would further urge tliat Barabbas, the leader of an 
insurrection, was a friend of the people and a champion of their liberties, so that he 
was to be preferred to Jesus of Nazareth. The mass of the people were not intelligently 
hostile to our Lord. Some knew little of him, and thought that the Sanhedrim was 
test able to judge of such questions; and others went with the popular current, 
whether it led them to shout " Hosanna 1 " or " Crucify him ! " Hence they were 
included with the soldiers in the prayer of our Lord, " Father, forgive them ; for they 
know not what they do." — A. R. 

Ver. 33. — Barhness around the cross. When we remember who he was who was 
dying amidst the mockery of the world he came to save, we are no longer incredulous 
about this statement. The "Light of the world" was in darkness, the Saviour was 
refusing to save himself, the King of glory was wearing thorns as his crown, and had 
ascended the cross as his throne. The event referred to in our text is one of many 
examples of the deep and secret connection existing between the kingdoms of nature 
and of grace. We believe that the Invisible created the visible, and still acts upon 
it, pioducing now and again transmutations of its energies, though never making 
a break in their continuity, and that when Christ Jesus came forth from the invisible 
world there was manifested in him a peculiar communication between these two realms. 
In him was seen the connection which had so olten been indicated in the Divine 
economy, e.g. a curse had accompanied man's spiritual fall. Promises of temporal good 
were associated with moral worth. Images drawn from the " desert " and the " trees " 
and " rivers " by the prophets found their justification in the truth uttered afterwards 
by St. Paul, " The whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together until 
now," etc. The darkening of the sun was the testimony of Nature to her dying Loed ; 
a hint that creation is dependent on him, that Nature is supported by unseen spiritual 
powers, and that the fate of the earth is involved in the kingdom of God. It is no 
meaningless portent described here, but an event which had its teaching both 
immediate and remote. Consider — 

I. The BFrBCTS of this darkness oh those around the cross. 1. Thit swper- 
natural gloom would increase the solemnity of the event. As the darkness grew denser, 
silence would fall on the gibing tongues and every noisy laugh would be stilled ; and 
as the gloom deepened into unearthly night over the busy streets, the open fields, and 
the sacred temple, many would ask themselves, " What meaneih this?" Carelessness 
and flippant scepticism are always out of place in view of the cross. If the narrative 
be mythical, it should at least be rejected intelligently and seriously ; for, if it be true, 
.t involves stupendous issues to us all. 2. It hid his agony from the onlookers. 
Faithful friends and, above all, the loving mother stood there till they jould bear no 
more ; and God would not suffer them to be tried, above bearing, so darkness shrouded 
the Sufferer. And the foes of our Lord were shut nut from a scene too sacred for them to 
witnesii. Beyond \/ha,t, was necessary, the well- beloved Ssou should not b« exposed t« 



3Z4 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. xv. 1-47, 



their brutil jeers. 3. It wa» an admonition to our Lord's foes. They were fleadera 
of Old Testament Scriptures, and knew well how their fathers had been dealt with. 
They remembered that in the day of their national deliverance darkness had fallen on 
Jehovah's foes, and had proved the precursor of heavier plagues, and therefore we do 
not wonder that some went home " beating their breasts," and saying, " What next?" 
Would that they had turned even then 1 

II. The suggestions op this darkness to the world. 1. It indicated the going 
out of the world's Light. Jesus had plainly declared, " I am the Light of the world;" 
" Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you." To some, at least, 
•uch words would come back with new meaning and power. To reject Christ is to 
shut off light from the soul, and become ready for the outer darkness. A Christless 
world was set forth When the sun was darkened. 2. It suggested the ignorance of the 
Gentiles and the malignity of the Jews. The soldiers were brutal, yet knew not what 
they did. Pilate, in political scheming, had lost all sense of righteousness and truth, 
and so in ignorance delivered Jesus to be crucified. " Darkness covered the earth, and 
gross darkness the people." On the other hand, the Jews had in themselves the fulfil- 
ment of the words, "The god of this world hath blinded the minds of them that 
believe not." 3. It reminded the Church of the mystery of the Atonement. The death 
of the Lord Jesus had a Godward as well as a worldward aspect. It was to attract 
human love, but at the same time to reveal Divine love. When the darkness passed 
away, and the snn shone upon the cross, the returning light was like the bow of 
promise after the Flood — a sign of peace between man and God, and a pledge of " the 
rainbow round about the throne," in the land where all give thanks to God and to the 
Lamb that was slain. — A. R. 

Ver. 43. — Joseph of Arimathcea. In comparison with the leading apostles of our Lord 
Joseph of Arimath^a was not distinguished. He had not the spirituality of St. John, 
nor the prominence of St. Peter, nor the world-wide influence of St. Paul. We are 
consciously turning from the generals of Christ's army to contemplate one of the 
ordinary soldiers ; but it was he who, when his natural leaders had fallen, stepped to 
the front and proved himself a hero. We know but little of Joseph beyond such facts 
as these : he was a rich man, respected by his countrymen as one who was " good ajid 
just ; " a member of the Sanhedrim, who refused his consent to the resolution passed 
that Jesus should be put to death; and a resident in Jerusalem, who, having pitpaied 
for himself a new grave, dedicated it to his crucified Lord. We may learn valuable 
lessons from his courage and fidelity, the more so if we blend together all the references 
made to him by the evangelists. 

I. That we ought to eefuse our consent to a wrong, even though oub befusal 
WILL not prevent ITS ACCOMPLISHMENT. Except for Nlcodemus, Joseph stood alone in 
protesting against the action resolved on by the council against Jesus. He was, no 
doubt, strongly urged to yield to the majority, so that the council might appear united 
in the endeavour to put down One who had disrejjarded its authority. But althouo-h 
his protest was seemingly powerless, he resolutely persisted in it, and to the last he 
" did not consent to the counsel and deed of them." He was an example in this to all 
who conscientiously object to habits and practices which obtain in their own sphere of 
activity, be they politicians, men of business, or boys and skirls at school. But let aU 
such be sure that a real principle is at stake, not a prejudice, and that they are not 
moved by self-assertion, obstinacy, or pride. 

II. That bt bravely doing what we believb to be right wb embolden amj 
HELP OTHERS. Jo.scph required courage on the council, and still more now when he 
went in to Pilate to beg the body of Jesus. So terrible was the hatred felt against 
Jesus by the chief priests that the proour.ator himself had trembled before it, and Peter, 
with his fellow-disciples, had forsaken the Lord. Yet Joseph stepped to the front as a 
friend of the crucified One, and Nicodemus followed him. All men of decided convic- 
tions thus influence others. Thousands thanked God secretly for the stand which 
Elijah made on Carmel. Multitudes wait to be led aright by those whose character and 
ability bring responsibility. 

ILL That if we go right onward in the path of duty wb shall suocbed 
i)F,TTBB THAN WB BXPBOT. When Josofh Undertook his mission he knew that b« 



cii. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCOnBTNG TO ST. MARK. K5 

might risk his life, or at least his reputation ; that he might he called on to pay a heavy 
and prohibitory ransom as a brihe to the governor; or that he migLt he refused with 
scorn and insult. Yet, when he went in boldly to Pilate, to his own amazement, his 
request was freely granted 1 Many have had a similar experience: e.g. the Israelitea 
when they obeyed the command, " Go forward," and saw the sea divide before their 
advancing footsteps ; and I'eter, who followed the angel and found the great gate of the 
prison open of its own accord. Apply this to typical experiences in a Christian's life. 

IV. That a crisis comes in the history of men which determines their whole 
FUTURE. The crucifixion of Jesus constituted a crisis to Joseph. Under the influence 
of sorrow and indignation he was prompted to this step, and the future destiny of this 
secret disciple depended upon his taking it. Such times come to us all. Our spiritual 
life has not always the same even flow. Ocasionally we are strangely, strongly 
moved to resolve, to speak, or to act, and tremendous issues depend upon our obedience 
to God-given impulse. If the vessel aground on the harbour bar is not set free when 
the tide is highest, she will be wrecked in the coming storm. 

v. That the moving cause op decision for God is the cross of the Lord Jesus 
Chkist. Joseph had listened to the teaching of Jesus, and witnessed his superhuman 
works, but till now had been a disciple " secretly," for fear of the Jews. That position 
was a false one, and so long as he was in it he was deficient in gratitude and courage. 
But when he saw Jesus on the cross he felt as the centurion did when he cried, " Truly 
this was the Son of God ; " and henceforth he was known as the Lord's disciple vaa 
seivimt. Christ's death has been to millions the beginning of new life. 

"VI. That God will fulfil his purposes whether his avowed servants are 
LOYAL TO him oe NOT. The twelve were scattered and the Church seemed destroyed, 
when suddenly there came forth from their former obscurity two secret disciples, who 
took upon themselves the work which others had left. And in all ages God has his 
faithful ones who are sometimes unrecognized by the Church ; yet, filled with his Spirit, 
they shall aid in establishing the kingdom of the crucified, and now risen, Christ. 
—AH. 

Vers. 6 — 15. — Barabbas ; yr, the evil choice. A strange custom prevailed. To 
appease the anger of the rabble, and to curry favour with them, Pilate was wont, on 
the recurrence of certain feasts, to release a prisoner, giving the mob permission to 
choose who should be the favoured one.' At this feast "the multitude went up and 
began to ask him to do as he was wont to do unto them." Knowing that " for envy 
the chief priests had delivered him up," he tested the feeling of the multitude by 
asking them if he should release " the King of the Jews," thus giving them the oppor- 
tonity of repudiating the deed of the priests. The question hangs as in a balance. The 
voice of a rabble is called upon to decide the fate of " the Son of man. On that voice 
hi n^es (apparently) the course of the work of the world's redemption. The die is cast. 
The multitude make their election. The choice is proclaimed in a wild, uproarious cry, 
" Not this man, but Barabbas." So the besotted rabble declare their spirit, their low 
moral condition, their attitude towards truth and righteousness. Barabbas, we learn, was 
" a robber," and he was cast into prison " for a certain insurrection made in the city, and 
for murder." Thus they " denied the holy and righteous One, and asked for a murderer 
to be granted unto " them. Nothing could more clearly declare the spirit they were 
of. Sadly and in silence many pure hearts mourned while the rabble j^ave vent to 
their evilness, pouring forth the uttermost malignity as a flood to sweep away " the 
Prince of life." The insensate tools of a corrupt, self-condemned priesthood, they, by 
yielding all too readily to them who should have guided them into the right way, 
become identified with " the chief priests " in a choice which for ever brands them 
.I'ith the utmost vileness. The spirit of the people must be judged by their attitude 
towards Jesus on the one hand, and towards Barabbas on the other ; and a word 
is sufficient to declare it. In the one we behold the Teacher of righteousness, 
who had endeavoured to enforce the laws of God. He represented truth. To it he 
bore witness. He denounced evil in thought, in word, in deed. He opened to the feet 
of the people the path of virtue ; he pointed to the gates of the eternal city, and gave 
men assurance of immortality. Never bad the world looked upon so perfect an embodi- 
ment of pure goodness ; never will it look upon his like until he himself appear again 



826 THE GOSPEL ACCORBINa TO ST. MARK. [oa. tv. 1—47. 

and eyery eye beholds him. The other is the embodiment of evil. His name is th« 
lynonym of it. The one name men dare not assume from its loftiness ; the other they 
would not from its lowness. But this rabble-host chooses the evil one, and so declaiea 
its spirit is in accord with his. It is self-condemned. How painfully we read: 1. The 
perilous influence which unscrupulous leaders may exert over an undisciplined, untutored 
mob. 2. How possible it is for the human heart so to deceive itself that the highes* 
representatives of the purest system of truth and morals may be debased into an 
alliance with the most corrupt and degraded, and may prostitute the holiest functions 
to the most evil ends. High priests of Gk)d may lead men to the service of the devil. 
3. The sad consequences of (1) a blinded intelligence, (2) an undisciplined moral 
nature, (3) a corrupt prejudice. High priests and people have their way. "Their 
voices prevailed." And Pilate, moved with fear, and evidently against his convictions 
of right, " to content the multitude," " released him . . . whom they asked for ; but 
Jesus he delivered up to their will." Thus the world to-day demands its Barabbaa 
and rejects Jesus. Truth, goodness, charity, patience, heavenly mindedness — all that 
is pure and good — is sacrificed, and by " the multitude " «till evU is preferred, «nd they, 
alasl are " content." — Q. 

Vera. 16 — 32. — The crucifixion: the human deed. To the contemplation of that 

supreme fact in history, around which the thoughts, the hearts, of men gather more 
and more, we are directed by the few sad, solemn words, " Pilate • • . delivered Jesus, 
when he had scourged him, to be crucified." The preliminary incidents are minutely 
related. They describe the most solemn mockery ever prpetrated. The scourging 
first. He is stripped to the waist, his hands tied behind him ; his bent back is beaten 
with leathern thongs weighted at the ends with bits of lead or sharpened bone. Bleeding, 
he is led within the court, " the Prsetorium," where the whole cohort of soldiers vent their 
ingenuity in exposing their Victim to ridicule. They cast a purple-dyed military cloak 
over him ; with their hard hands they twist twigs of n&>k, with its long, hard, sharp 
spikes or thorns, into a mock-crown, and press it down upon his fever-heated brow. In his 
yielding hand they thrust a reed, and bow their knees in mock submission and homage, 
and with coarse gibes hail him " King of the Jews." Snatching the reed from his hand, 
they beat him with it on his bleeding head ; they strike him with their fists or with 
rods ; and in the direst indignity spit upon him. Then, " wearing the crown of thorns 
and the purple robe," he is led out. To this uncomplaining Sufferer — this smitten and 
forsaken One — Pilate calls the attention of the multitude with words which, like those 
he wrote, float on through the ages, bearing their different message as the listening ears 
differed — " Ecce homo 1 " The echoing cry from the mingled voices of " the chief priests 
and the officers" arose above all others, "Crucify, crucify!" A miserable squabble between 
Pilate and the Jews ends in his " Behold your King!" and their reply, " Away with him, 
away with him, crucify himl . . . We have no king but Caesar." In the temple Judas 
is casting down " the thirty pieces of silver," making confession, in a repentance all 
too late, " I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood," and his agonized spirit 
seeks a vain relief in a hasty destruction of a life he cannot support, Jesus, " bearing the 
cross," is led away to be crucified, when, sinking, exhausted with suffering, beneath its 
weight, he is relieved by its being laid on " one Simon of Cyrene " — the first in a long 
line of lowly cross-bearers who endure the shame for Jesus' sake. " And they bring 
him unto the place Golgotha." One only spark of humanity is left. " They offered him 
wine mingled with myrrh." Then upon a cross — symbol of tlie uttermost degradation 
and shame, and more than a symbol of the uttermost suffering — they stretched his sacred; 
quivering limbs, piercing his hands and his feet with rough nails. Thus " they cruci- 
fied him?' Then from out of the most indescribable agony of body broke forth the gentle 
murmur of a loving heart in modest prayer, " Father, forgive them ; for they know 
not what they do." Ah ! they crushed, they broke that heart ; but it sent forth only 
the sweet fragrance of its love, as a crushed flower its perfume. But he is not alone. 
"With him they crucify two robbi.TS, one on his right hand and one on his left." Thus 
is he"numbeied with the transgressors." "Kacked by the extremest pain, and covered 
with every shame which men were wont to heap on the greatest criminals ; forsaken 
and denied by bis disciples; no sigh escaped his lips, no cry of agony, no bitter or 
filtering wgrd ; only a prayer for the forgiveuess of his enemies. They liad acted U 



on.. XT. 1-47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 821 

bl'mdnesa, nnder the influence of religious and political fanaticism ; for, to use St. PaJl'i 
wordg, had they known it they would not have crucified tlie Lord of glory." Surely 
they could not know, or it would not have to he recorded in one sentence : " And they 
crucify him, and part his garments among them, casting lots upon them, what each should 
take* So hard, so insensible 1 In presence of the central fact in the world's history, 
men gamble 1 

Here we must find our lessons, in the contrasted intensity of interest in human salva- 
tion which is shown from above, and that careless, blind indifference which marlsa 
men " before whose eyes Jesus Christ [is] openly set forth crucified." The world must 
see itself represented in the actors on that dread evening ; and each of us may see 
himself in one or other of the many surrounding " the Man " on that day of darkness, 
doom, and death. Let each bring himself into presence of that cross — the tru« 
judgment-seat — of Christ, and there test his heart, and try and prove his life. Ami 
further, let each one learn how his hand is not wanting among those rude hands that 
smote that tender fiesh ; nor his words from those that fell on that quick ear ; nor his 
gins from those that burdened that too heavy- weigh ted heart. 

" Our sins of spite were part of those that day. 

Whose cruel whips and tliorns did make him smart ; 

Our lusts were those that tired him in the way ; 
Our want of love was that which pieroud his heart ; 

And still when we forget or slight his pain, 

We crucify and torture him again." 

o. 

Vers. 33 — 41. — The crucifixion: the Divine words. Sjven words are counted by 
t hem who now treasure his sayings, as spoken by Jesus on the cross. Each evangelist 
contributes his portion towards the little perfect stock. 

I. The first was a wokd of prater for furgivbness, itself a forgiveness. " Iforgive 
them : do thou, Father, forgive." It was a word of excuse for them who did it 
ignorantly and in unbelief. " They see only a malefactor : open their eyes that they 
may see and know." If the prayer may be offered for them who, with wicked hands, 
crucified the Lord of glory, because they did it ignorantly, learn we that such a prayer 
may be oifered, and surely will be heard, for all ignorant, blinded ones who, in sinning • 
against the Lord, are sinners against their own souls. In proportion as we sin wilfully, 
having knowledge of the truth and of what we do, we put ourselves further and further 
away from the possibility of forgiveness. How true is it that men to-day sin, not knowing 
what they do ! This prayer covers all sin, for no one knows truly and fully what ho 
does when he sins against Christ. 

II. The second word is a word of promise in response to prater and confession. 
The time was brief; the last moments of the twelfth hour were hurrying past. In the 
heart of one of the malefactors some early teaching remained to quicken the conscience 
into life; and the punishment of crime was workina; its right effect. " We indeed justly 
... we receive the due reward of our deeds." The word which passed the sacred lips, 
unmoistened with the stupefying wine, were words of life and healing and promise in 
response to the prayer, " Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom." 
What faith is here I Faith in the kingdom, in the coming, in the readiness to hear ! 
" Jesus " may net have had the same meaning to him it has to us. The reply to a dying, 
penitent thiethu.. been a fountain oiiife to many. "Verily I say unto thee. To-day shaft 
thou be with me in Paradise." 

III. A third word was a word of tender, filial love. The languid, bloodshot, 
half-closed eyes turned, and " Jesus . . . saw his mother, and the disciple standing by, 
whom he loved." The fountain of love was not stayed ; the holy heart was well-nigh 
breaking, yet it beat truly in all filial affection. From out of his great suffering ha 
thinks of her, and thinks with fervent love. " Hail, thou that art highly favoured 1 " 
He is still her Son, henceforth to be represented in the " son" who is now to regard her ai 
" mother." But he makes provision for her future. Ere those lips which spoke so often 
to the disciple " whom he loved " were closed, he uttered one last word to him, revealing 
the deep thought of the iSuftVrer's heart, and committing to him a sacred charge h« 
irould entrust only to one " whom he loved " — " Behold thy mother." It is all beauti- 



328 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. iv. 1—47 

^l^y hnman ; but as all human deeds, when they are true and heautiful, approach th» 
Divine, so was this beautifully Divine. It was enough. A wish from that heart and 
those dried lips was sacred. "Prom that hour the disciple took her unto hia own 
home" — took her with the sword piercing through her soul. 

IV. A fourth word is feom the very abyss of surFERiNO — perhaps from a greatei 
depth than any word arose that ever escaped from the lips of man. Darkness was over 
the land ; darkness was over the pure Suflerer's soul. The words present the deepest 
of mysteries ; we cannot open it. Was it, as has been suggested, the effect of the com- 
bination of profound mental r 'i .;uish with the well-nigh intolerable pangs of dissolution, 
rendered all the more natural and inevitable in the case of One whose feelings were so 
deep, tender, and real ; whose moral consciousness was so pure, and whose love was tici 
intense ? Had his abiding conviction of iellowship with God for the moment given way 
under the pressure of extreme bodily and mental suffering ? Was it a mere passing 
feeling, as though hs were no longer sustained by the power of the Divine life ? Surely 
more than this. Ah ! who can know ? It is only as we descend to these depths that 
we can understand how dark, how cold, how sad they are. Mere words can never 
convey an idea of suffering. The bitterness of this cup he only knows who drinks it. 
WJiat is the forsaking by the God to whom he still clings — " My God, my God " — and 
" why " is he forsaken, remain for us depths into whose darkness we may peer but 
cannot fathom. 

V. A fifth word is from the poor fevered frame. Fainting from loss of blood, 
from acute pain, from unrelieved suffering. " I thirst." Truly he may say, " My strength 
is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws." The former cry 
ascended to heaven ; this sinks upon the earth. A moistened sponge on a hyssop rod 
brought him temporary relief, and brought him strength suflBcient to utter — 

VI. A sixth word, uttered with " a loud " (was it a triumphant ?) " voice," declaring, 
" It is finished." lea, all is finished, notwithstanding the efforts of wicked men to 
prevent it. They unconsciously wrought out that which the Divine " hand and counsel 
foreordained to come to pass." " It is finished ; " yea, Jesus' work is finished. The great 
end is reached. Tha last supreme act, or consummation of the continuous act of that 
life which was " one offering of himself," is now in process of completion. So far as relates 
to the toil, and service, and sacrifice, and sufl'ering of earth, all is finished; and the last 
act of the conscious life, the last breath of the living frame, the last word of the lips 
of truth, seal the whole past. 

VII. And in a seventh word, with one supreme effort to that Father firom whom he 
seemed momentarily separated, he yields up himself — " gave up his spirit." Now are 
the words fulfilled, "I lay down my life, that I may take it again. No one taketh it 
away from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again. This commandment have I received from my Father." — O. 

Vers. 42 — 47. — The entombment. The sabbath hurried on — the day of rest. Joseph 
of Arimathaea, " a councillor of honourable estate, who also himself was looking for the 
kingdom of God," begged permission of Pilate to have the body of Jesus for interment, 
Pilate, being satisfied of the death of Jesus, " granted the corpse to Joseph." Then with 
tender hands he wrapped the body in a linen cloth and laid it in a tomb ; " and he rolled 
a stone against the door of the tomb." Now the work is complete. The human rage is 
satisfied. The voice of the accuser is silent. The Divine condescension is perfect. It 
could descend no lower. The grave is the goal of human weakness. It is the lowest 
Btep; then begins the upward ascent. The humiliation being complete, the exaltation 
begins. The grave is really the pathway to glory and honour. Jesus, who has sancti- 
fied every path of life, now sanctifies the grave. He has w ithdrawn the sting from death ; 
he dissipates the darkness from the tomb. And though we cannot desire the grave, yet 
it is no longer the repulsive, loathsome place it had ever been. Christ in the tomb of 
earth plainly speaks to us many lessons. 

I. Concerning him, it teaches us that no descent was too great for him to make 
rs HIS LOVING SERVIOB TO THE CHILDREN OF MEN. He who stoopcd SO low as to be bora 
in a manger, sharing his first hed with lowing oxen, stoops lower still in making ready 
for the children of men their last sleeping-place. He who washed the feet of his 
disciples shared the grave witli guilty men. forasmuch as they whom he was not 



ea. XT. 1—47.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 821 

ashamed to call brethren must needa die and be buried, "he also himself in Hka 
manner partook of the same ; " as " it behoved him in all th'ngs to be made like 
unto his brethren," he refused not this. 

II. Concerning the grave, it is a sanotifioation op it. We need not be ashamed 
to descend into this valley of humiliation, for our " Head " has gone before. If we can 
endure the sufferings of our cross, we can despise the shame of our tomb. We need not 
fear to die, for he hath brought " to nought him that had the power of death, that i» 
the devil; " nor need we fear to lie down in the tomb, for Jesus lay there. 

" 'Tis now a cell, where angels use 
To come and go with heavenly news, 
And in the ears of mourners say, 
' Come, see the place where Jesus lay.' " 

It !• not the final goal of the human feet, as we shall soon learn. Its bolts can be with- 
drawn ; its seal can be broken ; its stone can be rolled away. The grave may be the 
pathway to the throne. 

III. But it brings home to our hearts Chbist's claim upon us fob oub undying 
SBATITUDE. Never shall we repay that debt. Even the bitterest cup he will drink for 
us; the most laborious service he will undertake for us ; the uttermost humiliation he 
will endure for us. We owe all to him in the constitution of our life and its surrounding 
conditions; we owe no less the entire redemption of our life from all evils; we jwe 
the smoothing of the rough places of life, our uplifting above the pains of li.'e, and we 
owe the sanctiBcation and perfecting of life. Truly we owe all. Only by revei'ent faith, 
by lowly service, by growing love, can we acknowledge our deep-abiding debt. This we 
may perfect by a calm and trustful yieldini; up our life to our Father on hiu;h, both in 
the daily dying to self and in a final committal of all to him, breathing ou'. our life into 
his hands. 

" So, buried with our Lord, we'll close our eyes 
To the decaying world, till angels bid us rise." 

o. 

Vers. 1 — 20. — The second trial. I. It blicitbd the innocence of Jesus. Charges 
were made that he had excited sedition through the country, had prohibited the Roman 
tribute, and had claimed royalty. The last only had any show of plausibility in it. 
Jesus admitted his kingship, but declared it in immortal words to be the sovereignty 
of truth over the consciences of men. Beading the narratives of the other evangelists, 
we gain a clear impression of the innocence of Jesus, as it was exhibited to all who 
looked on, and defied the inventions of malice. Especially is that innocence reflected 
from the bearing of Pilate. To him our Lord replied when he asked for information; 
but met the accusations of the priests with a silence equally significant. And Pilate 
was struck dumb with conviction. Character is self-sufBciency. It is " centrality ; 
the impossibility of being displaced or overset." Words will not prove innocence ; it 
speaks louder in silence. Passion and unreason illustrate it. We are generally more 
anxious to avoid misconstruction than to act as we think right. Jesus teaches us to 
be servants of the truth, and to be indifferent to the constructions of our enemies. 
God and the angels are the true spectators of our actions; and the judgment of pos- 
terity will reflect the jud'^meut of Gud. 

II. It elicited his perfect loyalty. There must come a time when the truths 
we have professed will demand to be sealed by our action. Christ had taught men 
to " seek first the kingdom of God ; " to postpone everything to duty ; to take heed to 
the light within ; to esteem the soul of greater worth than the whole world. His 
conduct now falls into harmony with his words; and perfect music fli'ws through 
the world from both. He preferred the fulfilment of duty to the preservation of 
life. 

III. It elicited human injosticb and vice. Socrates told his j'ldges at Athens 
that it was thej who were really on 'their trial. So it was the Sanhedrim, ami also 
Pilate, who were on this occasion tried and condenmed. The ages have since been 
reverberating their damnation. Expediency and worldly favour were in one scale; 
ri'fht, innocence, truth, in the other. The former dipped. Worldly authority wm 



S30 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. [dn. xv. 1— 47 

opposed to spiritual majesty; the former struck a blow at the latter, which recoiled 
with Divine eflFect. The condemnation of Christ was an outrage upon the conscience 
of the world, both Jewish and pagan. Pilate's illustrious countryman, Cicero, had 
taught with enthusiasm that the useful and the right form a unity ; that the useful 
can never be put before the right without defeating the social good (' De Officiis,' iii.). An 
action can never be useful unless it is first right. Here was a great reversal of that 
order. That Jesus should die is expedient, said the Sanhedrim ; but not right, said 
their conscience. On other grounds, Pilate took the same position; while his wile, 
like a second conscience, would have restrained him. In similar crises of personal 
experience, let us remember that to subordinate right to expediency is to condemn the 
Lord of life afresh. 

IV. It illustrates the methods op Providenob. When innocence suffers and 
violence prevails, the foundations of moral order seem to be shaken, and the righteous 
exclaim, " What shall we do? " The face of Providence seems obscured. But God is 
One who hideth himself. What we call the evil in ndture may be the disguise of his 
wisdom; and not less does he conceal himself behind the evil of men. Here the 
greatest evil on their part gave occasion for the greatest good. 

V. It illustrates the illusivenbss of appearances. Jesus is insulted by Roman 
soldiers ; himself the spiritual Emperor of mankind. He is mocked with a semblance 
of royalty ; the mocking expresses an eternal fact. " Ridicule is the test of truth." 
Beware of mockery and insolence ; we may be defying the Spirit of God. Seek below 
the praise and the blame of men, their applause and their abuse, for the eternal fact. 
Judge not of Christianity by what men say of it, but by itself. Estimate not its 
divinity by the worldly honour that attaches to it ; but rather by the dishonour of 
the many, and the loyalty and life of the few. Truth and meekness, truth and spiritual 
force, — these are mightier than all falsehood and scorn. — J, 

Vers. 21 — 32. — The Crucifixion. I. There mat be a blessino in enforced 
SERVICE. Simon the Cyrenian is raised into the light of history ; perhaps to teach us 
this. No nobler honour for the Christian than to reflect, " I have been called to bear 
the cross." And for some to reflect, " I was forced into carrying the cross I would have 
refused, or left on the ground." So with that other Simon, surnamcd Peter. 

II. Pain is rather to be struggled with than aktificiallt suppressed. We 
seek anodynes for our troubles. Jesus teaches us to react against them by the force of 
faith. In the hour of -^uty we are to seek presence, not absence, of mind ; to collect our 
faculties, not to distract them. 

III. What is physically possible mat be morallt impossible. Christ could 
have come down from the cross in the former sense, could not in the latter. He pre- 
sents the ideal of suffering service for us, and the revelation of God's ways. There may 
be things which God cannot do, in our way of speaking, because he knows they are not 
well to be done. We, at least, cannot save ourselves at the expense of duty, and must 
be content to appear foolish or impotent to many. Suffering and salvation are facts 
eternally wedded and at one. — J. 

Vers. 33 — Z^.—Beath of Jesus. I. There mat for a time bb an eclipse fob 
THE FAITHFUL. " No light 1 " There is an extremity of trial in these words. Ko 
hope ! The very sun of life seems extinguished, and all worth of existence vanished. 
Iteason can find no foothold in this darkness. 

II. Yet there is no absolute darkness. Out of it comes the cry of faith. The 
first words of a long-remembered psalm break from the lips of Jesus ; a psalm that rises 
out of the minor into the major key, from the darkness into the blaze of prophetic 
vision. Doubtless in that moment the soul of Jesus passed swiftly through the whole 
scale of that psalmist's experience, and rose into joy upon the wings of thankso-ivina. 

IIL Mat the terminus of life and of service be identical 1 We may breathe 
this prayer before the cross of Christ. Our work finished, what need have we to tarry ? 
Pericles, in his oration over those who fell for Athens' good, says that, devoting their 
lives which had been usefully passed in peace on the field, their happiness and their lif« 
ended at the same moment. As Christians, our ideal is service, terminable only with 
UAh " Too busy with the crowded hour to fear to live or die." May we 



oa. IV. 1— 47j THE GOSPEL ACCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. 131 



" Obey the voice at eve obey'd at prime ; 
Lowly faithful, banish fear, 

Bight onward drive unarm'd; 
The port, well worth the cruise, is near, 
And every wave is charm'd." 

IV. Finis coronat opus. " Many signs showed that he who died upon the crom 
was the Son of Grtid." "Regard the end." It reflects its light upon the whole course 
from its beginning. What deep conviction of sin, of righteousness, of judgment ; of 
the frailty of man, the power and wisdom and the love of God, roots itself in tha 
cross of Jesus 1 It is an end which is a beginning. — J. 

Vers. 40 — 47. — The burial. I. Faith thrives in sobbow. Remoter disciples draw 
near, and secret disciples come forth, in the hour of humiliation and defeat. The auu 
sets, but not their hope ; and the stars rise, but their faith is earlier up. 

II. Love survives all loss, its burning ray, like that of a hidden gem, flashes 
out in the gloom. The nobleness of Christ had taught them to master selfishness and 
despair. His form was enshrined in the " amber of memory." They who had been 
all eye when he was present, were all recollection now that he was gone. 

III. Geibfs are certain, joys come by surprise. It was certain that Jesus was 
dead; and none expected his resurrection. There is change, not loss, in the kingdum 
of the spirit. God takes away a good to restore it in a new form. Disappointincnt 
vacates the heart for higher blessings. His revelation is in light and shadow. — J. 

Vers. 1 — 15. Parallel passages ; Matt, xxvii. 1, 2, H — 26 ; Luke xxiii. 1 — 7, 13 — 
24 ; John xviii. 28 ; xix. 16. — Judicial processes. I. Jesus sent prom the San- 
hedrim. TO Pilate — from the Jewish trial to the Roman trial. 1. T/ie first 
stage of the Jtwish trial. After the arrest at Gethsemane, our Lord was conducted 
back to the city, across the Kidron to the palace of the ex-high priest Annas, tlie 
fa'uiie,''-in-law of Caiaphas, the actual high priest that same year. The influence of this 
ftinctionary was very great; his age, astuteness, riches, power, perhaps presidency of 
the Sanhedrim — all contributed to it. In answer 'to the inquiries of Annas about out 
Lord's disciples and doctrine, the Saviour appealed to his teachmg in the synasjogue, in 
the temple, always in public ; and referred him to his auditors on these occasions. 
This reply was construed into disrespect towards the ex-high priest, and resulted in the 
first act of violence, apart from the arrest itself; for one of the officers struck Jesus with 
the palm of his hand or with a rod (^dvuriio), as rendered in the margin. This was the 
first of the three stages of the Jewish trial. Here we remark (1) that both Jews and 
Gentiles took part in arresting Jesus anc' conducting him to the high priest. " The band 
and the captain," or chiliarch, that is, tribune, formed the Roman or Gentile element ; 
while the " officers of the Jews " composed the Jewish element. Thus from first tu 
last " the Gentiles and the people of Israel " combined against the Lord and hia 
Anointed. The mention (2) of both Annas and Caiaphas as high priests by St. Luke 
(iii. 2) tallies with the fact that, owing to the arbitrary interference of the Romans, 
there might be several high priests alive at the snme time ; that is, those who had held 
the office and been deposed, and tlie person actually exercising the office. Of course, 
according to the Law of Moses, there could only be one high priest at a time, and that 
rightful high priest was the hereditary representative of Aaron. Even in the Roman 
period the high priesthood had not become a yearly office, though the frequent deposi- 
tions and displacements occasioned many changes and much confusion. Thus Annas 
had been deposed in the twelfth year of our era by Valerius Gratus, the immediate 
predecessor of Pilate in the procuratorship of Judsea; yet, so great was his influence, that 
he had his own son Eleazar, his son-in-law Caiaphas, and four other sons subsequently 
appointed to the high priesthood. (3) The preliminary inquiry before Annas might 
elicit information with regard to the extent of disci [ileship, and so of sym|.-athy among 
the rulers, as in the case of Nicodemus, that miglit be calculated on ; not only so, it 
would result in a prejudgment of the case through the shrewdness and influence of tha 
ex-high priest. Further, a higher object — an object most probably not dreamt of hv 
either Annas or Caiaphas — was aniitypioal. We read in Lev. xvi. that on the great d.i^ 
ot Atoncmeatf Aarou laid both his hands upon the head of the live, or scape, goat, auu 



332 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [ch. xv. 1—47. 

confessed over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their transgressions 
in all their sins, putting them iipon the head of the goat ; and sent him away hy the 
hand of a fit man into the wilderness ; and the goat bore upon him all their iniquities 
into a land not inhabited. Similarly, the high priests concerned in this trial were, in 
the exercise of an analogous function, pronouncing sin to be upon the head of the Victim 
before he was led forth to crucifixiou. 2. The second stage of the Jewish trial. The 
second stage of the Jewish trial cousiited of an informal investigation before Oaiaphas, 
and a committee or commission of the Sanhedrim. In order that a conviction might be 
obtained, it was necessary to secure two witnesses at least to depose to some definite 
charge. But while the testimony of some was irrelevant, that of others was self-contradic- 
tory. At length two volunteered to testify in the case. For this testimony, such as it was, 
they were obliged to travel back over a period of some three years. Then, fixing on 
certain words of our Lord at the first Passover after entering on his public ministry, in 
reference to the temple, they either misunderstood them, or misinterpreted and conse- 
quently misrepresented them. The words in question were constructed into contempt 
of the temple ; this contempt, if fully proved, would have constituted a capital charge, 
just as, in the case of the protomartyr Stephen, the charge was that he ceased not to speak 
" blasphemous words against this holy place and the Law." But this charge was not sub- 
stantiated ; the evidence broke down in consequence of the disagreement of the witnesses. 
Our Lord had said, " Destroy (Kitrare) this temple, and in three days I will raise it up " 
(eT'epa), a word quite suitable to resurrection, but no way appropriate to rebuilding); 
" but he spake of the temple of his body." One of the witnesses perverted this into, " I 
will destroy (KaraKiaa) this temple that Jis made with hands, and within three days I 
will build (oiKoSoiiiiffoi) another made without hands " (ch. xiv. 58) ; the other testified, 
" I can destroy (Siva/uu KaToXEirai) the temple of God, and build (o'lKoSo/ijiircu) it in three 
days " (Matt. xxvi. 61). Accordingly, St. Mark adds, " Neither so did their witness 
agree." What our Lord had spoken in a figurative sense they applied literally ; for 
upraising they substituted building ; what was really a promise they twisted into a 
threat ; if they themselves destroyed their temple, he promised replacement. The temple 
had long been distinguished by the Shechinah glory or visible presence of Jehovah, yet 
was doomed to destruction ; the human body of Jesus, in which dwelt the fulness 
of the Godhead bodily, when raised up would supersede the inhabitation of God in the 
literal temple. 3. Pretence of legality. What now can the members of the Sanhedrim 
present on this occasion do ? They wish to keep up the semblance of law and justice, but 
the evidence has signally failed. The condemnation of Jesus is a foregone conclusion, 
in whatever way it is to be effected, and still the appearance of legality must be main- 
tained. A clever thought occurs to the mind of the high priest, and in default of 
evidence he resorts to the desperate expedient of causing Jesus to criminate himself. 
Accordingly, standing up into the midst («5 niaov), and thus passing from his seat to 
i-ome conspicuous position, as St. Mark graphically describes it, he adjured Jesus most 
solemnly to declare if he were indeed the Messiah, that is, " the Christ, the son of the 
Blessed," viz. if he claimed to be not only the expected Messiah, but also to be a Divine 
person — the Son and equal of God. Whereupon followed the avowal by whichhecriminated 
himself, and gave ground of condemnation. Though he had acknowledged the confession 
of Peter to the same effect, and even commended it ; though he had accepted the same 
or an equivalent title on the occasion of his public entry into Jerusalem, he had not as 
yet publicly claimed it. Now, however, he avowed it in the most public manner, in 
the presence of the high priest and members of council. According to St. Mark, this 
avowal was expressed by "lam;" according to St. Matthew by "Thou hast said;" 
while in St. Luke's report of the third Jewish trial, the two are combined with a trifling 
variation, namely, " Ye say that I am." 4. Hypocrisy in high places. If our Lord had 
remained silent, they would have probably charged him with imposture; now that he 
confessed his Messiahship and future exaltation, they proceeded to condemn him for blas- 
phemy. The council sought nothing further ; they wanted only evidence against him 
—something to inculpate, not to exculpate, him. They did not wish to hear the grounds 
of his claim ; they wanted no explanation. With the Jews the setting up of t. claim to 
any Divine attribute was regarded as blasphemy ; the claim of Christ, according to their 
opinion of him, came under the Mosaic law of blasphemy. And now the hypocrisy of 
the high priest is something shocking. As the highest ecclesiastical functionary of the 



OH. XY. 1—47.] l-HE GOSPEL ACCOROIXa TO ST. MARK. 331 

natioD, and the principal ofiSoer of its great council, his duty surely was to investigate 
the confession and claim of one who professed to embody the hopes of the nation, and 
to scrutinize the true nature of tliat claim, the real meaning of it, the grounds on which 
it rested, the reasons of it, and the evidence for it. On the contrary, he grasped with 
avidity at the prospect of a condemnation. His sense of justice was no higher than hia 
sense of religion ; on anything that might tend to explain, or extenuate, or exculpate, 
he shut his eyes and closed his ears. Bu£ what is still more disgusting in the conduct 
of this ecclesiastic was his abominable hypocrisy. He feigned abhorrence at the crime 
which he was so anxious to establisb. Glad as he was to have this constructive crime 
of blasphemy to allege, he prctendrd the most extreme horror by tearing his garments 
from the neck to the waist. Here, indeed, was " spiritual wickedness in high places." 
5. Tht third stage of the Jewish trial. This was the more formal trial ; it was held at 
dawn of day, and in the presence of the whole Sanhedrim (SKov rh <rvr4Spiov). The 
previoTB trial, being held at night, was invalid ; besides, it had been conducted only by a 
representation — an influential representation or committee of the Sanhedrim, consisting, 
it is probable, mainly of the priests. At the present stage the whole council was present, 
with its three constituent parts — elders, chief priests, and scribes. This is the meeting 
of council mentioned in the fiist verse of the present chapter, and in the parallel verses 
of St. Matthew and St. Luku, viz. xxvii. 1 of the former, and xxii. 66 of the latter, 
^he object was to ratifj' a predetermined decree. They also found it necessary for 
their purpose to change ibe charge, and consequently also the venue. It was more, 
perhaps, with the object of consummating than of ratifying their sentence that this 
meeting was hastily summoned. The judicial murder which they had decided on 
was not in their power to carry out. Had it been so, stoning would have been the 
death-penalty. A deputation of an influential and imposing kind waited upon Pilate, 
to whom the Prisoner is now transferred, either hoping, through the facile condescension 
of the procurator, to get the case remitted to themselves for execution, or to devolve it 
on the Roman governor. 

II. The Roman trial, ob trial before Pilate. 1. Incidents leading to cruci- 
fixion. Cruciflxion was a mode of death unknown to Jewish law, and unpractised by 
the Jewish people. It was fearfully familiar as a mode of execution among the 
Romans — ^this we learn from their writings ; as, " Thou shalt not feed the crows on the 
cross," of Horace; " It makes no difference to Thuouore whether he rots on the ground 
or aloft, i.e. on the cross," of Cicero ; also from such exprt.ssions as the following : — 
" Go, soldier, get ready the cross ; " " Thou shalt go to the cross." It was not, how- 
ever, till the Roman period that it was introduced into Judaea. It was only after Jew 
and Roman had come into collision, and had taken respeci;ively the position of con- 
queror and conquered, of sovereign and subject, that this cruel mode of death found 
its way into the Holy Land. And yet, strange to say, long years before the Romans 
had risen to pre-eminence and power, and centuries before Judaea had been catalogued 
as a province of their vast empire, it had been foretold that Messiah's death would be 
by crucifixion. We refer to the well-known predictiun in the twenty-second psalm, 
where we read, " They pierced my hands and my leet " (" piercing my hands and my 
feet," accoriiing to Perowne ; " geknebelt [' fastened,' as the extremities were in cruci- 
fixion] meine Hande und Fiisse," according to Bwald). Before that prophecy was 
fulfilled a long series of events had to be evolved ; dynasties had to rise and fall ; a 
kingdom had to pass through the hands of many successive rulers and become extinct ; 
an empire, the greatest of ancient times, had to rise to unprecedented power ; that 
kingdom had to be absorbed, and become a province of that empire. In a word, Juda3a 
had to become tributary and Rome triumphant before the event could take place. The 
facts referred to changed the complexion of our Lord's trial. Of the many charges 
they might have manufactured, such as violation of the sabbath law, contempt of oral 
tradition, purification of the temple, heretical teaching, or esoteric doctrines of a 
dangerous kind, they elected that of blasphemy, grounded on his own confession of 
divinity, or of being " the Son of God ; " while he strengtiiens the admission by fore- 
telling that, besides QirKiiy) the verbal avowal, they would have ocular proof when they 
should see him — the Son of man as well as Son of God—" sitting at the right hand of 
power, and coming on the clouds of heaven." This admission was, as we have seen, 
extorted After the suborned witnesses had entirely broken down, and "^he two best «1 



184 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [«h. xv. 1— 47. 

them had shamefully perverted and prevaricated; but, notwithstanding, it was seized 
by the high priest from his false notions of Messiah as an acknowledgment of the 
charge preferred. Stoning was the mode of death which the Law appointed for that 
crime ; but though the Jews could pass sentence, they could not execute it. One of 
the signs of Messiah's advent thus stared them in the face; "the sceptre had [thus] 
departed from Judah, and a lawgiver from between his feet." Accordingly, they were 
obliged to have recourse to the Roman procurator, Pilate ; but then they knew that he 
would not interfere with their relifjious controversies. What now is to be done? 
They take new ground ; they change the accusation from blasphemy to treason, in 
order to subject their Prisoner to the secular power. 2. Charges preferred. The charge 
was really constructive treason, but their indictment as first advanced consisted ol 
three articles. They charged him (1) with perverting the nation ; (2) with forbidding 
to give tribute to Caesar ; and (3) with affirming that he himself was Christ, a King. 
Pilate pays no attention to the first and second, and only notices the third. His mode 
of procedure was in accordance with the Roman respect for law and sense of justice. 
He refused to confirm the sentence of the Sanhedrim, and proceeded to hold a private 
and preliminary examination {hxutplais; as we read in Inike xxiii. 14, avaxplvas), 
having removed Jesus into the Prastorium, or governor's palace. This examination 
Pilate conducted in person, as he had no quaestor ; and was satisfied of the harmless- 
ness of the title of King by the Saviour's explanation that his kingdom wag not of this 
world. Pilate was convinced of our Lord's innocence, but hearing Galilee mentioned, he 
lit once caught at the idea of shifting the responsibility, or at least sharing it with Herod 
Antipas, and at the same time of conciliating the tetrarch by an act of courtesy ; and 
in consequence remitted (ivirrfn^ev) the accused to Herod's as the higher court, or 
technically from the court wpprehensionis to the court originis. Herod, having been 
disappointed by seeing no miracle performed by the reputed miracle-worker, and dis- 
satisfied by his dignified sileuce, sent him back to Pilate, arrayed in a white or gorgeous 
(Xaiiitpav, from \i«t, to see) robe, thus caricaturing his candidateship or claim to royalty, 
and thereby hinting to Pilate that instead of a punishable offence, it was rather a matter 
of contempt and ridicule. Pilate is perplexed, and no wonder; his vacillation now 
begins to take effect. He sins against his sense of justice as a Roman magistrate ; he sins 
against conscience ; he proposes a most unjust and unlawful compromise, namely, the 
chastisement (7roiSe(!iras) of an innocent person. But this concession, unrighteous as it 
was, did not satisfy ; and again he tried to avail himself of the custom of releasing one at 
the feast in compliance with the clamour of the multitude ; but the cry of the populace, 
instigated by the agents of the priests, was, " Not this man, but Barabbas." By a 
symbolic act, this weak judge seeks to transfer the guilt to the infuriate mob, and still 
clinging to the hope that the multitude would be content with a compromise, he delivered 
Jesus to be scourged, and that, not with the rods of the lictors, but with the horrible 
scourge tipped with bone and lead (ippayfXK&aas'). 3. Retrospect at the indignities. The 
fii'st act of insult and violence was, as we have seen, during the inquisition by Annas, 
who sought to entangle him by insidious interrogatories, when one of the officers 
struck Jesus with his hand or with a rod ((SiJirio-^o), as St. John informs us. The next 
was in the course of the second Jewish trial, which was conducted by Caiaphas, and 
by which the confession of being " the Christ, the Son of God," was extorted. In 
describing this sad scene, no less than five forms of beating are mentioned by the 
Evangelists Matthew and Mark and Luke. The latter has (1) Sdpovres, properly to 
skin or flay, and then beat severely ; (2) (rvmov, imperfect, they kept smiting him ; (3) 
itaivas, to inflict blows or strike with violence ; St. Matthew has (4) iicoxi^iaaii, they 
buffeted with clenched fist ; and (5) ippimiray, they struck with open palms or rods ; 
while St. Mark has panliriMaiv . . . ifiaWov, they received him with blows of the hands 
or strokes of rods. It was on this occasion they did spit in his face and blindfold him, 
derisively bidding him " prophesy, who is it that smote thee ? " with many other 
vilifications, in some or all of which the members of the council, as well as the menials 
of the court, took part. We now hasten from such a disgraceful scene — from the 
scornful spitting, the shameful scoffing, the savage smiting, the ribald revilings, the 

shocking cruelties, and the savage barbarities of the miscreants of the Sanhedrim and 

pass on to his treatment by Herod. He juiiis with his men of war in setting oim 
'I pought und mocking hira, and arrays hjm in a goigeous robe, ^ if to caricatuw 



OH. xr. 1—47 ] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 881 

his pretensions, or, as somp think, a bright or white rohe, as though in mimicry of hia 
candidature for royal honours. Thus sent back to Pilate, he is scourged by the pro- 
curator's command. The very thought of that scourging makes the blood run cold 
and the heart sick. All that preceded, cruel as it was and devilish as it was, caused 
but little of bodily pain as compared with the scourging. He had indeed suffered 
dreadfully, in both body and mind. He had been betrayed by one disciple, denied by 
another ; three slept when they should have sympathized ; at length all forsook him 
and fled. He has been hurried from one tribunal to another — from the Sanhedrim t« 
the Roman governor, from the Roman governor to the Tetrarch of Galilee, and from 
Herod back to Pilate. See him the night preceding in the Garden of Gethsem«ne, in 
the midst of his agony, when perspiration bathed his body, and that bloody sweat 
trickled in big drops down to the ground. See him now in the place where he is 
scourged, cruelly scourged, his face marred, his body mangled, the quivering flesh 
fearfully torn with the bits of lead and bone plaited into the leathern thongs, 
while he is still barbarously smitten, and savage stripes inflicted on him. See him 
again, surrounded by a band of ruffian soldiers — provincial or rather Roman soldiers, 
to their disgrace be it recorded — who plait a crown of ndbk thorns, and press 
it down so that the sharp and prickly points more painfully pierce his temples and 
lacerate his bleeding brows. While his body is still smarting f]om the wounds made 
by the scourging, while the blood is still running down on every side from the thorn- 
crown, while insult is being heaped on insult and added to injury, they smite his 
sacred head with a reed as if to gash that head more brutally, and leave the thorns yet 
deeper in the skin. One other act in that bloody tragedy precedes and prepares for 
the crucifixion itself. Instead of the gorgeous or white robe with which Herod and 
his men of war had, in their bitter mockery, clothed him, the Roman soldiers of the 
governor arrayed him with the military scarlet or purple war-cloak, mimicking the 
imperial purple. He is stripped a second time — the mock-garments are pulled off him, 
and his own put on; and thus all his wounds are opened afresh and their pain 
renewed. During the mock-coronation, in which the leaves of thorn burlesqued the 
imperial wreath of laurel, the reed the royal sceptre, and the soldier's cloak the 
emperor's purple, they spat upon him, they smote him on the head, they bowed the 
knee in mockery, and they scoffed him, saying, " Hail, King of the Jews !" 4. Pilate's 
last effort to release him. Once more Pilate makes another efibrt to prevent the 
crucifixion of Christ. Though scourging was usually the frightful preparation for 
crucifixion, yet Pilate is most anxious to proceed no further. He seeks to have it 
regarded, perhaps, in the light of trial by torture without anything worthy of death 
being elicited, or perhaps he wishes to have it accepted as a sufficient substitute 
for crucifixion. With some such purpose — a purpose, as it is generally and properly 
understood, of commiseration — he exhibits the Saviour in that unspeakably sad and 
sorrowful plight — worn, wan, and '^wasted; his features here befouled with spitting, 
there besmeared with blood ; his face disfigured by blows — marred more than any man's 
and his countenance more than the sons of men ; while blood-drops trickle from 
many a wound down on the tesselated pavement. He calls their attention to this woe- 
begone and most pitiable spectacle, saying, in words that have thrilled many a heart, 
and shall thrill thousands in the generations that may be yet to come, " Behold the 
Man ! " But m vain. The only response was a louder, sterner, fiercer cry : " Crucify 
him ! crucify him ! " He deserves to die, " because he made himself the Son of God." 
Moved to the inmost depths of his being, Pilate struggles on for his release ; but, amid 
the loud clamour for the Victim's blood, there are ominous growls that boded a possible 
impeachment on the charge of treason against the governor himself. " If thou let this 
man go, thou art not Caesar's friend ; " " We have no king but Csesar." Shame upon 
those bloodthirsty hypocrites who could say so ; though they hated Caesar and all his 
belongings, and were real rebels at heart ! And shame upon thwt cowardly judge, who, 
as a Roman magistrate, quailed before such cruel clamour, and had not the courage of 
his own certain convictions I 6. Agencies co-operating to compass the crucifxion. II 
we glance for a moment at the various influences that were at work to cumiass our 
Lord's death upon the cross, we find in the foreground the envy and malice of ;hief 
priests and rulers ; the mean-spirited avarice of the wretched traitor Judas ; ihe want 
pf firmness and thorough conscientiousness oji the part of Pilate; the fufy of a fickle 



Sa? THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [cii. xv. 1— 47. 



mob misled by (i(si<;ning demagogues ; the submission of the soldiers to the orders o( 
their superiors; — all obeying the propensities of their own nature, though ignorant of 
the reason or tiie results ; all fulfilling the predictions of Scripture, though not know- 
ing it; and all accomplishing the purposes of God, though not intending it. But in 
the background, as we shall see in connection with the crucifixion itself, it was sin on 
the part of man, and substitution on the part of the Saviour. " He bore our sins," 
says the apostle, " in his own body on the tree." It was determinate counsel and 
foreknowledge on the part of God. In accordance with that counsel and foreknowledge, 
and in consequence of our sin and the Saviour's substitutionary self-sacrifice, " ought 
not Christ to suffer these things ? " Was it not necessary for him to become "obedient 
unto death, even the death of the cross " ? — J. J. G. 

Vers. 16 — 41. Parallel passages : Matt, xxvii. 27— 56 ; Luke xxiii. 26 — 49 ; John 
xii. 17 — 37. — The dosing scene. I. The crucifixion and accompanying events. 
1. The words of the Greed. The words of the Creed, " crucified under Pontius Pilate," 
are familiar to almost every young person who has been trained in the Christian 
religion. All down the centuries the nam* of this Roman knight, who was Procurator 
of Judaea under the Proprsetor of Syria, has been associated with the greatest crime that 
has blotted and blackened the page of history since the beginning of the world. He 
was a descendant of the great Samnite general, C. Pontius Telesinus, and so belonged 
to the Pontian gens. His surname, Pilatus, is usually derived from pilum, a javelin, 
and so means " armed with a javelin ; " though others connect it with pileatus, from 
pileus, a cap worn by manumitted slaves, implying that he had been a freedman, or the 
son of one. His head-quarters were at Csesarea, on the sea, but during the Jewish feasts, 
when such crowds assembled in Jerusalem, in discharge of his duty he came up to 
Jerusalem to keep order. In like manner Herod, whose usual residence was at 
Tiberias, had come up to Jerusalem to keep the feast, ostensibly in conformity to the 
Jews' religion, but more especially to conciliate the favour of the Jewish people. It 
thus happened that the tetrarch and Roman governor were both at Jerusalem at the 
same time — the former occupying the old Asmonean palace, and the latter Herod's 
PraBtorium a palace of Herod the Great, or perhaps a part of Fort Antonia. 2. Pilate't 
embarrassment and earnestness to secure the Saviour's acquittal. He had offended the 
Jews by bringing the Roman standards to Jerusalem, and had been obliged to retrace 
this step ; he bad quarrelled with them about secularizing the corban, or sacred 
treasury money, to jirovide a suitable water-supply for Jerusalem; he had been 
engaged in a deadly feud with the Samaritans ; and had mingled the blood of the 
Galilseans with their own sacrifices. He was thus on bad terms with the people of 
every province in the land, and could not, therefore, afford further to provoke their 
wrath. On the other hand, he had had three warnings — the voice of his own conscience, 
the dream of his wife, Claudia Procula, and the announcement of Jesus' mysterious 
title of " Son of God." On the one side was the fear of the Jews whom he had so 
deeply offended, and fear also of compromising himself with the emperor, now that his 
patron Sejanus had fallen ; on the other were his remaining sense of justice, his respect 
for Jesus as an innocent man, perhaps as something more — so that TertuUian s,:\s of 
him, " Jam pro conscientia Chridtianus" — and the threefold warning already mentioned. 
In consequence he does his best, in his perplexing circumstances, to have Jesus released ; 
for he sent him to Herod, then offered to release him as a favour, according to an 
established custom. Next he thought to substitute scourging for crucifixion; and when 
that had failed, he appealed to their pity. But all to no purpose. What was he to do ? 
Why, assert, as he was bound to do, the power of the Roman law, maintain the cause 
of justice, and obey the voice of conscience at all hazards. But instead of this he 
vacillated at the beginning, temporized afterwards, and yielded to his fears in the end. 
Unhappily, he allowed fear for his personal safety to stifle the voice of conscience. 
3. Tlie crucifixion. Crosses were of different sorts and shapes. There was the craas 
simplex, or simple cross, which was rather a stake on which the body was impaled ; 
there was the crux decussator, or St. Andrew's cross, in the form of the letter X ; there 
was the crux immissa, or Latin cross, in the form of a dagger with point downward f ; 
there was the crux commissa, in the form of the letter T. On account of the inscriphen 
the form of the cross on which our Lord suffwcd ig generally supposed to have beet 



OH. XT. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 337 

that of the third sort. And now we are arrived at the last sad scene in that shocking 
drama. Criminals usually carried their cross, or the cross-beams of it, as they went to 
execution ; hence the term/wrct/er, or cross-bearer. Jesus, exhausted by all he had 
previously endured, and crushed beneath that heavy cross, sank by the way. Simon, an 
African Jew, is impressed into the service {liryyapeiovrt, send out a mounted courier, 
ftom the mounted couriers ready to carry the royal despatches in Persia ; then force to do 
service, compel) and compelled to carry the Saviour's cross. Jesus is fastened to that 
cross ; his hands and his feet are pierced with nails ; the cross is hoisted, and with a 
Hide and sudden dash it is sunk deep into the earth. There the bleeding Victim hangs, 
his bones disjointed, his veins broken, his wounds freshened, his skin livid, his face 
wan, his strength exhausted ; blood flows from his head, blood from his hands, blood 
from his feet, blood from his opened side. There he hangs, wounded, tortured, fainting, 
bleeding, dying. There he hangs upon that cursed tree, the passers-by reviling him 
and wagging their heads, soldiers mocking him, rulers deriding him, malefactors railing 
on him, — a fearful fourfold mockery. He is offered vinegar and gall (or wine and 
myrrh, i.e. wine myrrhed, or made acid), but, in the first instance, will not drink, 
lest it should blunt the pain of dying or cloud his faculties ; " The cup that my Father 
gave me, shall I not drink it ? " He suffers the withdrawment of his heavenly Father's 
countenance, and in consequence exclaims, " Eloi, Bloi, lama sabaohthani>? " — " My God, 
my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? " At length, with a, loud voice, he cries out, 
" It is finished ! " and bows his head in death. We do not marvel at the accompanying 
circumstances, strange and marvellous as they were. No wonder the sun drew back 
from the spectacle, and shrouded his glorious rays in darkness, rather than gaze on such 
a scene. No wonder that dense darkness settled on the land for three long hours. No 
wonder earth trembled and quaked in horror at the foul deed that had been done. 
No wonder that rocks rent and graves opened, and the tenants of the tomb came forth 
as though in consternation, shocked at human sinfulness, and in sympathy with the 
heavenly Sufferer. No wonder the veil of the temple, strong and thick, is torn in 
twain from top to bottom, for the humanity of the Saviour is torn with thorns, 
and smitings, and nails, and spear-thrust ; while he is pouring out bis life unto death. 
4. The inscription. The main part of the superscription, viz. " The King of the 
Jews," is found in the record of each evangelist — the same in all and correct in each. 
In one it is completed by the name, " Jesus," which a Roman, proud of the purity of his 
speech, and jealous of preserving it, naturally enough left out of the Latin title ; in 
another it Is supplemented by the name of the place, "Nazareth;" while the words 
" This is " are only introductory. Otherwise the inscription was trilingual, and exactly 
recorded as written in the three languages by three of the evangelists respectively, 
while St. Mark records the actual charge — the superscription of his accusation (aiT^os) 
common to them all ; and this was the assumption of royalty. 5. The time of the 
crucifixion. The crucifixion really commenced at 9 a.m. The darkness began at 
noon ; death took place at 3 p.m. The apparent discrepancy between the synoptists 
and John xix. 14 is not to be removed by the similarity of the Greek numerals for six 
and three (s' and ■/) respectively, and the supposed substitution or rather misreading 
of the former for the latter in the Johannean Gospel. The reconciliation is more 
probably effected by a difference of time-reckoning — the synoptists adopting the 
Jewish and St. John the Roman method. Thus the delivery and preparations began 
at 6 a.m. according to the latter. 

n. The design of the ceucifixion. 1. Not for personal chastisement. The design 
could not in any sense be for personal chastisement, for Jesus had been " holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners ; " it is expressly stated, too, that he was " cut off, 
but not for himself." Neither could it be as an example, for the example of One per- 
fectly innocent suffering so severely would only discourage the guilty, and might well 
drive them to despair ; for if this were done to a green tree, what would be done to a 
dry— if the guiltless suffered so fearfully, what might the guilty expect? Besides, if 
Christ suffered as an example, what possible good could his example do to those that 
lived before his day ? Neither was it for confirmation of his teaching — to confirm the 
doctrines which he taught and seal them with his blood ; for some of the prophets had 
done this before him, several of the apostles did so after him, and the martyrs all down 
the ages have suffered in like manner. And yet, though thus entitled, according to th« 

MABK — II. 8 



S38 THE GOSPEL ACCORDINa TO ST. MARK. [oh. xv. 1—47 



theory ta question, to stand on the same platform with Jesus, of none of them could it 
ever be asked, with the expectation of an affirmative answer, " Was he crucified for you ? " 
Of no one in all the glorious company of the apostles, or in all the goodly fellowship of 
the prophets, or in all the noble army of martyrs, or in all the holy Church throughout 
all the world, could it be said, " He was crucified for you." How, then, are we to account 
for the unparalleled sufierings of the Son of God ; for the indescribable distress that 
overwhelmed him during those sufferings ? What reason can we render for the transcen- 
dent value ascribed to the gift of God's Son — ^that unspeakable gift ; for the incomparable 
worth of the boon, so that all other benefits sink into insignificance when placed beside 
it? How are we to explain the fact that, amid the utmost chariness of human eulogy, 
we find the highest praises everywhere throughout this Book lavished on the Son of 
God ? How comes it to pass that while we are instructed to " cease firom man, for 
wherein is he to be accounted of? " we are invited to look up with greatest reverence to 
the Man Christ Jesus, as placed far above the proudest pinnacle of earthly grandeur, 
and his name raised high above every name, so that in honour of that name " every 
knee should bow and every tongue confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of 
God the Father"? Even in heaven the Lamb, in the midst of the throne, as ho had 
been slain, is still the marvel of the universe ; while the key-note of the song sung by 
the redeemed jn glory, and ever sounding along the arches of the sky, is, " Worthy is 
the Lamb that was slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and 
honour, and glory, and blessing." What is the solution of all this ? We have no doubt, 
and feel no difficulty in giving a decided and definite answer to all questions of the sort 
proposed, for Scripture itself supplies that answer. It is because he " came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many ; " it is because he 
" hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a 
iweet-smelling savour ; " it is because he " bare our sins in his own body on the tTf,e," 
suffering, " the just for the unjust, to bring us to God ; " it is because " he was made sin 
for us, though he knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in 
him ; " it is because in him " we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of 
sins, according to the riches of his grace." Why, again, are there so many Scriptures all 
bearing on this same subject ? Just to exhibit it under its various aspects and from 
sundry standpoints ; just to explain it more clearly and enforce it more fully ; and, still 
more, to awaken our liveliest interest in it, and impress us with a due sense of its supreme 
and paramount importance. 2. The sufferings of the cross vicarious. Objections have 
been urged against the fairness of the holy suffering in the stead of the unholy, and the 
objectors strive to explain away the fact of such substitution. To such objectors we 
reply — If you object to the fairness of the holy suffering in the room of the unholy, 
and seek to explain it away, we object to the fairness of what you can never explain 
away — of what you must admit, however reluctant, and cannot deny, however desirous. 
If you object to the holy suffering in place of the unholy, we object to the holy suffering 
at all ; and yet you are bound to acknowledge that the Holy One has suffered, and cannot 
venture, so long at least as you credit the Gospel narrative, to gainsay the historic fact. 
But perfect holiness is justly entitled to happiness, and by the law of Heaven is (as it 
should be) entirely exempt from suffering ; and therefore, unless the Holy One suffered in 
the room and stead of the unholy, his sufferings would not only be most unjust, but at 
the same time altogether meaningless. 3. The doctrine of substitution in both secular 
and sacred history. Of the very many instances of this doctrine of substitution met with 
in the pages of both sacred and secular history, a few examples may be here adduced. 
Judah intreated Joseph that he might be kept instead of Benjamin — a bondman in his 
room. After an address of most pathetic and powerful pleading, he says, " Now there- 
fore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord ; and 
let the lad go up with his brethren. For how shall 1 go up to my father, and the lad 
be not with me ? lest peradventure I see the evil that shall come ou my father." In 
the days of King David an unnatural war broke out. • Rebels banded themselves against 
their soverei;jn ; his son became their leader. A disastrous battle was fought in the 
wood of Ephraim, and the young man Absalom was slain. One messenger follows on 
the heels of another, saying, " Tidings, my lord the king ; '' while his question is once 
and again the same, " Is the young man Absalom safe?" The king, it is plain, would 
rather have loet the battle than hii son ; he would have parted with his kingdom 



OIL XT, 1—47.1 THE GOSPEL ACCOKDING TO ST. MAEK. 831 

rather than his son ; nay, he would have given life itself for his son's life. For now, when 
he hafl learnt at length that that fair and favourite son had fallen hy the hand of the 
martial hut merciless Joah, " the king," we read, " was ni uch moved, and went up to the 
ch^mher over the gate, and wept : and as he went, thus he said, my son Ahsaloni, 
my son, my son Absalom ! would God I had died for thee, Absalom, my son, my 
son I " Even Caiaphas enunciated the doctrine, though ignorant of its true hearing and 
unconscious of the great truth it involved, when he "gave counsel to the Jews, that it 
was expedient that one man should die for the people." The sins of the whole people laid 
on the head of the scapegoat, the sins of the individual person transferred to the head 
of the sin offering, — such acts as these symbolically teach the same. When we turn to 
the secular classics, we find that one of the sublimest poems and simplest tragedies of 
antiquity is based on the doctrine of substitution ; it represents a deity suffering in the 
cause of humanity and on account of favours bestowed on man. Another instance, 
and one containing the most genuine example of conjugal affection in the old Greek 
drama, represents a wife giving her life a substitute for that of her husband. So 
familiar was this doctrine to the ancients. The great Theban poet, with wonted power, 
sketches in a few stirring sentences the loyalty and love of the brave Antilochus in 
defence of his aged parent Nestor, the renowned knight of Pylos. Enfeebled by years 
and endangered by younger warriors, his horse wounded by the archery of Paris, his 
chariot impeded, and himself fiercely assailed by the Ethiop Memnon, the old man, in 
trepidation of spirit, called loudly on his son for succour; nor did he call in vain. 
Promptly was his call heard and heeded. The faithful son proved his devotion to his 
sire ; he hastened to his side ; he defended him from the strong spear of the assailant ; 
he saved that sire's life, but not without the sacrifice of his own ; he rescued his parent 
from ruin, but received his own death-blow ; he averted the fate that impended over 
his father, but at the expense of his own heart's blood. Hundreds of years have rolled 
away since that deed of daring and devotedness was done, and still it is enshrined in 
the immortal verse of the Pindaric muse, and the hero's memory embalmed among the 
younger men of ancient days as first in affection to his father. Again, we admire the 
Eoman poet's graphic deliueation of the battle-scene in which the gallant son of 
Mezentius fell. We admire still more the filial affection of that son who, when the 
deadly blow had been aimed at his father, interposed himself in his father's stead, 
received the blow, lost his own life, but saved his father's. " By thy death I live, my 
son; by thy wounds I am saved 1" the veteran warrior exclaimed. In like manner 
the Son of God took the sinner's place, and stood in the sinner's room j and in 
the words of inspiration, the sinner who trusts in him can say, " He was wounded 
for my transgressions, he was bruised for my iniquities: the chastisement of my 
peace was upon him; and with his stripes I am healed." For us the Saviour hung 
upon that cross ; for us that frame writhed in agony ; for us those limbs quivered 
ill torture ; for us that ghastly paleness overspread his face ; for us those eye-strings 
broke in death ; for us that side was pierced with the rude soldier's spear ; for us 
he suffered and for us he died. 4. The power of the cross in conversion. The first 
convert of the Greenland mission was a robber-chief, calli d Kajarnak. That mission 
had long been unsuccessful; the missionaries had been sorely tried. At last, disheartened, 
they were about to leave the country, when one day the bandit, with his followers, 
came to rob the mission tent. On entering, he saw the missionary writing, and won- 
dered what it meant ; the missionary explained to him that, by the marks he was 
making on the paper, he could tell the thoughts that had passed through the mind of 
a man called John hundreds of years before. " Impossible ! " exclaimed the savage 
chief. The missionary, who was finishing his translation of the Gospel of St. John, 
read to these heathen Greenlanders the record of the crucifixion as contained in the 
nineteenth chapter of that Gospel, on which he was then employed. The chieftain and 
his men were strangely interested in the narrative. At length Kajarnak, with much emo- 
tion, cried out, " What had the man done that they treated him so ? " The missionary 
addressed him in reply, "That man did nothing amiss, but Kajarnak has done much 
wrong ; Kajarnak murdered his wife ; Kajarnak has robbed as well as murdered ; 
Kajarnak has filled the land with violence ; and that man was bearing the punishment 
of Kajarnak's sins that Kajarnak might be saved." Tears rolled down the cheek of the 
rude robber-chief, and he besought the missionary to read him all that over again, " for," 



MO THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xv, 1—47. 

he added, " I too would like to be saved." We do not wonder that the story of the crosi 
had such a powerful effect on the first convert in Greenland. 5. Christ's death on th* 
cross a satis/action. The death of Christ did not cause God to love us, but, on the con- 
trary, was the expression of that love; it did not originate God's love to man, but, 
contrariwise, was the effect and evidence of that love ; and in accordance with this we 
read that " God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life." A mighty debt was 
due to the government, law, and justice of God, as well as to his truth and holiness 
and purity; that debt was sin. This huge hindrance barred the way of access to com- 
munion and fellowship with God ; but God himself appointed, accepted, and applied 
the means for the removal of that hindrance and the reopening of the way. Again, the 
Bun is always shining, though we do not always see it ; either clouds overspread the sky 
and cover the fair face of day, or earth rolls round upon its axis, and so during the 
hours of night we are turned away from the sun. Notwithstanding this, the sun is 
ever sending out his rays ; and when the clouds scatter, or the earth rolls round again, 
his full-orbed brightness beams upon us, we see him in the splendour of his shining ; and 
" a pleasant thing it is fer the eyes to behold the sun." So the face of God is ever shining, 
but the clouds of sin darken the sky above us and separate between us and our God ; 
by the death of Christ those clouds are driven away, and that severance ceases ; we are 
brought back into the clear light of unclouded day, and bask in the bright effulgence 
of our heavenly Father's face. The death of Christ on the cross thus bridged the chasm 
that sin had made ; it spanned the gulf that iniquity had fixed ; it opened the new and 
living way to yon bright world above. By the cross is the way of safety and salva- 
tion ; for by that cross our sins were expiated, by that cross propitiation was effected, 
by that cross atonement was made. By that cross, moreover, the Creator and his fallen 
creature were brought together ; by that cross man and his Maker were reconciled ; by 
that cross the offended Sovereign and the rebel sinner were set at one again. In that 
cross we see the vicarious suffering of one for many, the wondrous substitution of the 
just for the unjust, the punishment of the sinner inflicted on the Saviour. Through that 
cross we see the Law magnified, justice satisfied, truth vindicated, government estab- 
lished, sin punished, God glorified, our debt cancelled, the handwriting against lu blotted 
out, and the believing sinner saved. 

"Thus from the Saviour on the cross 
A healing virtue flows ; 
Who looks to him with lively faith 
Is saved from endless woes." 

6. Doulh aspect of Christ's death on the cross. The death of Christ on tlie cross Is a 
purification as well as a propitiation ; it is the source of sanotiScation and the ground of 
satisfaction. In reply to the question of the elder in Revelation, saying, " What are these 
which are arrayed in white robes ? and whence came they ?" the answer is returned, 
" These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and 
made them white in the blood of the Lamb." So, also, in Heb. ix. 14, " How much more 
shall the blood of Chiist, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot 
to God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God ? " There is a 
seeming incongruity in blood purifying. We speak of being defiled with blood or 
stained with blood, but Scripture speaks of blood cleansing, which is the opposite. We 
may to some extent illustrate this by certain ceremonies that had to be gone through 
in olden times by a person who had committed homicide. Among the ancient Greeks 
the person in question forfeited life. The soul of the slain was supposed to demand 
life for life, but that life might be redeemed or bought off by the vicarious substitution 
of a victim. This victim was usually a ram, the slaying of which symbolically denoted 
the surrender of the guilty man's own life. This was the ceremony of atonement to 
appease the soul of the slain, and was called hilasmoi. But another ceremony was 
needed— a ceremony of purification to fit the man, whose guilt had been atoned by the 
propitiatory sacrifice just mentioned, for intercourse with his fellow-men. He then 
stood on the fleece of the ram of atonement or propitiation, in order to come into the 
closest possible contact and most intimate connection with the victim which had, as 
wo have seen, vicariously represented him, when an animal of another kind was 



at XT. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL AOCORDINQ TO ST. MARK. Ul 

eiaughtered as a victim of purification, and slaughtered in such a way that the blood 
which spurted from the wound fell upon the hands of the homicide, and thus tha 
human blood which still cleaved to his hands was conceived to be washed away by the 
blood cf this second victim. This process was called katharmoi, and thus was ha 
purified. The custom to which we have alluded, borrowed, like so many other heathen 
customs, from scattered and distorted fragments of Divine truth, shows, among other 
things, that the idea of cleansing by means of blood was familiar to the ancients. At 
the same time that we use this illustration we do not understand the blood of the cross 
in the gross literal sense, but understand by it the death of Christ upon the cross, and, 
as that was a bloody one, we are not surprised that it should be called in several 
Scriptures his blood. The death of Christ (1) as a propitiation turns away the wrath 
of God, due to sin, from man : this is its propitiatory efficacy. It turns away man 
from sin : this is its purificatory effect. God loved us with an everlasting love, but sin 
he hates with an infinite and everlasting hatred. As a Friend God loves us, but as a 
Lawgiver he denounces our sin, as a Judge he condemns it, and as a King he must root 
it out of his dominions altogether. The love of God is like a mighty river. It has 
flowed from eternity in the majesty of its strength and in the glorious fulness of its 
stream ; but sin rose as a vast obstruction to the current — it lay like a formidable 
boom across the stream. At length, in the fulness of time, the cross of Christ broke 
through the boom, forced aside the obstruction, and opened up the channel ; and now the 
sinner, sheltered beneath the shadow of that cross, can say, " Though thoii wast angry 
with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou hast comforted me." " God was in Christ, 
reconciling the world unto himself." How? " Not imputing unto men their trespasses ; " 
not «har:;ing us with those offences by which we justly incurred his displeasure and 
merited his wrath ; forgiving them, forgetting them, and so reconciled to us, and recon- 
ciling us to him, through the blood of the cross. But the death of Christ (2) is a purifica- 
lion. It purifies the whole man ; its purifying influence goes on, and is needed, till death. 
" Ths blood of Jesus Christ," we read, " cleanseth us from all sin." No doubt it 
oleanseth as a propitiation fiom the guilt of sin, but more especially it cleanseth as a 
purification from the filth of sin. It cleanseth the soul from the love of sin and the 
body from the practice of it; the faculties from thoughts of sin, the members of 
the body from works of sin. The hands are purified from deeds of darkness; they are 
fitted fur and filled with works of faith and labours of love on earth, and thus prepared 
ior sweeping the harps of gold and swelling the symphonies of heaven. The eyes are 
purified ; they are cleared of scales, and opened to see the wondrous things of God's 
Law, and the gracious things of both Law and gospel. Thus, too, are they prepared 
for gazing on the radiant splendour of the eternal throne and the glories of the upper 
sanctuary. The ears are opened to hear what God the Lord says to his servants, and 
are thus prepared at length for drinking in the music of the skies and for being charmed 
with the melodies of heaven. The feet are kept back from every false step and every 
wrong way, and furnished as though with wings to move readily and rapidly in the 
way of God's commandments ; and thus they are prepared at last to stand upon the 
glassy sea and tread the golden streets. The head is freed from every iniquitous 
scheme, and enlightened to comprehend the Divine counsels of mercy ; and thus it is 
prepared to wear a crown, fair in its form, fresh in its colouring, brilliant in its lustre, 
unfading in its beauty, and amaranthine in its bloom. The heart is purified from every 
propensity to evil ; it overflows with the love of God on earth, and waits to have that 
love still more intensifled amid the raptures and ecstasies of heaven. 

III. Lessons taught us by the ceoss. 1. Ood's hatred of sin is seen in the cross. 
We trace the wrath of God in the waters of the flood that swept away the antedi- 
luvians ; in the sin-ruined cities of which few fragments remain to tell where once 
they were ; in the dreary waters that roU over the desolated plain where Sodom and 
Gomorrah once stood ; in the peeled and scattered and sifted race whose fathers' awful 
imprecation, "His blood be upon us, and our children," called down the withering 
eurse of Heaven ; in that dark abode where the angels that kept not their first estate are 
reserved in everlasting chains under darkness unto the judgment of the great day ; in 
that region of despair where the finally impenitent are doomed to weeping and wailing 
and gnashing of teeth, and where the smoke of their torment ascendeth up for ever 
wxd ever, ^d yet the wrath of God, we think, is revealed in clearer light and blazoned 



342 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK, [oh. xv. 1— 4T, 

in more glaring characters In the sacrifice of the cross, because " God spared not his 
own Son," when that Son undertook the penalty of our sin, " but delivered him up for 
us all." 2. Tht highest morality comes from the cross. No theory of morals is so 
persuasive, no precepts so powerful, as the picture of dying love exhibited in the cross. 
" The love of Christ constraineth us," says the apostle ; " because we thus judge, that 
one died for all, therefore all died ; and he died for all, that they which live should no 
longer live unto themselves, but unto him who for their sakes died and rose again " 
(Revised Version) ; and also, " He gave himself for us, to redeem us from all iniquity, 
and to purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works ; " and once more, 
" The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who 
loved me, and gave himself for me." Oh, how can we go on in sin if we reflect, aa wa 
ought, that sin crucified the Lord of life and glory ; if we reflect that it was sin 
inflicted those wounds upon him ; if we remember that sin caused him that agony of 
soul as well as anguish of body, when, in the language of the prophet, he might 
well say, " Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by ? behold, and see if there be 
any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me, wherewith Jehovah hath 
afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger ; " if we consider that our sin was laid upon 
him and borne by him when " he became obedient unto death, even the death of 
the cross," and when "he put away sin by the sacrifice of himself"? The way to 
purify our fallen humanity and elevate the standard of morality is not by moral 
lessons, however proper and usefnl in their own place, but by leading sinners to the 
foot of the cross, and by pointing to that cross as embodying three arguments, than 
which there is nothing more potent or more powerfully persuasive in all the universe 
besides. The first argument which the blood that flowed on that cross embodies is the 
mercy of God the Father, in reopening the channel of his love which sin had dammed 
up and closed. The second argument is the love of God the Son, in assuming our 
nature, in agonizing and sweating, in being smitten and scourged and spit upon and 
scorned, in being cruelly crowned and crucified; and all to "finish transgression, and to 
make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting 
righteousness." The third argument is the grace of God the Holy Spirit, in sprin- 
kling the blood thus shed on the conscience, when he brings home the death of Christ, 
in the power and demonstration of faith, to the sinner's heart. How is it possible to 
resist this triple argument ? How is it possible to go on in sin, which caused our Lord 
such suffering, and when such love— the love of the Trinity — is constraining na to 
abandon it for ever? 3. The innocence of the Sufferer. Heaven and earth attested his 
innocence. Friend and foe bore witness to it. A noble Roman lady, wife of the 
governor, warned her lord, saying, " Have thou nothing to do with that just man." Pilate 
himself, the judge, informed chief priests and people, "I find no fault in this man." 
Again a second time, having assembled chief priests and rulers and people, he affirmed 
publicly and positively Jesus' innocence in the following strong terms : — " Behold, I, 
having examined him before you, found no fault in this man touching those things 
whereof ye accase him: no, nor yet Herod: for he sent him back unto us; and behold, 
nothing worthy of death hath been done by him " (Revised Version). Once more, foi 
the third time, he asserted his innocence, saying, " Why, what evil hath he done 1 
I have found no cause of dciith in him." Judas, the traitor, admitted the same thing, 
laying, " I have betrayed innocent blood." The Roman centurion, who superintended 
the eieoutiou, cried out, " Certainly this was a righteous man;" and again, after he 
had seen the earthquake and those things that were done, " Truly this was the Son of 
God," One of the malefactors, his companion in suffering, frankly acknowledged, 
" This man hath done nothing amiss." The whole record of his trial furnishes the 
plainest and most positive evidence of his innocence. Satan had tried him, and found 
nothing in him. God the Father had owned him three times by an audible voice 
from heaven. He had committed no offence against the religion of the land, no crime 
against the laws of his country, no sin against God. He went about continually doing 
good; he was acknowledged to have done all things well; he was " holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners." 

" We held him as condemn'd by Heaven, 
An outcast from his God, 
While for our sins he groau'd, he bled, 
Beneath his Father's rod. 



SB. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 849 

" His Baored blood hath wasVd onr aonls 
From sin's polluted stain; 
Hie stripes have heal'd ua, and his death 
Bevived our bouIs again." 

1. ITis teven sayings on the cross. Of these three are recorded by St. Luke, other 
three by St. Jobu, and the remaining one by both St. Matthew and St. Mark. The first 
of those seven sayings, or seven words,, is a prayer for his murderers : " Father, forgive 
them ; for they know not what they do." There is no doubt that they were acting in 
ignorance and unbelief; yet they were not excusable on that account, for men are 
accountabi* for their belief, and especially so when they have abundant means of recti- 
fying their misbelief or removing their unbelief. The spirit of forgiveness which this 
prayer breathes is truly wonderful. There is an entire absence of revenge and of all 
vindictiveness, and yet this was only the negative side ; there was the positive feeling 
of love to his enemies, pity for his murderers, and prayer for those who used him so 
despitefully. Thus he practised what he preached, and exemplified what he taught in 
the condition of the petition, " Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that tres- 
pass against us." The second of those words is apromise to the penitent sufferer bende 
him : " To-day shalt thou be with me in Paradise." At first it would ajipear that both 
malefactors had railed upon him, or the plural is used idiomatically fur the singular. 
One became penitent, rebuking the railing of his fellow-sufferer. By faith he looked to 
the pierced One at his side, and mourned. His faith became marvellously strong in an 
incredibly short space. The right rendering of his prayer in the Revised Version makes 
this more manifest : "Jesus, remember me when thou comest in thy kingdom." The 
common rendering of into, as if it were tls with the accusative, would imply that 
Jesus passed into his kingdom at the hour of his dissolution, so that faith woidd not 
have long to wait ; but the expression " in thy kingdom " (iv with the dative) points 
not to the immediate future like the former, but to the more distant future when Jesug 
would come again in his kingdom ; and still the faith that prompted the petition patiently 
looked forward to that far-off day. Thus there is no sinner beyond the reach of 
mercy ; no time too late to seek salvation ; and no prayers of faith rejected. The soul 
united to Jesus is safe in big arms, and admitted to glory soon as separated from the 
body. The third saying is a provision for his wiflowed mother in her sore bereave- 
ment : " Woman, behold thy son ! " and to the disciple he said, " Behold thy 
mother 1 " It was to the beloved John the intimation was given to treat the Virgin 
mother as his own mother, while Mary was to regard and depend on John as her son. 
The hint was understood by both ; the new relationship was accepted, John under- 
took the responsibility, and Mary confided herself to his care. Jesus, as he hung in 
agony, was thus mindful of his mother, making careful provision for her. What a 
lesson of filial love is taught us here 1 What a lesson of dutifulness to a parent, 
especially when that parent is bereaved and desolate 1 The fourth saying is a position 
of spiritual loneliness : " My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? " Here there 
is faith, but faith wanting the assurance of sense. There is faith in Jesus acknow- 
ledging God as his God ; but a sense of the Divine presence is absent. The complaint uf 
Divine abandonment is caused by that absence, and the deserted soul is in agony. The 
condition of the Christian is sometimes similar — when, like Job, he goes forward, but 
God is not there ; backward, but he cannot perceive him ; and when he turns himself to 
every side, but cannot find him. But oh, how great the difference 1 Such a season of 
darkness is for the most part occasioned by sin ; so in our Saviour's case it was indeed 
for Bin, but not his own 1 The fifth is the pain of bodily suffering : " I thirst." The 
pain of thirst is worse to bear than that of hunger ; when long continued it is distressing 
in the extreme. Men who have travelled in a desert district or under a tropical sun 
can realize the severity of this condition. In the case of our Lord there was a peculiar 
aggravation. Near the cross bad been placed a vessel of sour wine (posca) for thi 
use of the soldiers, the sight of which would increase the feeling of thirst and pain 
on the part of the Sufferer. Nor was that all ; among the cruel mocking of our Lord in 
the earlier stage of the crucifixion was the circumstance that the soldiers tantalized 
him by raising to his lips their jar or sponge of vinegar, and then suddenly withdrawing 
rt, for we read, " The soldiers also mocked him . . . offering him vinegar." The sixth 
\s tiie perfection of his work : " It is finished." As has been beautifully said, " Finished 



344 THE GOSPEL AOOORDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oh. xv. 1-47. 



was his holy life ; with his life his struggle, with his struggle his work, with hia work 
tlM ndemption, with Hie redemption the foundation of the new world." 

" ' 'Tis finislied I ' was hia latest voioe 
These sacred accents o'er, 
He bow'd his head, gave up the ghc 
Aud Buffer'd pain no more. 

■ « "Tis flnish'd ! ' The Messiah dies 
For sins, but not his own ; 
The great redemption is complete, 
And Satan's power o'erthrown. 

• ' 'Tis finish'd I ' All his groans are part ; 
His blood, his paia, and toils, 
Have fully vanquishfed our foes. 
And orown'd him with their spoils. 

" "Tis finished I ' Legal worship ends, 
And gospel ages run ; 
All old things now are pass'd away, 
And a new world begun." 

The WTenth is presentation of his spirit to his Father : " Father, Into tliy liands I 
commend my spirit." Many a time have these words waked a corresponding senti- 
ment in the dying Christian's breast ; many a time have they been used by the dying 
Christian to express his soul's surrender to God. Similarly the protomartyr's " Lord 
Jesus, receive my spirit." Likewise in the language of ancient piety, " Into thine hand 
I commit my spirit : thou hast redeemed me, Lord God of truth." Hence too we 
infer the immateriality of the soul, and its independence of the body. Here also wa 
learn how to die, yielding our soul into the hand of our heavenly Father. — J. J. Q. 

Vers. 42 — 47. Parallel passages: Matt.xxvii.57 — 61; Lukexxiii.50 — 56. — ITieburial 
I. Seoekt disciples. Among secret disciples of our Lord were Joseph of Arimathasa and 
Nicodemus. The residence of the former was Eamah, or Eamathaim, the name signi- 
fying a hill ; while some identify it with Eamleh in Dan, others with Eamathaim iu 
Ephraim, and others, again, with Eamah in Benjamin. But the character of the man is 
of mnch more importance to us than his place of abode. Accordingly, one evangelist 
describes him, as has been ingeniously jjointed out, according to the Jewish ideal, as a 
rich man, — so St. Matthew ; a second according to the Eonian ideal, as an honourable 
(cuffX^/iay) councillor, or councillor of honourable estate (Eevised Version), — so St. Mark ; 
while a third according to tlie Greek ideal, as good and just, somewhat similar to the 
Greek Ka\hs kb! iiyaeds, implying a person of good social position and respectable culture, 
and thus presumably of correct morals, — so St. Luke. In any case, the third Gospel 
represents him as a moral man and a religious man — two characteristics that should 
never be dissociated. We are further informed that Joseph, being one of the seventy 
Sanhedrists, protested against the conduct of the Sanliedrim in their condemnation of 
our Lord. Though it is not expressly stated, we may be sure that Nicodemus, the 
same who is characterized as coming to our Lord by niuht, if present, joined him in the 
protest ; but they were a small minority, and so the majority of that body accomplished 
their counsel and crime. Of Joseph's discipleship St. Matthew says, " Who also himself 
was Je.sus' disciple ; " and St. Luke, " Who also liimself \v aited for the kingdom of God." 
The aZso in both cases implies that he was a faithlul follower of Christ, though in secret, 
as well as the more open disciples ; while St. John tells us the reason of the secrecy in 
the words, " secretly for fear of the Jews." He now laid aside his timidity, and proved 
himself no longer deficient in Christian courage ; for he went in boldly (roKnicta) to 
Pilate and craved the body of his Lord. Tliough "not many mighty according to the 
flesh, not many noble," are called ; yet, thank Gud I there are still some such. Among 
ttiese, Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, a master in Israel, a Sanhedrists or member of the 
great national council, who had absented himself, or at all events refused consent t« 
the condemnation, " brought a mixture of myrrh and alpes, about a hundred pouna 
weight," for his bvuial. On mention of Nicodemus, it is remarkable we are still reminded 



OT. XV. 1—47.] THE GOSPEL AOCOBDETQ TO BT. MABK. 841 

of his night interview with our Lord. " He that came to Jesus by night," says St. John, 
and again, " which at first came to Jesus by night," as is added by the same evangelist. 
Now he too has been emboldened by the cross. Joseph, on obtaining the body, laid 
it in his own new tomb, so that the prediction was fultilled to the effect that, though 
his grave was made with the wicked intentionally, that is, according to the intention 
of Ms enemies, yet was actually with the rich in his death. Crucified with male- 
factors, it was intended and expected that-he would share their fate in buriaL Not so, 
however ; for though he died as a criminal, he was not buried as one. 

II. The BURFBisE of Pilate. The usual time for death to supervene in the case of 
persons crucified was some three days, the very shortest a day and a half. Consequently 
Pilate expresses bis astonishment, and requires the evidence of the centurion to satisfy 
him of Jesus' death. He first asks in surprise if he were already dead (r^Svijice), and 
then, calling the centurio'n, inquires if he had been any while dead (Im^Bayt), Here the 
accurate use of the Greek tenses is worthy of attention, and brings out the governor's 
amazement more clearly. His first inquiry is expressed by the perfect, and refers to 
the state — if he was already in the state of death ; satisfied of that, and not a little sur- 
prised, he asks an additional question {iimp^TTiirtr) of the centurion, and in this second 
inquiry he employs the aorist in relation to the occurrence — if death had occurred any 
\ength of time previously, or how long, in any case to make sure it was not a swoon. 
It has been stated and maintained, on respectable medical authority, that the direct 
cause of Christ's death was rupture of the heart. In that case the blood passed from 
the interior of the heart out into the heart-sac, and, like all extravasated blood, separated 
into the red clot and watery element. This would agree well with the suddenness of 
the Saviour's death, after only some six hours on the cross — a circumstance which, as 
we have just seen, took Pilate himself so much by surprise ; whereas crucifixion usually 
caused death by exhaustion, and after many hours' lingering. This would also agree 
well with the loud voice of that cry which the Saviour uttered when he yielded up the 
ghost. This would agree well with the quantity of blood shed to fill that fountain, of 
which the prophet speaks, saying, "In that day there shall be a/oimtain opened to the 
house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for nncleanness j " for in 
crucifixion the loss of blood is diminished by the nails choking up the wounds they 
make. This would agree well with such Scriptures as the following : — " Keproaoh hath 
broken my heart ; " " My heiirt is like wax ; it is melted in the midst of my bowels." 
This would, moreover, agree well with the fact that when he poured out his soul unto 
death, his bodily sufferings, bitter as they were, had less effect than his mental agony 
in producing that death. This would still further agree well with what occurred when 
the soldier pierced the Saviour's side with his broad-headed spear. That rude Roman 
had no command to infiict such a wound ; it was mere bootless barbarity on his part. 
The body was dead ; why gash it so, except perhaps to make sure it was death and not 
syncope? Nevertheless, he fulfilled prophecy without thinking it; he realized the 
opening of the prophet's fountain without knowing aught about it. He made a passage 
for the blood and water already escaped from that broken heart ; he helped to open the 
fountain that cleanseth from all sin. 

in. SiGNiFioANOB OF THE BLOOD AND WATEB. The blood and water that flowed from 
the fountain thus opened in the Saviour's side are significant of the two great blessings 
which believers partake through Christ. There was blood for redemption, water for 
regeneration; blood for remission, water for renewal; blood for pardon, water for 
purity ; blood to put away the guilt of sin, water to purge away its filth ; blood for 
justification, water for sanctification ; blood for atonement (and this is the special 
work of the Son of God), water for purification (and this is the province of the Spirit 
of God) ; blood and the sacramental wine is a symbol of it, water and the baptismal 
element is a sign of it. Thus the two great agents in salvation — the Son of God and 
the Spirit of God ; the two great works they accomplish — redemption and regeneration ; 
the two great doctrines of a standing and spiritual Church — justification and sanctifica- 
tion — are kept fresh in the memory and visible to the eye by the sacramental seals of 
the covenant In allusion, probably, to this St. John (1 Epist. v. 6) says, " This is he 
that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ ; not with water only, but with the 
water and with the blood " (Revised Version). These two must always go together ; 
these two fiowed forth together from the pierced side of the Saviour ; these two the 



M6 



THE (JOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [oh. xvi. 1—20 



apostle has joined together. These two form the streams of the prophetic fountain j 
and by means of the twofold stream of this fountain "ye are washed, ye are sanctified 
ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God." 

" Book of ages, cleft for me, 
Let me hide myself in thee ; 
Let the water and the blood. 
From thy riven side which flow'd. 
Be of sin the double cure, 
Cleanse me f^om its guilt and power." 

rV. Thb funeral. The funeral consisted, as far as we can learn, of few pertong. 
There are only four persons named by name as present on the occasion — two men and 
two women ; though it is probable that a few females besides, who had accompanied 
him ftom Galilee, were also at least spectators, as St. Luke tells us that " the women 
also, which came with him from Galilee, followed after, and beheld the sepulchre, and 
how his body was laid." Joseph wrapped the body in the fine linen he had purchased, 
and sprinkled the myrrh and aloes among the folds, then laid the body in the rock- 
hewn tomb, and rolled a stone of large size to close therewith the entrance of the 
sepulchre. In these several operations, but especially in that of rolling the huge stone, 
Joseph was assisted, we may be certain, by Nicodemus, and both by their servants or 
attendants; while Mary of Magdala, and Mary the mother of Joses, and the other 
women from Galilee, were looking on. They beheld {iBe^pouy), carefully observing tha 
place and manner of the sepulchre. — J. J. G. 



EXPOSITION. 



CHAPTER XVL 



Vei. 1. — And when the sabbath was past, 
Mary Magdalene, and JIary the mother of 
James, and Salome, bought spices ^iiySpacrav 
apdiuLTo) that they might come and anoint 
hxm. A hasty but lavish embalming of our 
Lord's sacred body had been begun on 
Friday evening by Joseph and Nicodemus. 
They had " brought a mixture of myrrh and 
aloes, about a hundred pound weight " (John 
xix. 39). This would be a compound — the 
gum of the myrrh tree, and a powder of the 
fragrant aloe wood mixed together, with 
which they would completely cover the 
body, which was then swathed with linen 
cloths (6661/10), also steeped in the aromatic 
preparation. Then the lindon would be 
placed over all. Compare the ipeTi\t^ei> of 
St. Luke (xxiii. 53), as applying to the 
tindon, with the eSriaav of St. John (xix. 
40) as applying to the iedvio. This verse 
records a further stage in the embalm- 
ing. What had been done on the Friday 
evening had been done in haste, and 
yet sufficiently for the preservation of the 
sacred body, if that had been needful, from 
decay. The remaining work could be done 
more carefully and tenderly at the tomb. 
Observe the aorist in this verse (J]y6pairav), 
" they bought ; " not " they had bought." 

Ver. 2. — And very early on the ^st day 
of the week {Klav Trpui rf /tia rwv aafifiiTav), 
they come (epxavrai) — not "they came," 
Bt. Mark is fond of the graphic present- 



to the tomb when the son was risen. They 
bought the spices that they needed oa the 
Saturday evening, after the sabbath waa 
past; and then set out early the next 
morning, reaching the tomb when the smi 
was risen. 

Ver. 3. — And they were saying (f^eyoy) 
among themselves, Who shall roll ns away 
the stone from the door of the tomb f The 
usual form of tombs in Palestine was the 
following: — There was generally an ap- 
proach to the tomb open to the sky ; then 
a low eutrance on the side of the rock, 
leading into a square chamber, on one side 
of which was a recess for the body, about 
three feet deep, with a low arch over it. 
The stone here referred to by the women 
would be the stone which covered the actual 
entrance into the vault. It would probably 
be not less than six feet in breadth and 
three in height. This great stone had been 
rolled by Joseph to the mouth of tlie tomb ; 
and then he had departed. Now, as the 
women approached, " they were saying (?A€- 
7oy) among themselves. Who shall roU us 
away (iiro/cuXfo-ei) the stone ? " They had 
seen the arrangements, and had observed 
the size of the stone on the Friday evening, 
(ch. XV. 47). 

Ver. 4.— And looking np (aya$\^airai), 
they see (Oeupovaiv) that the stone is rolled 
back (&iraKEK(;A.i(rTai) : for it was exceeding 
great (fieyas <r<j)6dpa). At this point wa 
learn frum St. John that Mary Magdalene ran 
away to tell Peter and John (John zx. 8). 



. XVI. 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 



847 



Ver. 5. — And entering into the toml), they 
saw a yonng man sitting on the right side, 
arrayed in a white rohe; and they were 
amazed. They enter the tomb, the expres- 
Bion "tomb" including the ante-ohamber. 
They see that the stone has been rolled 
back, so as to expose the entrance into the 
place where Jesus had lain. On that stone 
a young man was sitting. The angel ap- 
peared in the form of a young man, because 
youth indicates the vigour, the beauty, and 
the strength of angels. The good angels 
always appear in beauty and comeliness 
of form. There will be no deformity in 
heaven. The angel appeared as arrayed in 
a white robe. This white robe, or talar, 
indicated a heavenly spiritual being. St. 
Matthew (xxviii. 3) says that " his counte- 
nance was like lightning," flashing with 
splendour, and his raiment was as white as 
snow. It may be that he appeared more 
terrible to the keepers (Matt, xxviii. 4), 
and that he abated something of his 
dazzling brightness when he appeared to 
the women; but "they were affrighted" 
(e{e8a;Uj8^fl);(ray) ; literally, they were amazed. 
Amazement was the dominant feeling, 
though probably not unmingled with fear. 

Yer. 6. — ^And he saith unto them, Be not 
amazed — fiii iK9afi$e7<r6£, the same word — 
ye seek Jesus, the Kazareue, which hath been 
oraoided: he is risen; he is not here: behold, 
the place where they laid him ; that is, behold, 
here it the place where they laid him (ISi, 6 
tSvos). St. Matthew (xxviii. 6) says, " Come, 
see the place where the Lord lay " (AeuTe, 
tiere rhv r6vov). This seems to imply that 
the women actually entered the inner 
chamber, and saw the very place where the 
Lord lay. Who does not see here how irre- 
fragable is the evidence of his resurrection ? 

Ver. 7. — ^But go, tell his disciples and 
Peter, He goeth before you into Galilee; there 
shall ye see him, as he said unto yon. 8t. 
Gregory (' Horn, in Evan.') says, " If the 
angel had not named Peter, he would not 
have dared to come amongst the disciples. 
Therefore he is specially named, lest he 
ahould despair on account of his denial." 
It wa» evidently intended as a special 
message of comfort to Peter. St. Luke 
(xxlv. 34) records the personal appearance 
of our Lord first to Peter. Here St. Mark, 
with cliaraoteristio modesty, keeps Peter in 
the background. In eh. xiv. 28 our Lord is 
recorded to have said, " After I am raised 
up, I will go before you into Galilee." He 
would go before them as their Shepherd, 
and lead them to that part of the Holy Land 
which, as he had honoured it before his 
resurrectwD, to he would honour it again 

DOW. 

Ver. 8. — And they went ont— the word 
(toxJi) " quickly " is omitted — and fled from 



the tomb; for trembling and astonishment 
had oome upon them {rpS/juis Kcd eKiTTarts)— 
agitation and ecstasy ; they were in a state 
of the utmost excitement. And they said 
nothing to any one; for they were afraid. 
Tlie vision of angels had terrified them. 
They were probably afraid to say anything 
to any one, on account of the Jews, lest it 
should be said that they had stolen the body 
of Jesus. It has been well remarked that 
independent accounts of events occurring in 
a time of supreme excitement, and related 
by trustworthy witnesses, but from ditferent 
points of view, naturally present difiSoulties 
which cannot be cleared up without a full 
knowledge of all the particulars. (See 
' Speaker's Commentary ' in Matt, xxviii. 9.) 

Ver. 9. — Now when he was risen early on 
the first day of the week, he appeared first 
to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast 
out seven devils. St. Luke (viii. 2) mentions 
that " seven devils had gone ont of her ; " 
and St. Mark repeats it here, to show the 
power of love and penitence, that she was 
the first to be permitted to see the risen 
Saviour. The vision of the angel had 
scared her, and she said nothing ; but the 
actual sight of her risen Lord gave her 
confidence, and she went immediately, in 
obedience to his command, and told the 
disciples (see John xx. 11 — 18). She 
had lingered about his tomb; her »trong 
affection riveted her to the spot. 

Ver. 10. — She went and told eKfivri irop(v 
Bfiira airfiyy^iKe) them that had been with 
him, as they mourned and wept. The aorist 
here indicates immediate action. This word 
iropiieffBai occurs again in vers. 12 and 15, 
but nowhere else in St. Mark's Gospel. It 
is to be noticed, however, that it occurs twice 
in the First Epistle of St. Peter, and once 
in his Second Epistle. This seems to con- 
nect St. Peter with the writer of these 
Terses. 

Ver. 11. — And they, when they heard that 
he was alive, and had been seen of her, 
disbelieved (jiiriaT-nirav). They refused to 
believe on the bare statement of Mary 
Magdalene, although M. Benan says, " 8a 
grande affirmation de femme, ' II est res- 
Buscit^l' a ete la base de la foi de 
I'humanit^." They did not believe her 
until the risen Lord stood before them. 
(See 'Speaker's Commentary' (St. Mark), 
p. 297.) 

Ver. 12. — And after these things he was 
manifested in another form unto two of them, 
as they walked (Tropsvo/ievois) on their way 
into the country. This appearance is doubt- 
less the same as that whic^ is related fully 
by St. Luke (xxiv. 13). 

Ver. 13. — And they went away and told U 
unto the rest : neither believed they them 
This want of faith happened by the per 



848 



THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINQ TO ST. MARK. [oh. xvl 1—20. 



mlsgion ancl prsvidenco of God. "This 
their unbelief," says St. Gregory, " was not 
BO much their infirmity as oar future con- 
stancy OK the faith." 

Ver, 14. — And afterward (tarepoy 8J) he 
■wsiB manifested {l<j>cwepcieii) nnto the eleven 
ibemselves (avrois rois IvScko) as they sat at 
meat. There is an emphasis here on the 
word " tliemselves." The former appear- 
ances had been to persons not having any 
official character. But now he appears to 
the eleven apostles, when they were all 
gathered together at the close of that 
memorable day. " Unto the eleven." If, as 
seems evident, this appearance refers to the 
day of our Lord's resurrection, there would 
be only ten present ; for Thomas was not 
then with them. Still, they might be called 
the eleven, because the apoatoLio college 
was reduced to eleven after the betrayal by 
Judas ; so that they might still be called 
the eleven, although Thomas was absent. 
St. Bernard says on this, " If Christ comes 
and is present when we sit at meat, how 
much more when we kneel in prayer I " 
He upbraided them {avelSurs). This is a 
strong word of rebuke. They ought to have 
received the testimony of competent wit- 
nesses. But their doubts were only removed 
by the evidence gf their senses ; just as 
afterwards in the case of Thomas. St. 
Mark is always careful to record the rebukes 
administered by our Lord to his apostles. 

Vers. 15, 16. — And he said unto them, Go 
ye into all the world, and preach the gospel 
to the whole creation (Trdirri -rf; ktIo-ci)- He 
that helieveth and is baptized shall be saved ; 
but he that disbelieveth shall be condemned. 
Here is a considerable interval of time, not 
noticed in any way by the evangelist. And 
he eaith unto them ; not on the day of his 
resurrection. It would seem that this 
charge was delivered to them in Galilee, 
and that it is the same as that recorded in 
St. Matthew (xxviii. 19), which was again 
repeated immediately before his ascension 
from Bethany. Go ye into dU the world ; not 
into Judaea only, but everywhere. This 
command has expanded with the discovery 
in later times of new portions of the in- 
habited earth ; and must ever be coex- 
tensive with geographic discovery. Preach 
the gospel to the whole creation; that Is, 
" among all nations." Man is the noblest 
work of God. All the creation is gathered 
up in him, created after the image of the 
Creator. Ee that believeth and is baptized 
shall be saved ; but he that disbelieveth shall 
be condemned. These words are very im- 
portant. The first clause opposes the 
rotion that faith alone is sufficient for sal- 
vation, without those works which are the 
fruit of faith. He that believtth and is 
haptited shall be saved; that is, he that 



believeth, and as an evidence of his faith 
accepts Christ's baptism, and fulfils the 

S remises and vows which he then took upon 
imself, working out his own salvation with 
fear and trembling, shall be saved. But he 
that disbelieveth shall be condemned (A Si 
cmiiTT-fiffas, KaTaKpiB^ffeToi), The condem- 
nation anticipates the doom which will bs 
incurred by continual unbelief. 

Vers. 17, 18. — ^And these signs shall 
follow them that believe. Such evidences 
were necessary in the first dawn of Chris- 
tianity, to attract attention to the doctrine; 
but our Lord's words do not mean that they 
were to be in perpetuity, as a continually re- 
curring evidence of the truth of Christianity. 
St. Gregory (ou 1 Cor. xiv. 22) says, " These 
si^ns were necessar) in the beginning of 
Christianity. In order that faith might 
take root and increase, it must be nourished 
by miracle j <3r so even we, when we plant 
shrubs, only water them until we see that 
they are taking root, and when we see that 
they have rooted themselves, we cease to 
water them. And this is what St. Paul 
means where he says ' Tongues are for a sign, 
not to those who believe, but to the un- 
believing ' (1 Cor. xiv. 22)." In my name 
shall they cast out devils. St. Mark, of all 
the evangelists, dwells most perhaps on this, 
as characteristic of oui Lord's work, and as 
the evidence of his supreme dominion over 
the spiritual world. They shall speak with 
new tongues. This was the first intimation 
of the great miracle to be inaugfuiated on 
the day of Pentecost. The gift was con- 
tinued but for a very limited time. They 
shall take up serpents. The instance of St. 
Paul at Melita (Acts xxviii. 3 — 5) would be 
familiar to St. Mark's readers. And if they 
drink any deadly thing, it shall in no wise 
hurt them. There are some few traditionary 
notices of the fulfilment of this promise i 
as in the case of "Justus Barsabas," 
mentioned by Eusebius ('H.E.,' iii. 19), 
and of St. John, mentioned by St. Augus- 
tine. It may , be observed of this passage, 
that no one could have interpolated it after 
the cessation of the signs to which it refers, 
which took place very early. 

Ver. 19. — So then the Lord Jesus, after he 
had spoken unto them, was received up into 
heaven. Here is another interval. The 
evangelist has gathered up some few of the 
most important words and sayings of Christ ; 
and now he takes his reader to Bethany, the 
scene of our Lord's ascension. It has been 
well observed (see Bishop Wordsworth, in 
loo,') that the fact of the Ascension is gradu- 
ally revealed in the Gospels. St. Matthew 
does not mention it at all. St. Mark refers to 
it in this brief and very simple manner. But 
St. Luke describes it with great fulness, both 
in his Gospel and in the Aoti of the 



OH. xvL 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACOORDING TO ST. MAEK. 



84t 



Apostles, throughout which book he leads 
his readers to contemplate Christ as as- 
cended into heaven, and as sitting at God's 
right hand, and as ruling the Church and 
the world from the throne of his glory. 

Ver. 20.— And they went forth, and 
prejohed everywhere, the Lord working with 
them, and oonSiming the word by the signs 
that followed. Amen. These words are 
alluded to in several passages by Justin 
Martyr (about A.D. 160), and, for the reasons 
given above, ooold not have been written 



later than the time of miracles being 
wrought. They form a fitting introduction 
to the Acts of the Apostles. Cornelius & 
Lapide concludes his Commentary upon St. 
Mark with the following beautiful apos- 
trophe of St. Augustine : — " O kingdom ol 
everlasting blessedness, where youth never 
grows old, where beauty never fades, where 
love never waxes cold, where health never 
fails, where joy never decreaaei, where lift 
never ends I " 



HOMILBTIOS 

Vers. 1 — 8. — 3%« empty sepulchre. In this passage there is no direct namtlTe of the 
Saviour's resurrection. The evangelist probably tells what, and only what, he had 
heard from credible and well-known witnesses. There were no such witnesses to the 
act of the Lord's emergence from the tomb. But the Marys and Salome had stated 
what they had seen and heard. They declared that, although they went early to the 
sepulchre, they found it both open and empty. They related their interview with the 
young man, the angel, who informed them that Jesus had risen. And it is upon their 
testimony that the evangelist bases in the first instance his gospel of the resurrection. 

L LOVB WILL FIND OCCASIONS AND WAYS OF EXPRESSING ITSELF. Ll OUT Lord's 

ministry, devout and attached women had often provided for his wants. When the 
end of that ministry arrived, these affectionate friends were found faithful to their 
Master ; they were amongst the witnesses of his crucifixion and his death. Nor did 
they then withdraw, but lingered by the lifeless body until it was deposited in the 
new-hewn tomb. Even then their love was not satisfied ; it remained for them to 
finish the rites which had been so hastily performed by Nicodemus and Joseph, and so 
abruptly suspended by the sunset which was the commencement of the Jewish sabbath. 
Behold them, accordingly, in the garden immediately after sunrise. On the past 
evening they have purchased spices ; and they have now, at early morning, come, 
laden with the fragrant preparations, to perform the last offices to the body of him they 
have long honoured and loved. The incident reminds us of the grateful and most 
graceful tribute offered to Jesus by the sister of Lazarus, who poured the costly per- 
fume over the sacred feet of her Lord, her Benefactor. In both cases the value and 
the charm of the services are owing to the love by which they were inspired. Love 
followed Jesus, not only in the way, and into the dwelling, but to the cross and to the 
grave. They who truly love the Lord Christ will find opportunities in abundance of 
proving their affection. 

II. Wb imagine DIFFICULTIES WHICH GoD HAS ALREADY SOLVED FOB US. No 

wonder that these feeble women questioned one with another, " Who shall roll us 
away the stone ? " Strong men had closed the entrance to the tomb by placing this 
huge stone against it ; how should this barrier to the carrying out of their intentions 
ba removed ? They looked up, and lo 1 the stone was rolled away. This had been 
done at daybreak by the celestial messenger. Very similar is much of Christian expe- 
rience. We perplex ourselves, it may be, with speculative difficulties. Nature and 
revelation teem with mysteries. To our finite and untrained, inexperienced intelli- 
gence it must be so. Our penetration is too dull, our wisdom is too short-sighted ; 
our powers, knowledge, and opportunities are all unequal to the task. But all is clear 
to that Being who is infinitely wise ; and when we lift up our eyes we shall in due 
time Bee the resolution of our doubts. We perplex ourselves, it may be, with practical 
difBoulties. How shall we do our work — that work being so vast, and we so helpless? 
How shall we train our family, conduct our business, discharge our responsibilities ? 
We cannot tell. But, looking unto him, we shall be lightoned. He shall bring our 
way to pass. We perplex ourselves, it may be, with difficulties as to the Church ana 
kingdom of Christ. How shall the Lord's people bfi awakened to zeal, or reconciled in 
anity, or qualified for the work assigned them in a dark and sinful world ? Our mind 



350 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIKG TO ST. MARK. [oh. xvi. 1—20. 

is baffled by the problem, whici we have no means of solving. Let us go on our way. 
When we come to our difficulty, we may perhaps find that it is gone. Let us leave 
the problems of the future to be solved by him with whom all is one eternal " now." 
Let us commit the distant in space and in time to him to whom belong alike the far- 
off and the near. There is no stone so exceeding great that he cannot roll it away , 
none that he will suffer to hinder or delay the execution of his own purposes. 

IIL Christ mat be sought in the grave, bdt he is pound in the risen life, the 
WiRiTUAL EBAi.M. Notwithstanding that Jesus had foretold both his death and his 
resurrection, the disciples were overwhelmed with astonishment at his crucifixion, and 
were amazed and incredulous at the tidings of his triumph over the grave. Tie men 
do not seem to have come to the tomb until they were summoned ; the women came, 
but they came to embalm the dead, not to welcome the living — the risen. It needed 
that they should be assured " He is risen ; he is not here ! " in order that the 
current of their mournful thoughts should be arrested and reversed. In the tomb 
they did not find him, but they met him in his glorious resurrection-body. There 
are many who still commit the same mistake regarding our Saviour. They think of 
his bodily and earthly life, of its outward incidents and of its tragic close. They think 
of him as if his ministry and his mediation came to an end on Calvary. They do not 
think of him as risen, as living in human society, as working in human hearts, as 
governing and blessing human lives. Yet, for us, what is the significance of the 
Redeemer's rising from the dead ? Is it not just this — that the Saviour's resurrection- 
life is his moral and spiritual sway over humanity ? It is not in his body that his 
presence consists. It is in the penetration of the world's moral nature by his ever- 
present, all-pervading Spirit ; it is in the transformation of the world's moral life by 
the power of his sacrifice, his obedience, his sell-denial, his benevolence. Many a 
king and conqueror has died, after a life of ambition, a career of slaughter and of 
oppression. The death of such has been welcome, for it has put an end to a power 
for mischief which has cursed the world. But every teacher, every discoverer of truth, 
has implanted in the soul of humanity a seed wliich has outlived himself. How 
much more does the Divine Light and Life of men continue to illumine and to inspire 
the world, which first rejected him, and then found out his inestimable worth, his 
incalculable power ! 

IV. The most welcome and glorious eevblation is received at fiest with 
FBAB, ASTONISHMENT, AND SILENCE. Of the Women We read, " They were amazed ; " 
" trembling and astonishment came upon them ; " " they were afraid ; " " they said 
nothing to any one." It is a strange effect to follow from such a cause. Nothing 
could be so welcome and so joyful as the news which greeted them. But it was too 
startling, too surprising, too unexpected. They " departed with fear and great joy," 
just as the eleven afterwards " disbelieved for joy." There is news which seems too 
good to be true. Even so now there are doubting souls, who fain would believe in a 
Divine Saviour, and who withhold their faith, not from unspiriiuality of nature and 
habit, but from the intensity of their appreciation of the blessing needed — the revela- 
tion of Divine favour, and the prospect of a glorious immortality. Let such raise their 
minds to the height of the Divine benevolence. " Why should it be thought a thing 
incredible with you that God should raise the dead ? " Such an interposition is surely 
worthy even of the Supreme I " That our faith and hope might he in God." Surely 
such an end may be believed to justify the most unexampled revelation and the most 
stupendous display of power. It is well that the tidings should be received with 
some sense of their amazing importance and their unique bearing upon the state and 
prospects of mankind. 

V. The NEWS op the eesukeection is good tidings to be published abeoad. The 
faithful women were directed to act as messengers. They have been called "the 
apostles of the apostles." They were to find Peter and the other disciples, to teU them 
that Jesus had risen, and to direct them where they should meet him. This they did, 
and in so doing they set an example to Christians in all coming time. Whatever 
else may be said of the resurrection of Jesus, this must be said of it first and fore- 
most: It is good news, worthy of all acceptation. As such the apostles received it, 
and as such they published it. In the record of their ministry, nothing is so promi- 
nently put forward as their preaching Jesus and the Resurrection. A risen and 



OH. XTi. 1—20.1 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. «61 



glorified Saviour was the Saviour they preached — a Saviour who had died, but who 
1-veth evermore. Glad tidings to be proclaimed in every language and to all mankind ! 
Application. 1. Let us learn to live a life of faith in a risen, exalted, reigning 
Saviour and Lord. Our religious life should receive its impulse and its motive from 
looking upwards to the Lord of life. 2. Let us regard it as our sacred ministry to 
publish as good tidings the truth that Christ is risen. This is the office and privilege 
of the Church of him who was dead and is alive again, and lives for evermore. 

Vers. 9 — 14. — Disbelief convinced. The day of Christ's resurrection was a day which 
opened in gloom and closed with gladness. In the morning our Lord's disciples and 
friends were mourning their Master's death, were grieving at what they deemed their 
forsaken and friendless lot ; in the evening the same persons were rejoicing in a risen 
and triumphant Redeemer. They had found the key to their perplexities; they had 
received a new impulse and aim, the power and the promise of a new life. To what 
was it all due? Simply to this: they exchanged unreasonable disbelief for reasonable 
faith, 

I. The evidbnob disbelieved. In some cases we are justified in refusing our assent 
to testimony ; in others we are justified in withholding that assent until the testimony 
is confirmed. Such was not the case on the occasion under consideration. The evidence 
was that of credible persons, and of persons whom the eleven knew to be credible. 
Mary of Magdala, and Cleopas, and his companion were well known to the company of 
our Lord's friends and disciples. They were persons of unquestionable veracity. They 
had been themselves convinced against their own persuasions and prejudices. Mary 
had gone to the grave to complete the rites of burial — a proof that she was not expect- 
ing the resurrection. The two who walked to Emmaus regarded the death of Jesus as 
the destruction of their hopes; they were sad of countenance and slow of heart. If 
the testimony of Mary were rejected as that of an enthusiast, how could the testimony 
of the two companions be disputed ? Besides, from the other Gospels we know that 
the other women had also borne witness to having seen Jesus, and that the Lord had 
appeared to Simon, who had announced the good news to the others. Testimony so 
varied, repeated, and credible as this deserved a better reception than was accorded to 
it. But whatever was said of the rising of the Lord Jesus, the disciples during that 
day disbelieved. 

II. The explanation op this disbelief. There must have been and there were 
reasons, or rather motives, for the attitude of the unbelieving disciples. According to 
this passage, grief was one explanation. The sorrow which possessed the hearts of 
Christ's friends, when they saw him insulted, tortured, and slain, was deep and poig- 
nant. Time had not elapsed for that grief to be allayed. They were still prostrate 
beneath the anguish which had crushed their hearts. They would hear of nothing that 
might alleviate and soothe them. And with grief was mingled disappointment. Their 
mounting hopes were smitten as with a bolt, and fell lifeless to the earth. They had 
looked for conquest, and they thought they saw defeat. They had looked for a king- 
dom, and lo! their King was slain. Doubtless, the sentiments of all were expressed in 
the pathetic lament, " We trusted this had been he who should have redeemed Israel." 
Such hopes, so crushed, could not easily arise again. Minds so amazed, staggered, 
utterly perplexed, were all unready to welcome tidings of encouragement. The storm- 
blast had passed over the tree and snapped the trunk in twain ; the calm and the sun- 
shine could not rear the prostrate head. 

III. The blamableness op this disbelief. When the Lord himself appeared 
unto them he doubtless made allowance for their feelings. Yet it is here recorded, " He 
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they believed not 
them which had seen him after he was risen." This implies that they ought to have 
felt and acted otherwise. 1. And they would have done so had they cherished a 
iuster view of the nature of the Lord himself. Had they remembered the witness 
t)orne to him by the Father, had they recalled his own lofty claims, had they pondered 
his wonderful works, and especially his miracles of raising the dead to life, then the 
tidings that he had risen would not have fallen upon unreceptive minds. 2. Further 
the ilisoiplcs should have remembered the Lord's promises, some oi which had been 
giTen in figurative language, but some of which had \xen couched in the plainest 



868 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK [oh. xvi. 1— Za 

termi. He had said that, after being put to death, he would rise en the third day. 
How is it that they had so utterly forgotten a promise so express and so surprising ? 
8. And they should have borne in mind the predictions of the Old Testament regarding 
the Messianic kingdom, which should be based upon humiliation and suffering, but 
should be built up in glory. Jesus himself reproached them for having missed the 
purport of the Messianic prophecies : " Ought not Christ to have," etc. ? 

IV. Disbelief vanquished. What Christ's messengers could not do, he did himself. 
What could not be wrought by testimony, was wrought by evidence of eyesight and 
hearing. The change which came over the disciples demands attention. Their conver- 
sion from disbelief to faith was: 1. Instantaneous. For long hours they had resisted 
the witness of those who had seen the risen Lord ; but, upon themselves seeing him, 
they yielded an immediate assent. 2. It was complete and joyful. There was no 
further questioning, and no further sadness. For a moment "they believed not for joy ;" 
but " then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord." Their minds went quite 
round ; from doubt they passed to confidence, from depression to exhilaration. 3. And 
this conversion was enduring. Never did they hesitate in their own testimony. They 
thenceforth regarded themselves as witnesses of the resurrection, and spake boldly of 
what their eyes had seen, their ears had heard, their hands had handled, of the Word 
of life. 

V. The lessons of their disbelief. 1. It makes the testimony of the disciples 
the more valuable. Clearly, those men were not credulous, were not disposed or 
prepared to believe. It must have been conclusive evidence indeed which convinced 
them. There can be no danger in accepting the testimony of such men as these. 
2. It is a rebuke to those who, through hardness of heart, believe nut in a risen 
Saviour. With the clear, full evidence which we possess, we shall indeed be blamable 
if we withhold our cordial faith from him who for us died and rose again. " Blessed," 
says the Lord, "are they who, not having seen, yet believe." 

Vers. 16—18. — The great commission. Whether these words were spoken at once 
upon one occasion, or whether they are the summing up of many words uttered by 
our Lord between his resurrection and ascension, one thing is clear — ^they are the 
unburdeninsj; of his great heart of what was the load chiefly pressing upon it. Why 
had he condescended to live upon earth, to fulfil a ministry of humiliation, to endure 
unequalled woes, to die a death of ignominy and of shame ? Surely not that after his 
depsuiiure from earth all things might be as before. But rather and only that, as the 
great foreseen result of his earthly advent and ministry, a new and heavenly power 
might be introduced into humanity, a new spiritual kingdom might be set up in the 
world, and a new day might dawn upon the long, dark night of time. Hence the 
gospel which he caused to be proclaimed, the commission which he entrusted to his 
disciples and especially his apostles. Hence the authority Jesus entrusted to his 
servants, and the vast sphere he contemplated for their labours of witness and of work. 

L The commission bnteusted to the Church. 1. What they were to take. " The 
gospel," glad tiriings of salvation and eternal life through a Divine Redeemer, who 
died for the world's sins, and lives for the world's eternal life. 2. To whom they were 
to take it, " To the whole creation," <.e. to all mankind, of every race and every 
language, as what is intended for all and is adapted to alL 3. Who were to take it ? 
The eleven first received ihe sacred charge, but all Christ's disciples who should believe 
through them on his Name were entrusted with this great commission. " Freely," said 
Christ, " ye have received ; freely give." No order of men, but the whole Church, 
receives this sacred trust. 

n. The besponsibilitt laid upon thb wobld to which the oospel combs, A 
great alternative is propounded. There is no middle course supposed. Belief and 
>>aptism are the condition of salvation ; disbelief ensures condemnation. We may well 
admire the wisdom and the condescending compassion which determined such a 
condition as faith as the condition hpon which the highest spiritual blessirgs may b( 
enjoyed. It is possible to the youngest, to the least learned, to the feeblest of men. 
Yet it is a mighty principle; being able, when directed towards a Divine Saviour, tc 
lecure all good which man can need and God can give, both for time and for eternity. 

IIL ThK OBKDBMTIAU AOCOUPANYINa THE FUBLIOATIOH OF THE Q03PEL. L What 



CH. XVI. 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. »68 

they werf. There are enumerated: power to exorcise demons, power to speak with 
tongues, immunity from harm by poison or by serpent-bite, the ministry of super- 
natural healing. 2. Why they were given. It was to authenticate the message and 
the messengers. As in Christ's mioistry spiritual authority was indicated by miracu- 
lous works, so was it in the ministry of Christ's followers and apostles. As a matter 
of fact, attention was thus drawn to the Word of life. 3. Why they were withdrawn. 
When this exactly was we cannot perhaps decide ; but as the purpose of their bestowal 
was temporary, it is evident that when this purpose was answered, and Christianity 
was launched upon the waters of the world, it was in accordance with Divine wisdom 
that miracles should cease. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Ascension. Christ ascended on high. How conld it be otherwise ? 
He came into this world in a manner and with accompaniments so remarkable, he lived 
in this world a life so singular and unique, that it was but appropriate that he should 
quit this world as none other has ever done. What is meant by his being " received 
up " — where " heaven " is, — this we do not know ; our knowledge is limited, and our 
power of conceiving the eternity and infinity around us is feeble. One thing we do see, 
and that is, that Jesus finished his work on earth and then departed ; and one other 
thing we see, almost as clearly, viz. that the moral, spiritual work which was the 
object of his mission, so far from coming to an end with his bodily departure, really 
then commenced, and has been proceeding ever since. How he interests himself in it 
and carries it on, we can only tell in general and scriptural language ; that he does so, 
is plain to every spiritually enlightened man. St. Mark, who plunged at the outset so 
boldly into his task of relating " the gospel of the Son of God," here, with charac- 
teristic brevity, clearness, and vigour, tells the last portion of his narrative — the 
ascension of the Saviour into heaven, and the consequent continuation of his work on 
earth. 

I. Thb Ascension is the completion ov oub Saviotjb's babthlt ministry. To 
those who believe that the Lord Jesus arose from the dead, the narrative of the 
Ascension can present little difficulty. It is impossible to believe that he who 
consented to die, and who conquered death, could again enter the grave. It remained 
lor him to quit the earth without dying ; and what we read of his fesurrection-body 
leads us to believe that this was not only possible, but natural and easy. In fact, the 
Ascension may be regarded, not as the consequence so much as the completion of the 
Resurrection; and, in apostolic language, the two events are sometimes referred to in 
one and the same expression. How explicitly had Jesus foretold this great event ! 
Early in his ministry he had declared, " No man hath ascended into heaven, save he 
that descended out of heavea, even the Son of man, who is in heaven." Expostulating 
with the cavillers at Capernaum at a later period, he had asked them, " What then if 
ye should behold the Son of man ascending where he was before ? " And on the day 
of his resurrection he had directed Mary to take to his disciples this message : " I 
ascend unto my Father and your Father, and my God and your God." The foresight 
and authority of our Saviour were proved by the correspondence between his words 
and the event which exactly fulfilled them. The Ascension implied that all the 
purposes of the incarnation and advent of the Redeemer were accomplished. What 
he came to do, to suffer, and to say, he had already done, suffered, and said. He did 
not leave the earth until on earth there was no more for him to do. In his recorded 
intercessory prayer, addressing his Father, he said, " I have glorified thee on the 
earth • I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do." 

IL The Ascension ib the commencement op otjb SAViotra's bbign. We are too 
prone to think of human life as if it closes when the last breath is drawn and the 
heart beats no more. We forget that this is but the birth to tne nigher, the proper, 
the eternal life. Similarly with our view of the Redeemer's ministry of service, his 
tenure of priestly, royal office. We are too prone to regard his life as closing with the 
conclusion of our Gospel narratives. Ve follow him in thought until the cloud, 
descending upon Olivet, receives him out of our sight, and then we say, "It ia 
all over 1 His course is run, his work is finished 1 " But it is not so. The very 
contrary of this is the case. That Christ's ascension draws a sharp line of demar- 
cation, is true ; but the one side is finite, the other is infinite. We can comprehend 
»ABS— H. 8 A 



S54 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK, [oh.xvi.1— 20 

the one ; the other baffles all our powers of penetration. The steps of Jesus through 
this earthly pilgrimage are steps which we can trace; but we lose sight of them, 
and faith alone can follow, when he ascends on high. This, however, is certain 
to us, that, with the ascension of Jesus, the second, the more spiritual, the mora 
beneficent, the more enduring stage of this Divine ministry, commenced. He did 
much in his humiliation; he is doing more in his glory. He came to found a 
kingdom; he went to administer it; and he must reign until his foes become his 
footstool. Contemplate the Son of man as he is here represented, no longer wearing 
the disguise of feebleness and submitting to the insults and the hatred of the wickeil. 
His days of toil, of hunger, and of weariness, his nights of exposure and of mental 
Cdnfliot, are over. No more is he to endure the misrepresentations of the hypocritical 
and the malicious ; no more to ba£3e the insidious snares of the crafty and the 
unscrupulous ; no more to be patient under the cold mockery of the unspiritual 
and ungrateful. His deeds of mercy shall never again be attributed to the powers 
of evil; never again shall those he fain would benefit seek to cast him headlong 
from the precipice ; nor shall he sigh because of the hardness of heart and insen- 
sibility of his foes. It is well that he has gone through it all ; that he has been 
despised and rejected of men, that he has been overwhelmed with the baptism of 
suffering, that he has drunk to the dregs earth's bitter cup of woe. All this is well. 
But it is better that it is past and over ; that he takes with him into the unseen state 
the memory of his humiliation, his obedience, his death; that he enters upon his 
purchased possession; that he sees "of the travail of his soul, and is satisfied;" that 
he is " received up into heaven, and sits down on the right hand of God." What are 
we to understand when told that Christ " sat down " in heaven, and by the Father's 
side? The evangelist speaks here in such a way as to convey to us important religious 
truth. Christ's earthly ministry had been one of unrest and homelessness ; from the 
commencement of his public labours until those labours ended on the cross, few had 
been the intervals of repose. With the Ascension began the period of rest. The seat 
upon the throne is becoming to royalty : the monarch sits whilst the courtiers, guards, 
and attendants stand. So the expression implies the kingly dignity of ImmanueL He 
has exchanged the crown of thorns for the diadem of empire. " On his head are many 
crovms." Further, a judge sits upon the judgment-seat, whilst the criminal stands at 
his bar. Jesus not long before had stood, as the vilest culprit might have done, 
before the malignant Caiaphas, before the vacillating, unrighteous Pilate. Now, no 
longer the accused, he is the just, majestic, and almighty Judge, ordained by God to 
be the Judge of quick and dead. How bold and plain, although metaphorical, is 
Mark's language here 1 " The Lord Jesus sat down at the right hand of God." " The 
right hand of God " is one of those expressions, so frequent in Scripture, which are 
used, in condescension to our infirmities, to convey to us, in a striking and effective 
manner, truth otherwise not easily communicated. A courtier, when at the right 
hand of his sovereign, is near him, is readily addressed ; is in a position either to give 
information or to receive instructions ; can easily obtain a signature, or an authority or 
warrant under the sign-manual ; is in a position to introduce to the king any appli- 
cant or petitioner; in brief, occupies a post of privilege, trust, influence, honour, and 
authority. And when our Saviour is pictured as at the right hand of God, we are to 
understand that he is the Mediator, through whom the Divine power and guidance, 
favour and lilessing, are bestowed upon those in whom he has shown himself interested 
by undergoing on their behalf the labours and the sacrifices of the earthly humiliation. 
No wonder, then, that the position occupied by Christians is described in language so 
rich, full, and inspiriting — that all things are declared to be theirs, for they are Christ's, 
and Christ is God's. 

III. ThB AsCBNSIOH WAB the PBEPABATION fob a new AKD SPntlTUAL EOONOHT. 

The bodily absence of the Redeemer was the condition of a new dispensation of 
spiritual power and of world-wide extent. Hitherto the evangelizing journey* of the 
twelve had been restricted in scope and local in range; they had gone only to the lost 
sheep of the house of Israel, and they had directed attention to the speedy approach of 
the kingdom. But the aim of Jesus was one of universal benevolence; other sheep, 
not of the Israelitish fold, were to be brought in ; he was to draw all men unto 
bimselt This was to be d'jps hy spiiitual agencies, which were dependent upon th* 



ra. ivL 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MARK. 3uS 

removal of the Lord to heaven. In fact, the ascension of the Lord Jesus was, in tha 
Divine counsels, the condition and the occasion of the bestowal of the Holy Spirit, in 
the manner and measure distinctive of the new, the Christian dispensation. He him- 
lelf had put this with great plainness before his disciples' minds : " If I go not away, 
the Comforter will not come unto you ; but if I go, I will send him unto you." This 
was a doctrinal statement of the nature of a revelation. What was the intelligible 
and manifest fact corresponding to it ? Surely this — that the earthly mission of the 
Saviour being complete, the gospel was to be preached, and should be made, by a 
spiritual force acting on human natures, the means of awakening men to a new 
conscience of sin, a new yearning for holiness, a new purpose of an unselfish and 
unworldly life. It is no more unreasonable to attribute the fruits of the gospel to the 
Spirit of God, than it is to attribute human purposes to the spirit of man. It is a 
spiritual universe, and things material and outward actions are nothing but the garb 
and utterance of what is spiritual. If there be truth declared, revealed, and if there 
be a nature capable of receiving, feeling, responding to truth, there is one all-sufficient 
explanation of this wonderful and beneficent correspondence, and that is, the presence 
and the action of the Holy Spirit of God. The ascension of Christ changed the life of 
the apostles, and through them, the history of the world. 1. Now and henceforth 
there was an express theme for them to publish. This was the gospel, the good tidings, 
which only now was complete, and so divinely perfected by all that Jesus had done 
and suffered, that it was adapted to fulfil the purposes of Divine wisdom. Before, the 
disciples had directed attention to what was to come ; now, to what had occurred 
actually and really. Christ had died for men's sins, according to the Scriptures ; he 
had arisen from the dead for their justification and salvation. Around the great 
central facts of Christ's birth, crucifixion, and resurrection gathered all the Divine 
truths which constituted the gospeL Accordingly, in the first place, the facts were 
related as facts abundantly attested, and as facts of interest and precious moment to 
all mankind. And, when these facts were believed, then they were explained, and 
(under the guidance of the Holy Spirit given from above) the inspired apostles taught 
their bearing upoQ the position and prospects of the sinful race of man. It should 
never be forgotten that our religion consists in something more than laws of life, 
sentiments of virtue, promises of help, hopes of immortality. In accordance with the 
constitution of things, all these depend upon and fiow from the great central facts 
relating to the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. Besides having a theme, the apostles of our 
Lord now had a commission which authorized them. They did not go unbidden, without 
instructions, without authority, upon this errand of mercy and blessing to mankind. 
He who had all power in heaven and in earth had given them their commission. He 
had said " Go I " and they went ; not in their own strength and wisdom, but in his. 
The same warrant and authentication abides with the Church of Christ throughout all 
the ages. The apostles were, as the name implies, those who were sent ; in this 
respect, as distinguished from personal endowment and equipment, an apostolic mission 
is entrusted to the whole body of Christ's followers to the end of time. 3. Thi 
sphere within which this commission was to be executed was world-wide. "Go ye 
into aU the world," Jesus had said, " and preach the gospel to the whole creation." 
" Make disciples of all nations." A grand and noble design, worthy of the source 
whence it emanated, in the heart of him who is " the Saviour of all men, specially of 
them that believe." The habitable globe is the field in which the Christian missionary 
is called to work ; for the human race is the object of Divine compassion, the destined 
participant in the bounty of the Divine beneficence. None, however large-hearted 
and compassionate, can complain that the operations of mercy and benevolence are 
restricted and restrained. 4. In fulfilling this commission, the heralds of Christ's 
gospel were assured that they should enjoy, not only personal assistance, but the 
assistance involved in undoubted credentials, by which they and their message should 
be commended to the attention of men. (1) The Lord wrought with them. They 
were workers, but they were fellow-workers with him. What was to be done in the 
renewal of human hearts, and the transformation of human character, was not to be 
done by the exercise of merely human power. A Divine energy and operation were 
alone adequate to secure results so difficult, so glorious. (2) Signs followed. Signs, 
I*, jf a Divine presence and energy. There were such in abundance, as i« eTident 



SM THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAEK. [oh. xvi 1—20 

from the record in the Acta of the Apostlea. Signs outward, manifest, obvious 
to every eye, as in the case of those miracles of healing which accompanied the 
ministrations of the first Christian preachers. Signs of a less obtrusive, but of an 
even more convincing character, as in the case of those Jews who were delivered from 
formalisia, those Gentiles who were emancipated from idolatry, those flagrant trans- 
gressors of the moral law who were turned from darkness unto light, and from the 
service of Satan unto God. (3) Thus the Word was confirmed. Miracles, preaching, 
all were means to an end, and that end the establishment and extension of a spiritual 
kingdom. For the Word of God was no mere instrument of music to charm the ear 
and captivate the imagination ; it was and is " the sword of the Spirit." Its work ii 
to conquer, to subdue, to govern ; and this work it does with incomparable keenness of 
edge, with incomparable force and eflSciency. It has been promised, " My Word 
shall not return unto me void." It has proved itself a Word of power, a Word of 
salvation, a Word of life. 

Application. 1. In heart, let Christ's people ascend with their ascended Lord and 
Leader. " Risen with Christ," " set your affection upon things above." 2. In life, let 
Christians seek to execute their Master's parting commission. He has left them a 
trust to fulfil, a work to do ; let them not be found slothful, but diligent and watch- 
ful. 3. In hope, let all who " love his appearing," look forward to his return. For 
in like manner shall he come again, to receive his people to himself " £v«n to, 
•ome, Lord Jesus 1 " 

HOMILIES BY VARIOUS AUTHORS. 

Vers. 1— '14:. — Resurrection proofs. The last days of the manifestation of QtcA in 
Christ were signalized by a great deprivation and a great recovery. A life beyond the 
dread confines of the grave completed the cycle of wonders associated with the earth- 
life of Jesus. This, although not sufiBciently realized ere it actually occurred, is a part 
of a continuative development. It is no awkward and hasty fragment joined on to 
another and more legitimate narrative. To intelligent students of the life, it appears 
the sublimely consistent outcome of all that preceded the death. The evangelists, 
from the very beginning of their histories, prepare one almost unconsciously for such 
a denouement. It is in a sense the necessary conclusion towards which they move, and 
it throws into new relations and proportions all the preceding events. The earthly 
actions and experiences of Christ are sufficiently verified, but in describing them the 
evangelists do not seem to thinh of having to furnish proof. It is only when they begin 
to tell us of the resurrections that all is alertness, and that conscious collation of evidence 
takes place. This is the arcanum of the faith which must be preserved from all 
uncertainty ; this fact must be certified that all else may be made intelligible and 
morally eflectual. And <Ae moral significance of the liesurrection is even more insisted 
on than its physical wonder. It is the defeat of evil machinations, and a triumph 
over every precaution of his enemies. 

I. Some impoktant elements of bvidbnob foe the Eesuebection. The number 
and variety of Christ's appearances have been noted by the evangelists. The spiritual 
nature perceives the supplementary effect and educative efiSciency of his resurrection 
fellowship. There is also a marked absence of all appearance of collusion. 1. Con- 
spirators would have striven to keep the grave sealed until its emptiness should be 
discovered. 2. The Roman watch was all but inviolable. 3. Those who might be 
expected to conspire remained at a distance, and were informed of the event. 4. 
Many of them at first refused to believe the news. 5. From the Euiniaus and embalm- 
ing incidents, we see that most of the disciples did not look fur his (at all events 
immediate) reappearance. 

II. The nature of the Eebuekeotion. The question of those who deny the 
physical, yet emphasize the ideal and spiritual resurrection — " What can a few pounds 
more or less of dust and ashes matter 1 " — is shallow and impertinent. 1. The senses 
were appealed to : sight, hearing, touch ; physical- results were produced ; fellowship 
was realized with him under physical conditions (the fish and honeycomb). 2. IJt 
was not recognized at first. A great change had, therefore, been produced. And such 
a thing night he looked for. Mary, Emnaus, Thomas and the stigmata. 3. Th4 



aa. x»i. 1— 20.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDIHG TO ST. MARK. B6l 

manner of disappearance as described U suggestive tf m real body (Acta i. 0; Lnka 
xxiv. 50, 51). 

III. Thb BBAKiNas OF THIS FACT UPON Cheistian FAITH AND LiFB. In Consider- 
ing these, we see how the foregoing question betrays an incapacity for discussing the 
highest practical problems. 1. Christ came to save the entire nature — body, sotil, »nd 
spirit. He is, therefore, himself the Firstfruits and the Type. There is, in his resurrec- 
tion state, a hint as to the possibilities of our material nature when completely purified 
and redeemed. 2. The bodily resurrection of Christ is a more signal marvel than the 
spiritual alone would have been, and was at the same time more susceptible of sensible 
demonstration. 3. It was in harmony with the method of his miracles, and the grand 
key to them. How the moral element in this life grew and expanded into ever more 
powerful effects and general relations 1 At last, when earnestly and carefully regarded, 
doubt is overwhelmed by it. How it appeals to our sense of the highest fituesi, and 
answers the unconscious longings of the spiritual Ufe I — M. 

Vers. 3, 4. — " Who shall roll us away the stone t " Two things occurrsd together In 
attempting the last service to the buried Christ — weak, though willing and loving 
instruments, and a practically insurmountable difiBculty. They themselves were 
unable to roll away the stone which closed the sepulchre, " for it was exceeding great." 
This experience has often been repeated. 

I. How F0EBB0DINQ8 OF DIFFICULTY IN ChBISTIAN BBEVIOB OFTEN ABISK. 1, Bj 

discounting the help of Christ. They thought him dead and helpless. 2. By ealeu- 
lating only on^s own resources. Looking inward. The healthy outward and upwwd 
look at the indications of Providence and experience. 

II. How THE GOOD INTENTION OF LOVTCtO HEARTS 18 EKWABDED BT THK SaTIOUB. 

1. By finding the difficulty which had been anticipated already removed. 2. By find- 
ing the intended service rendered unnecessary. The empty grave at first a disappoint- 
ment, but afterwards a source of joy. — M. 

Ver. 6. — " He it not here." L Thb flaob whbek Cebibt has bkkh is sot alwat* 

THE PLACE WHERE ChEIST IS. 

IL It 18 A LIVING AND NOT A DEAD OhRIST THAT ChEISTIANS ABB TO SEBK. 
HI. THBT that TEDLT seek ChEIST will, EVEN THEOUQH DISAPPOINTIIIMT, 

lbaen where to find him. 
lY. The dxttieb of boebowino love abe displaced bt the onriES or bbjoio- 

INQ faith. — M. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Hie gospel the Word of the ascended Lord. These words, at the and 
of Mark's account, give the great sequence of our Lord's manifestation. The Ascension 
was the divinely necessary result of the Resurrection ; the gospel is the necessary fruit 
on the human side of the experience produced in the hearts of the disciples by his life 
and work. Such a series of events could not end in silence. As in life, so in death, 
resurrection, and exaltation, Jesus Christ " could not be hid." The preaching of the 
gospel is a result, therefore, of an express command and an inward impulse. The two 
verses are in sequence to the preceding account, and the one to the other, logically, 
spiritually, and potentially. Notice in this connection — 

I. The point at which the pebaohino of the gospel begins. At the flnal 
withdrawal and exaltation of Jesus. 1. Its subject is a completed one. 2. The variout 
portions of it are self-evidently connected, and mutually interpret one another. The 
final transcendent issues of the contest of Christ with sin and death are each repre- 
sentative and interpretative of what preceded and led up to them. The life and its 
relation to the Divine purpose, prophetic anticipation, and human yearning, would be 
incomprehensible without this glorious trinity of consummations : death, resurrection, 
and ascension. 

II. The powee rr eepebsents. The power of a finished work of atonement, a 
victory over death and hell, and an. exalted, glorified humanity. 1. The highest exalta- 
tion hiat been reached by him of whom it speak*. He is invested with Divine power, 
and executive authority in the universe of God. Whether there be any such place ai 
the " right hand of God " may be a «uiioua question ; that theie i* a *Mt wUch loeh t 



iSjj tHE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MASK. [ott.tvtl— 20, 

phrase describes is a matter of spiritual revelation and experience. " All power is 
given, ' etc. 2. Its tone is therefore authoritative in the highest degree. The gospel is 
tt throne-word. Preachers are ambassadors. The dignities and pretensions of earth 
are nothing to them. The Lord through them " commands all men everywhere to 
repent." Herod is a sad illustration of what occurs when even a king attempts to 
patronize the gospel. 3. This pretension is confirmed by practical proofs. The works 
accompanying it and resulting from it are " signs." You cannot explain them unless 
on the highest ground. Although physical miracles have ceased, spiritual results 
are still more demonstrative and glorious. In changing the heart, renewing the 
nature, purifying the affections, the " Word of his power " achieves what nothing else 
can. And such signs are to be looked for whenever and wherever it is proclaimed. 
" The Lord working with them " — everywhere, because ascended and glorified. 

IIL Thb feoplb it concerns. " And they went forth, and preached everywhere." 
This was no accident or caprice of choice : he commanded it (ver. 15). But it is also 
divinely fitting that this should be bo. I. The gospel is intended for all men. 2. It 
is adapted to all men. 3. The work of Christ's servants is to seek the salvation of all 
men. Until aU have had an opportunity we must continue to preach : that is our 
responsibility. It is not said that all will believe or be saved : that is the responsibility 
of those who hear. Only of this are we certain : " The Lord is not slack concerning 
liis promise, as some count slackness; but is longsutfering to you-ward, not wishing 
that any should perith, hut that all should come to repentance" (2 Pet. iiL 9). — M. 

Vom. 3, 4. — The stone rolled away. Day was dawning on Jerusalem when the 
women saw this strange sight. Day was dawning in their hearts too, for slowly and 
surely the darkness of doubt and grief was stealing away. And day was dawning on 
the whole world, and on all future ages of history, for the Sun of Righteousness had 
risen, bringing life and immortality to light. No three days in human history were so 
momentous as these of which the context speaks ; for it was on them that the great 
conflict between death and life was fought out, and for ever won, by the Captain of 
our salvation. (Describe the varied feelings which swayed the minds of Christ's foes 
and friends after the Crucifixion, as they thought of his quiet grave in the garden.) 
The resurrection of Jesus Christ was put boldly in the forefront of apostolic teaching. 
Of all the miracles, this was the chief; of all evidences of the supernatural, this was 
the most important. In almost every recorded address and extant letter, this is 
insisted on as the cardinal fact of the Christian faith ; indeed, Paul says, " Lf Christ be 
not risen, your faith is vain." 

L Wb reooonizb the stone rolled away rnoM the sepdlcheb ab beino to 
(J8 A SIGN OP Christ's victory. 1. Accepting the fact of our Lord's resurrection, not 
only as proved by the credible, concurrent, and cumulative evidence of trustworthy men, 
but on the ground that this fact alone will rationally account for the victory of the 
Christian faith over men of all nations and conditiims, we do not wonder at its 
prominence in New Testament teaching. Because Christ has risen, his death becomes 
more than a martyrdom for the truth; it appears as the voluntary offering of himself 
on the part of One who said of his life, " I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again." It is the sign that God was still well pleased with the 
beloved Son, for it was the Divine reversal of the worid's judgment upon him. It is 
a proof that the same Jesus who once walked this weary world still lives, with the 
old sympathy and power to help, fulfilling his promise, " I am with you alway even 
unto the end of the world." It is the pledge to us, the only pledge we have in history 
that the splendid utterances of St. Paul about the resurrection of the saints will have 
their fulfilment. For the redeemed, as well as for their Lord, heavenly hands have 
rolled away the stone that once sealed the grave. 2. The victory of Christ on the 
Resurrection morning was dramatically complete in its details, and in this we see a 
suggestion of the absoluteness of his triumph over his foes. The Gentiles had mocked 
and crucified him ; he passed by their strong guard without an effort. The Jews had 
accomplished their purpose against him; the seal of the Sanhedrim was broken. 
Death had seized upon him, and some had cried, " Himself he cannot save ; " but the 
Son of God, it was cot possible that he should be holden of death. The' grave' had 
closed rver him ; but he passed through its portals resistlessly, as Samson came foitk 



XVI. 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINO TO ST. MARK. 861 



from Gaza, bearing on his shoulders its gates of brass and bars of Iron. " He mugt 
reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet " — the pride that will not let ua 
become as little children ; the self-will that declares, " We will not have this man to 
reign over us ; " the lusts which, like the horses of the sun, would drag their victims 
to destruction ; the death that strikes down all our defences, and tears away our dear 
ones from our embrace. Victory over these will be his, not ours. To the eye of 
faith the rolling away of the stone appears to be the loosening of the keystone in the 
great fortress of sin and death, of which at last there shall not be left one stone upon 
another. 

II. THB 8T0NB ROLLED AWAT MAT ALSO BE EEGAKDED BY US AS A BEMINDEB OP 

EXPECTED DIFFICULTIES UNEXPECTEDLY EEMOVED. It was natural enough that these 
feeble women should say among themselves, " Who shall roll us away the stona from 
the door of the sepulchre ? " For a moment it appeared as if all their labour of love, 
in the preparation of spices, would be thrown away — that the last tender ministry 
must be given up. But as they went forward, trembling yet hoping, they discovered 
that the difficulty they had dreaded was gone. God had done for them what they 
could not have done for themselves. Too often we discourage ourselves by thinking of 
future difficulties, until they loom so large in our imagination that we turn back from 
the path of duty. 1. It is so with our anxieties about temporal things. But whatever 
lies in the future, let us go on steadfastly and trustfully, and by-and-by we shall 
make the conquered difficulty an Ebenezer, which shall witness to others of the fact, 
" Hitherto hath the Lord helped me." 2. Similarly we must deal with some difficulties 
respecting Christian doctrine. " Whosoever shall do the will of God shall know the 
doctrine." 3. So let us go on also to attempt our appointed work for Ood; and the 
difficulties which are insurmountable by us will be removed by hands mightier than 
our own. — ^A. R. 

Vers. 1 — 18. — The Besurreetion, In the early dawn — " at the rising of the sun " — 
on the morning after the sabbath — that one most wondrous sabbath, the last of the 
old series — ^hasty feet were hurrying to the sepulchre. They were those of Mary 
Magdalene and Mary the mother of James, and Salome. Love drew them thus early 
to the sacred tomb. But they were bringing " spices that they might come and anoint 
him," so far were they from expecting what had taken place. It does not appear that 
any of the disciples were looking for the Resurrection. As they neared the place a 
difficulty suggested itself to them : " Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of 
the tomb? " To their astonishment, it was rolled away. " Entering into the tomb," 
they found not the body as they expecied; but "they saw a young man [an angel] 
sitting at the right side, arrayed in a white robe." Calming their affrighted spirits, he 
declared for the first time, " He is risen ; he is not here." The few details of the 
excited doings of that first morning of the week — that first Lord's day — ^have a deep 
interest, which their meagreness cannot destroy, if indeed it abates it. Again and again 
Jesus api)ear3 to the disciples, now in smaller, now in larger companies, and gives 
them as true and deeply settled an assurance of his resurrection as was before given of 
his death. To that resurrection we turn as to the signal incident in the life of the 
world's Redeemer — the central fact in all human history. Nothing abates the signifi- 
cance of the Incarnation ; but the raising up of the dead body into life is supreme in 
its bearing on the history of the human race. 

I. The resurrection of Christ is the ceucial test or the WOBLd's redemption. 
" If Christ hath not been raised, your faith is vain." Theu the whole structure of 
Christianity is shaken to its foundations. It has no longer its present significance. It 
has wrought only imaginary changes. " Ye are yet in your sins." It has deluded its 
most devoted adherents. Itself aiming at truth, exalting, glorifying it, it has deceived 
and disappointed the hopes of its faithful ones. " They also which have fallen asleep 
in Christ have perished." The Christian Church has never shrunk from the alternative, 
exultino- in its jubilant assurance, " But now hath Christ been raised from the dead." 
Herein the completeness of the atoning work of Christ is demonstrated, the warrant 
of faith in that atonement is presented, and the end of all is attained in the righteous- 
ness of men. With a divinely attested atonement, of which, to avail themselves, 
men are warranted in appropriating by faith the justification— the righteousnesi 



860 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDING TO ST. MAKE, [ch.xti.1— 20 

which they need. He " was delivered up for our offences, and was raised for atu 

justification." 

II. The resurrection of Christ is the fiem grocitd of httman hope. " As in Adam 
all die, so also in Christ shall all be made alive." Back to this event the eye of the 
believer has turned to see the assuring sign. Our friends lie still in the grave ; but 
the Church has never since that early morning looked to a Christ in a tomb. It is 
easy to see how the horizon of the human life would be overclouded had we to think 
of the Redeemer as still in the grave. 

in. The briohtbst aspect of human lifb is seen in the resurrection of Christ. 
Life with or without a future suggests the two utmost extremes. The barest glimmer 
of a possibility of a future life beyond the grave would be the greatest enrichment of 
that life had there not been a previous assurance of it. This fact added to human life 
transforms it at once. It is an inestimable possession. What possibilities does it not 
open before our eyes I What an encouragement to patience I " The sufferings of this 
present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed to 
US-ward." The re.'iurrection of Christ throws an altogether new light upon all human 
history ; but its brightest light is thrown upon the gluom of the future. 

IV. The resurrection of Christ is the iLLnsTBious example of the univebsal 
EESUBEEOTION. " Christ the Pirstl'ruits." The ingathering and presentation of the first- 
fruits must be taken as the pledge of the ingathering and presentation of the entire 
harvest. The inspired teaching on this lofty subject is such as to give the utmost 
assurance and comfort. The "weakness," the "dishonour," the "corruption," with 
which we are made familiar by death, stand in contrast with the " incorruption," the 
" glory," the " power," which we learn shall characterize the resurrection. While the 
casting off the " natural body," to be clothed with " a spiritual body," the exchange of 
" the earthy " for " the heavenly," is exemplified in the one Example which is for every 
believer the most comfortable assurance. 

V, The resurrection of Christ is the complete dbmonstbatioh of TRirrMPH. 
" Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up." It has ever been held that the 
Resurrection was the Divine seal of testimony to the perfactness and acceptability of 
the work of Christ. The rage of wicked men, the antagonism of error, the whole power 
of the enemy, triumphed in crushing the truth ; but the Resurrection is a demonstration 
of complete superiority to all, and casts its illuminating comment upon the words, " I 
lay down my life, that I may take it again. ... I have power to lay it down, and I have 
power to take it again." These and many other teachings cluster around this most 
precious incident in the history of this typical life. He who would derive the utmost 
advantage therefrom must needs share the experience of the holy apostle: "I count 
all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord : for 
whom 1 suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may gain 
Christ, and be found in him, not having a righteousness of mine own, even that which 
is of the Law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is of 
God by faith : that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the feUow- 
ship of his sufferings, becoming conformed unto his death ; if by any means I may 
attain unto the resurrection from the dead " (PhiL iii. 8 — H). — G. 

Vers. 19, 20. — Tht Ascension. And now after " he was manifested " many times, 
•bowing " himself alive after his passion by many proofs, appearing unto them by the 
space of forty days," and having taught to his disciples, in the new light of his resurrec- 
tion, "the things concerning the kingdom of God," he — "the Lord Jesus" — "was 
received up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God," " the heaven " 
receiving him " until the times of restoration of all things." Now the holy, earthly 
life of Jesus is terminated. He has " ascended on high ; " now the luminous pathway 
to heaven is open ; now the eyes of the disciples of the Lord Jesus are ever tm-ned 
upward, and their steps tend to heaven. Now the great truth is exemplified ; life ends 
not in a grave, nor even in a resurrection from the dead, but in an ascension into heaven. 
This is the true goal. This the final hope. The regained Paradise is not on earth, but 
on high. The home of the weary is in " my Father's house." The world's rest is in 
heaven. Now life is a pilgrimage; men "seek a country," "a better country, that 
it, a heavenly ; " and " God hath prepared for them a city." The typical life is a perfect 



•■.xvi,l--20.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDINtt TO ST. MAEK. «6] 

one i tha cycle Is complete. He " came down from heaven." He has ascended up 
" where he was before." So is it with the revelations of Holy Scripture. They begin 
in an earthly paradise ; they end in a heavenly one. Such is the cherished hope of all 
believers. We must consider the ascension of Jesus in its bearing upon his own life, 
and upon the life and hope of his disciples, and upon the aspect of human life 
generally. 

I. The Ascension into heaven is the jttst vindioation of the lite and claims op 
Jesus. The position which he assumed amongst men as the Son of God, as the Saviour 
of the world, as the Judge of human actions ; the call which he addressed to men to 
believe in him, to accept his teachings as of supreme authcirity, to trust in him for 
salvation and eternal life ; and the great promises which he held out to men ; — all needed 
a demonstration of their validity. To the patient reader of the Gospels this demonstra- 
tion is afforded again and again " by divers portions and in divers manners." But all 
would lack their crowning affirmation had Jesus remained enchained by death, or had 
he not ascended up on high. It were impossible to believe in such a Mediator as still 
in the grave. The Ascension, which is the necessary consequence of the Resurrection, is 
the complement of the Incarnation. Such a life and such a death as Jesus' demanded 
a triumph and a vindication. It was, in the absence of the Resurrection, the failure of 
the truth. Sin, error, the world, conquered the truth and righteousness of heaven. So 
for the one brief sabbath — the dead lull in the world's active history — it seemed to be ; 
but the EesurrectioD, completed in the Ascension, is the effectual vindication of truth 
aid of righteousness, as it is the vindioation of the righteous One. 

II. Not less is the Ascension the vindication of the world's faith in Jbstjs. 
They who accept a teacher as authoritative, who commit great interests into his hands, 
who have so great faith in him as to entrust their leconciliation with God into his hands, 
who accept him as a mediator between themselves and God, who depend upon him for 
eternal life, who concentrate all their hopes of the future upon his word, must be pro- 
pared to justify their conduct. That justification is found in the Ascension. Too great 
a confidence cannot be placed in One concerning whom it may be said, " The third day 
he was raised again from the dead ; he ascended into heaven, and sitteth on the right 
hand of God." Jesus, who vindicated himself in every step of his progress, vindicates 
also the daily, humble, entire faith of " them that put their trust in him." 

III. There is a step further. Tub conduct of those who eejbct Christ awaits 
VINDICATION. Where shall it be found? Given the facts of Jesus' life, his death, his 
resurrection, and ascension on high, where can any justify their repudiation of him ? 
Precisely as faith and obedience are vindicated, so is unbelief and neglect condemned. 
The bearing of Christ's ascension on the universal life is of so great significance, that its 
rejection imposes the heaviest penalties on the disobedient. Not only is their own life 
debarred the beneficent influences of so great a feet, and the long train of facts of which 
it is the completion, but the life of others surrounding is proportionately injured. He 
who has faith in a great truth throws the influence of his encouragement over the faith 
of all amongst whom he moves, while he who abides in unbelief tends to wither the 
confldence of those around him. His example is contagious, and his life is impaired in 
its character. It cannot, therefore, exert the same beneficial influence upon others that 
it might do if under the control of great truths. Men must sooner or later vindicate to 
their fellows their conduct towards them. If it be good, the world's testimony will be 
joined to the Divine testimony. If evil, the world's condemnation must be added to 
that of the eternal Judge. Man's highest wisdom is to place himself near to great truths, 
that he may feel their power and elevation ; and, by a thorough sympathy with them, 
be prepared to extend their influence far and wide. How greatly the world to-day 
needs men having faith 1 Such only can move the mountains which stand in the way 
of human progress and blessing. No truths have equal power for the uplifting, the 
ennobling, the appeasement, the satisfaction, the glorification of the human life, as have 
those which, beginning with the Incarnation, end with the ascension into heaven of the 
Lord Jesus Christ ; " to whom be glory and dominion for ever and ever. Amen."— G. 

Yers. 1 8. — The sepulchre, I. Sblf-eb warding love. The women obey the longing 

to serve, though they know not how. Of love it is said, " All other pleasures ue not 
werti it's pains." In lavishing care upon the remains of one beloved, we show that tha 



S«2 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. [oa. xn. 1— 2C. 

proper objects of love are persons. It is not tt) the love of an abstraction, but to the love 
of himself, that Christ calls us. The suffering in this world are to us «8 the body of 
Jetus. 

n. Angblio ministry. " Angels minister to the followers of Christ, and share their 
joy." The chain of sympathy is electric between earth and heaven ; and all that we 
know in sorrow and joy has its immediate reflection and response above. 

III. The empty tomb. The contents have escaped, as some ethereal vapour elndes 
its bonds. He could not be holden of the tomb. It bore witness to bis resuirection ; 
and earth is no more a sepulchre, but a portico to heaven. — J. 

Vers. 9 — 14. — Appearances of the risen One. I. They were repeated and taried 
Bo in the history of the Church and the world ; there are epochs of the manifestation of 
Christ and of apparent concealment. Though history in one sense repeats itself, in 
another it does not. Christianity is the exhibition of the new in the old, the old in 
the new. And so in the individual. 

II. They were met by prejudice. New truth finds in us something ever to over- 
come. The victory over a prejudice gives us cause for thanks ; what we really possess 
of truth we possess because we have resisted it. We do not understand it till we have 
contended against it. " We may believe more surely in the Resurrection, because they 
were so slow to believe.'' 

III. The spibituai, evidence or Christianity is the beaIi bvidkncb. Tnless wa 
see that Christ's resurrection coincides with spiritual truth and needs, we shall iot see it 
at all. Mediate knowledge can never be free from doubt ; certainty lies in that which is 
immediate. — J. 

Vers. 15 — 18. — Final utterances. I. Christianity is a good message fob ah, 
mankind. 

II. Ali who have appiancb in Christ abb men consecrated and saved. 

III. Ip faith be possessed, all necessary gonpibmations of faith will bb 
obanted. 

IV. In the kingdom of Christ, the outward is only or value a.3 bigkificant 
of the inwaed and spiritual. — J. 

Vers. 19, 20. — The Ascension. I. The ascent op Christ follows fbom his 
DESCENT. His glory was conditioned and prepared for by his self-humiliation for our 



II. He is now in the seat op spiritual power and globy. The right hand of 
God is a figure of omnipotence. This power is felt in and through all the thought and 
development of the world. 

III. This power is felt in human works of love. Good signs ever are following 
the course of the good message. Faith working by love in us corresponds to powir 
working by love in God. For us there is Divine encouragement to work for humanity 
in this last page — 

" In dens of passion and pits of woe, 
To see God's love still struggling through. 
To Bun the dark and solve the curse, 
And beam to the bounds of the oniverEe." 

A 

Vera. 1—18. Parallel passages : Matt, ixviii. 1—15 ; Luke ixiv. 1 — 49 ; John xx. 
l~23.~ An eventful day. I. The eesurreotion op Christ. 1. The morning of ow 
Lord's resurrection. The first day of the week on which the events recorded in 
this section of the chapter took place was an eventful one. On the morning of 
that day we are placed side by side with some weeping women. They are Mary 
Magdalene, Mary the mother of James, and Salome the wife of Zebedee. They had 
loved their liOrd in life; they had stood by him in death; they had cleaved to him 
on the cross ; and now his lifeless corpse is to them an object of afieotionate concern 
In the grey dawn of the morning twiligtit they quit their couch, they leave thei- 
cottage, and, setting out, come to the tomb (rpxa^at, present, " come " go St. M»xk 



eB.ivti-20j TflE GOSfEL AOGOSMNG TO 3t MaHK. Ui 

graphically) with the spices and perfumes they had carefully prepared, the Bun by this 
time having begun to rise. But lo 1 in their confusion and haste and sorrow they have 
overlooked an important fact; they have not known, or forgotten, the efforts of hii 
enemies to make sure the sepulchre, already secured with a great stone, sealing it with 
the imperial signet and setting a guard. In their Iturry they have forgotten all this — 
the stone, the seal, the sentry. Soon as the thought occurs to them they look anxiously 
at each other and sorrowfully inquire, " Who shall roll us away the stone from the door of 
the sepulchre ? " Of the stone, at least, they were well aware. 2. The rolling away of t/ie 
stone. Not pausing for an answer, they press forward to the sepulchre. On reaching 
the spot their fears are disappointed and their expectations exceeded. An earthquake 
had shaken the place, an angel had descended ; and when they looked up (i.va$K4tliairat, 
another graphic trait) they see that the stone is rolled away. So is it with many 
another stone of huge dimensions — with many a stone of difficulty and doubt and 
danger. So with the stone that barred the entrance of the heavenly world against the 
sinner ; lo with the stone that closes the grave's mouth where the dear dead dust of 
loved ones lies ; so with the stone that may be laid on the spot where our own ashes 
shall one day repose. The rolling away of this stone from the sepulchre of the Saviour 
involves the rolling away of all these stones. 3. The evening of the same day. In the 
evening of the same day two lone pilgrims are traversing the pathway between the 
vineyards. They are journeying to a little village embosomed in vine-clad hUIs, and 
seven miles distant from Jerusalem. They are glad to escape from town ; for a heavy 
heart seeks solitude. Their Master had been crucified, their hopes had been dashed, 
and their fond anticipations disappointed. They were returning home in sadness, for 
what was there in the capital to interest them now ? All that had been dear to them 
there was now gone, and to all appearance gone for ever, for their Lord and Master was 
BO more. The lovely scene around, the bright sky above, the cheerfulness of the 
■eaAon, but little harmonized with their sadness of heart and sorrow of spirit. 

" The spring in its beauty on Carmel was seen, 
And Hermon was dress'd in its mantle of green ; 
While the pathway which led to Emmaus was made 
All fragrant and cool by the olive trees' shade ; 
The dove in Jehoshaphat's valley was wailing, 
The eagle round Olivet proudly was sailing : 
But all was unheeded, for doubt and dismay 
Were distracting those two lonely men on their way." 

They walked and talked, and talked and walked, beguiling the difficulties of the way, 
and forgetting the lapse of time. They commune and reason together ; they balance 
probabilities. They comment on the early visit of the women to the sepulchre, on the 
stone being rolled away, and the vision of the angels, and so for a moment they 
entertain a faint hope that their Master might have risen, and would now restore the 
kingdom to Israel. But that hope is like a brief glimpse of sunshine which the dark 
clouds soon blot again from the sky. Immediately it occurs to them that the words of 
the women had been treated as an idle tale. Their wish might have been father to the 
thought, while hope and love are proverbially quick-sighted. Why had Peter not seen 
the vision ? Why had John not been privileged with the sight ? A third traveller 
overtakes them. He joins their company. He asks the cause of the sadness pictured 
on their countenance ; he inquires the subject of their communings ; he converses with 
them cordially and confidentially ; their heart was burning within them while he spake 
to them by the way and while he opened to them the Scriptures. These two scenes — 
one in the morning, the other in the evening of the same day; the former described by 
St. Mark and St. Matthew, the latter by St. Mark, but more fully by St. Luke (xxiv. 
13' — 35) — occurred on the day of our Lord's resurrection from the dead. 

II. A VISIT TO THE Saviour's tomb. 1. The place where they laid him. " The place 
where they laid him," as St. Mark terms it, or the place where the Lord lay, was the 
tomb of Joseph of Arimathsea. We visit the tomb of an earthly friend ; we venerate 
the place of our fathers' sepulchres ; we gaze pensively on the green hillock that over- 
lays the mortal remains of one we love ; with willing hand we plant the shrub— tin 
myrtle or the cypress — which marks the place where the heart's treasure it «iuiurin«d^ 



S64 THE GOSPEL ACCOEDlNa TO ST. MAEK. [oh. XTl. 1— 20 



we goatoh the early flowers of the spring and strew them on the grave of some dear on« 
gone ; carefully we wreathe the garland and place it on the spot or hang it on the shrul: 
that points it out. Many a time hav<> we stood in cemeteries more like a flower-garden 
than a garden of the dead, and admired the care, the tenderness, and the affection ot 
surviving relatives, as evinced in the plants and wreaths and flowers which ornamented 
the last resting-place of the departed. " Come, see the place where the Lord lay," was the 
invitation of the angel to the women in the parallel record of St. Matthew. The passage 
(>f the Gospel before us is thus a visit to a tomb — to tbe tomb of Joseph of Arimathsea, 
the tomb where Jesus lay, tbe tomb of the deanst Friend we ever had, the tomb of 
the most loving One that ever lived, the tomb of him who " came not to be ministered 
unto, but to minister," of the good Shepherd that laid down his life for the sheep, of him 
in regard to whom the believer can say, "He loved me, and gave himself for me." 
2. Object of our visit to the Saviour's sepulchre. The followers of the false prophet 
Mahomet make their weary pilgrimages from year to year to that impostor's tomb. We 
pity their delusion, we pray for their deliverance ; but we admire their devotedness. 
The mighty military enterprises that roused the martial spirit of European peoples 
during the Middle Ages, and employed the bands and hearts of bravest warriors, had for 
their object the rescue of the holy sepulchre from the possession of the infidel, and the 
protection from injury and insult of all Christian pilgrims who might please to visit 
that shrine. The conception was a grand one, but somewhat gross — gigantic in one 
sense, and yet grovelling in another. The subject of our section leads us in the same direc- 
tion ; but our visit is spiritual, not literal ; it is not to the mere geographical position, 
but to the glorious Person who made a brief repose there, and accomplished a tri- 
umphant resurrection therefrom. 3. The lessons to he learnt from this visit. When 
we visit in this sense the place where they laid him, the first lesson we are taught by it 
is (1) the lowliness of our Lord. It was wondrous condescension on his part to visit 
earth at all For the Holy One to come into this sin-blighted world, for the eternal 
Word to be made flesh and dwell among us, for the Son of God to be made of a woman, 
made under the Law, for the King of saints to endure the contradiction of sinners, for 
the King of glory to make himself of no reputation, — in a word, for him who was in the 
form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, to take upon him the 
form of a servant, was surely most astonishing humiliation. But for that high and 
holy One, not only to empty himself and become obedient to death, and a death so 
painful and so shameful as that of the cross, but to enter the region of the dead, to he 
laid in the tomb, and to lie as a corpse in the cold grave where they laid him, — ^this 
may well challenge the surprise of man, as it commands the study of angels. We 
admire that patriot king who quitted for a time his throne and left his kingdom and 
travelled through the nations of Europe, visiting their dockyards, their workshops, and 
their manufactories, and actually working as a mechanic, in order that when he 
returned home and resumed the reins of government he might benefit his kingdom 
and improve his subjects. Still more are we astonished at Charles V., who had done 
daring deeds of chivalry, gained brilliant victories, achieved great successes, exhibited 
strokes of skilful diplomacy, and wielded a mighty power among the potentates of 
Europe, at length, as though wearied with royalty and fatigued with dominion and 
surfeited with splendour, giving up and resigning all, retiring into private life, and 
spending the remainder of his days in a cloister. But what was the temporary resigna- 
tion of the Czar of all the Bussias, or the final abdication of him who wore the imperial 
crown of Germany and swayed the proud sceptre of Spain, compared with the King of 
kings and Lord of lords resigning the sovereignty of the universe for the stable of 
Bethlehem, the crown of glory for the cross of Calvary, the sceptre of heaven for the 
garden sepulchre? "Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that wo 
through his poverty might be rich." (2) " Come, see the place where the Lord lay," and 
consider the lesson of his love, for it was his love that laid him there. It was love that 
made him submit to the indignities which, as we have seen, were heaped upon him— 
the scoffing, and scourging, and spitting, and smiting. It was love that subjected him 
to the insults of priests and people, to the sentence of an unjust judge, the torture of a 
moit cruel death, and the disgrace of an ignominious execution. It was love that thua 
nailed him to the cross and suspended him on that cursed tree, as the gazing-itock of 
earth and heaven. So was it love that bound him in the habilimenti of death, wrapped 



M. X^ 1—20,] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST, MARK. 861 

him in the cerements, and laid him in the coldness of the tomb. Was it strange, then, 
that the sun suffered an obscuration when the Saviour expired, that the sky put on 
mourning when the Lord of glory gave up the ghost, or that the frame of nature shook 
when the Divine Upholder of its system died ? Was it strange that rocks rent as if in 
commiseration of what might rend even a heart of stone? Was it strange that graves 
opened and their ghastly occupants came forth, and with bloodless face and skeleton 
form entered the holy city, and moved through the streets in grand and solemn silence, 
or flitted as strange and fearful apparitions among the living population that passed 
along the thoroughfares, when he who was the living One, having all life in himself, 
entered the abode of death and was laid in the grave? Long before, a dead man had 
started into life, when he was laid in a prophet's grave and touched a prophet's Iwnes. 
Was it strange if the dove cooed plaintively in the valley of the Kidron, if the vine 
drooped mournfully on the hillside, if the brook murmured dolefully as it rolled over 
its pebble bed that night? Was it strange that the disciples hung their heads In 
sorrow, in sadness, and in silence, when their Master was entombed ? " Come, see the 
place where they laid him," and " where the Lord lay ; " and will not love beget love ? 
Will you not love him who thus loved you, or rather can you forbear loving him who 
thus loved you first of all and best of all ? Who ever heard of love like this before? 
" Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends ; " 
but while we were yet sinners, and therefore enemies, "Christ died for us." 
(3) " Come, see the place where the Lord lay," and reflect on a third lesson which is 
taught us there. This lesson respects the light that is thus shed into the gloom of the 
grave, and into the dreariness of that dark and narrow house. Darkness had reigned 
in all deathland before, but then life and immortality were brought to light. In some 
places, where railways run beneath high hills, all at once you pass out of the light of 
day into a dark subterranean passage. In a moment or two you find that tunnel not 
so dark as at first you thought it ; the lamps on either side relieve the gloom and inter- 
rupt the darkness. By-and-by you quit the tunnel and emerge into the light of day, 
brighter and more beautiful, you think, than before because of the very contrast. The 
grave was a dark subterranean passage once ; no light entered it, no ray brightened it ; 
but now lamp after lamp is hung up in It, and on the other side the Christian finds 
himself in the everlasting light and unclouded brightness of heaven. 

III. The qeave whence the Lobd kosb : the kesubbbction of Chbist. L Honour 
shovm Christ in death. " Ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified : he is risen ; 
he is not here : behold the place where they laid him ; " and mark the honour paid him 
there. Even in death he was not unhonoured. A few faithful females, a few devoted 
though dejected disciples, refused to believe that the past was only a delusion, the 
present merely a dream, and the future altogether darkness. They entertained an 
undefined expectation, and that expectation now glimmered before their mind's eye 
like the meteor of a moment, anon disappeared, leaving the gloom still denser. It 
was a dark hour with the disciples of our Lord, but it was the hour before the day- 
break. These few faithful followers, however, ceased not in their attention to the body 
and attendance at the grave. They watched and waited, and visited the spot. The 
Jewish ruler Nicodemus, and Joseph of Arimathaea, a rich and honomable coun- 
sellor, as we saw in the preceding chapter, failed not in tender devotedness and 
affectionate dutifulness to the lifeless corpse. 2. Manowr of a higher kind. Greater 
glory awaits that body. The resurrection work of wonder takes place. Scarce had the 
morning of the third day arrived, scarce had the morning-star announced its early dawn, 
when the mediatorial reward began to be bestowed, and the faithfulness of the eternal 
covenant became manifest. Come once more, and see the place where the Lord lay, 
and as it can never be seen again. There — O wondrous sight I — ^lies the Prince of life ; 
he is sleeping the sleep of death — silent and still as the grave where they laid him. 
Satan exults, the hosts of darkness hold jubilee, all pandemonium triumphs, hell cannot 
xjntain its satisfaction, if aught like satisfaction ever enters there. But hark 1 a voice 
from heaven echoes through that sealed sepulchre ; it is the voice of God. The words 
" Awake, arise I " resound. In an instant the grave-clothes drop from off the body ; 
without the help of human hand they are wrapped together and carefully laid aside ; 
the napkin falls from the face ; the stream of vital fluid circulates through the veins ; 
the Umbt that a, momeiit before had been stiff and stark in death t^re in motioo. 7hf 



see THE GOSPEL ACCOEDINa TO ST. MAEK. [oh.xvl1— 20. 

form of sinful flesh — of a servant and a sufferer — is lail aside for ever. The Saviour 
rises ; he rises in glory indescribable ; he rises by his own and his Father's power ; h« 
rises triumphant over death, and the Conqueror of the grave. The angels of God come 
down to do him honour ; one of them rolls away the stone and opens the sepulchre ; 
the keepers shake and become as dead men ; earth becomes tremulous for joy under 
the feet of its risen King ; all nature puts on its fairest spring attire and joins in 
celebrating the Redeemer's triumph. Thus on all sides are re-echoed the words, " He 
is not here : for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay." 
3. Positive proof of his resurrection. If you have any doubt of this, you need not 
go further for proof, and proof to demonstration, than the lie of the adversaries. " His 
disciples," say they, " came by night, and stole him away while we slept." What 
eleven disciples overpower a company of Boman soldiers armed to the teeth, or roll 
away the huge stone in silence, or enter the tomb in secrecy, or range things bo 
securely there ? Or, granting this, how could they carry the body unnoticed through 
the streets of Jerusalem, while thousands bivouacked in or patrolled those streets and 
thoroughfares at that Passover season, and while the full-orbed moon shone down upon 
the scene ? Or, allowing this, is it likely that Roman soldiers would sleep on guard 
while death was the penalty, or that a whole detachment of them should all fall asleep 
at the same time ? Or, conceding even this, suppose they slept, how could they see 
the purloiners of the body, or how could they say whether disciples did it or not? We 
need not stay to answer these questions ; they sufiSciently show the truth of the state- 
ment, " He is not here : for he is risen." 

IV. Reasons fob the besubbbiction of oub Lobd. 1. It was necessary for Justifi- 
cation. We have visited the empty tomb, and now we may inquire why he lay there 
and rose thence. It was in the first place for our justification. " He was delivered for 
our offences, and raised again for our justification." " By his death," says one, " he 
paid our debt, in his resurrection he received our acquittance." Another says, " Had 
no man been a sinner Jesus had not died, had he been a sinner he had never risen 
again." In other words, his death shows his sufferings for sin, his resurrection proves 
full satisfaction made by those sufferings. The meaning of his death is summed up in 
the words, " God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, con- 
demned sin in the flesh ; " the meaning of his resurrection runs thus : " Who shall lay 
anything to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifieth. Who is he that 
condemneth ? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at 
the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." His resurrection was 
thus his acquittal from the obligations he had come under, and our absolution through 
him from the debt we owed, so that, once united to him by faith, our persons are 
justified, our sins remitted, and our services accepted. Thus we see the meaning of 
that empty tomb. It is as though the voice of the Eternal proclaimed in thunder- 
tones through all the universe, " This is my beloved Son," in whose person and work, 
in whose life and death, " I am well pleased." His resurrection is the full recognition 
of the Redeemer's work. It is the protest of Heaven against the accusations with 
which he was loaded. It is the vindication of him whom Jew and Gentile condemned 
as deserving of death. It is the authoritative announcement that the work was 
finished, the debt paid, justice satisfied, the Law fulfilled, obedience rendered, punish- 
ment endured, wrath exhausted, sin put away, righteousness brought in, Satan 
vanquished, and God glorified. It is the consent of Heaven to the cancelling of the 
handwriting that testified against us. Therefore "all power is given unto him in 
heaven and in earth." And had he not all power, as Jehovah's Fellow, from everlasting ? 
Yes, but now he has it as our Mediator; he holds it on our behalf, and exercises it tor 
our benefit. Therefore " h« received gifts." And why needed he gifts in whom all 
fulness dwelt, and who shared the Father's glory ? As Head over all things he received 
them for his people's use, " even for the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell 
among them." " Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that 
I might take it again." And did not God love him when he was in his bosom, before 
•11 worlds? Yes, but now he loves him as our Representative, and ns in him; and 
consequently the apostle prays so earnestly to " be found in Christ." He is "crowned 
with glory and honour." And why ? That he might communicate to us that glory which, 
•s God, he had laid aside, and as Mediator resumed, and thus make his own peculi«i 



«. xn. 1—20.3 THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MARK. 867 

privilege the common property of all believers. 2. It was necessary also for our sanctifl- 
cation. " Planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likenesi 
of his Msurreotion;" "As Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, 
even so should we also walk in newness of life." To live habitually in any known sin 
is to deny practically that sin is death ; to indulge presumptuously in sin is to ignore 
the fact that Christ has risen from the dead; to persevere in sin is to resist the 
influence of Christ's resurrection, and shut our ears to the loud call that comes from 
the empty tomb, saying, " Awake, thou that sleepest, and arise from the dead, and 
Christ shall give thee light." We turn to some practical illustrations of the subject 
of sanctiflcation. What is a saint ? He is one that is risen with Christ, and acts 
accordingly, seeking the things that are above. Though in this world, he is not of it ; 
he is above it. His conversation, treasure, heart, hope, home, — all are in heaven, whence 
he looks for the Saviour. Among the currents in the Atlantic Ocean is the great Gulf 
Stream ; it has been called a river in the ocean. The water of this stream is on the 
average twenty degrees higher than the surrounding ocean ; it preserves its waters dis • 
tinct from those of the sea on either side, so that the eye can trace the lino of contact. 
It retains its physical identity for thousands of miles, casting branches and fruits ot 
tropical trees on the coast of the Hebrides and Norway. It greatly influences the 
Atlantic, keeping one-fourth of its waters in constant motion. The sanctifled person — 
that is, the saint — is like that Gulf Stream ; he is in the ocean of this world, but he 
has no afBnity with it ; he is not conformed to it ; he has a higher temperature, for 
" the love of God is shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost which is given unto 
him." Nevertheless, his influence is great and always for good ; he keeps the dead 
waters from stagnation and in healthy movement. 

* With Christ the Lord we died to>in, 
Witli him to life we rise ; 
To life which, now begun on earth. 
Is perfect in the skies." 

8. 2%« resurrection of Christ is necessary for our resurrection. " Now is Christ risen 
from the dead, and become the Firstfruits of them that slept ; " " He has destroyed the 
last enemy, and that is death." During the reign of Augustus Caesar a reverse befell 
the Roman army in the densely wooded valley of the Lippe. It was led by Varus to 
quell an insurrection of the Germans. The legions got embarrassed amid the entangle- 
ments of the forest ; they fell into disorder ; a violent tempest coming on at the sarcie 
time aggravated their difficulties; four and twenty thousand of them were cut to 
pieces, and the general fell upon his sword. Six years after succeeding legions reached 
the plain, where lay the bleaching bones of former comrades, strewn in disorder or piled 
in heaps as they had fought and fallen. Fragments of weapons, limbs of horses, heads 
of men stuck on trunks of trees, were to be seen on every hand. In groves hard by 
were the savage altars where tribunes and centurions had been victimized ; while those 
who lurvived that fatal field pointed out the place where lieutenants were butchered, 
standards taken, Varus wounded, crosses erected for the captives, and the eagles trampled 
imderfoot. In addition to all, in a night-vision the ill-fated Varus, smeared with blood 
and emerging from the fens, seemed present to the imagination of his successor, and 
beckoning him to a like defeat. The description of the whole scene by Tacitus, the 
Roman historian, is vivid and terrible in the extreme. Ever after throughout his reign 
the Emperor Augustus was heard at times to exclaim, "Varus, Varus, give me back my 
legions 1 " So, when we reflect on the ruins of frail humanity — the wreck of generation 
after generation — we may well imagine Mother Earth appealing to Death in pitiful 
accents, and exclaiming, " Death, Death, give me back my sons and daughters ; restore 
to me my children thou hast slain." That appeal shall be heeded one day, not by 
Death, but by him who was swallowed of Death — swallowed as a poison, and so 
•destroyed the destroyer. Christ, by his resurrection, says to Earth, widowed and 
weeping over the graves of her children, " Weep not 1 I will ransom them from the 
power of the grave ; I will redeem them from death." To Death he says at the same 
time, " Death, I will be thy plagues ! Grave, I will be thy destruction ! " Further, 
he will not only raise us up, he will fashion the body of our humiliation and make it 
Uka Mt own glorious body. Flints and animals h^ve their proper habitats ; difTereat 



»68 THE GOSPEL ACOOBDING TO ST. MAEK. [oftXTi. 1— za 

•peclea demand different situations ; different vegetable tribes are allotted to different 
latitudes and different elevations. The palms of the torrid zone will dwindle and dia 
in the temperate ; the trees of the temperate, again, shrink into shrubs in the frigid. 
Such is the difference of latitude. That of elevation has a similar effect. A French 
traveller tells us that, in ascending Mount Ararat, he foimd at the foot the plants of 
Asia, further up those of Italy, at a higher elevation those of Prauce, then thjse of 
Sweden, and at the top those of Lapland and the northern regions. Just so we shall 
be adapted to our future dwelling-place. " Piesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom 
of Grod ;" therefore the living shall be changed, the dead quickened, and all God's people, 
quick and dead, glorified together ; " for this corruptible must put on incorruption, and 
tfais mortal must put on immortality." 

V. Peaotioal lessons. 1. Come, "behold the place where they laid him," and 
there see the fi-uits of Christ'.': death and the benefits of his resurrection; come, seek 
the pardon and peace which the justified possess; come, secure the holiness and 
bappiness of the sanctified; come, entertain the "sure and certain hope of the resur- 
rection to eternal life." 2. We have considered the lowliness of Christ, and dwelt on 
his love, and now we may rejoice in the light he has shed on the tomb. We are 
hastening to that " bourn whence no traveller returns." As we advance, desire fails ; 
a little longer, and the grasshopper will be a burden. Once we reach this Bommit wa 
soon go down the hill, and it is well and wisely so arranged. 

" Heaven gives our years of failing strength 
Indemnifying fleetness. 
And those of youth a seeming length 
Froportion'd to their sweetness." 

3. " Te seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was crucified." So, too, we aeek Jesus, though 
condemned as a Nazarene in the spirit of the contemptuous question, " can any good 
thing come out of Nazareth?" We seek Christ crucified, though to the Jew a 
stumbling-block, and to the Greek foolishness. We are not ashamed of the offence 
of the cross. Nay, like Paul, we glory in that cross. The day was when Paul gloried 
in his pedigree, for he was an Hebrew of the Hebrews ; in his sect, for he belonged 
to the straitest sect of the Jews' religion, being a Pharisee; in his morality, as 
touching the Law blameless; in his learning, brought up at the feet of Gamaliel; in 
the seal of the Abrahamic covenant, being circumcised on the eighth day ; in his 
Roman franchise, born free ; in his citizenship, a citizen of no mean city — his native 
Tarsus, beautifully situated in the plain and on the banks of the Cydnus ; in his per- 
secuting zeal, haling men and women to prison. But once his eyes were opened 
once his heart was renewed, once he obtained mercy, then his ground of glorying was 
altogether changed. " God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world." 4. We shall 
not see his face until either we stand on the sea of glass, or his feet stand ao-ain on 
Olivet ; we cannot hold him as those who "met him by the way ... and held him by 
the feet, and worshipped him; " we cannot minister to him as certain women in the 
days of his flesh ; we cannot serve him at food like Martha, nor pour oil on hig head 
like Mary. What, then, remains for us to do ? How are we to express our love to him ? 
We are to think of him, believe on him, pray to him, accept him for our King and 
submit to his laws, call on his name, take the cup of salvation and keep his memory 
green m our souls, show forth his death, glory in his resurrection, partake of the sacra- 
ment of the Supper— It is the memorial of his death; and delight in the sabbath— it is 
the monument of his resurrection. 5. " Come, see the place where the Lord lay " and 
let the sight encourage you. Dread not death ; you believe in him that conquered it 
Dread not the grave; you love him who lay in it. Dread not hell; you believe in 
him who rescued you from it But dread sin and depart from it; "go and ain n« 
more.— J. J. O. ° 



Vers. 19, 20. Parallel passages : Luke xiiv. 50—53 ; Acts 1. 9— 12.— 371* Aicentim. 
h S^fZt''" ""' '?:*^'''f™" PKBCEDiKG. Our Lord led the apostles out •' as fej 
?L^ f ^M Li ° .*^ ^'^^"^ *^°.P\°^ *^* '"°"'»* "^ Olives, a mUe, or somewhat more 
than a mile, below the amnmit of tbe ridge, whence they afterward, returned by S2 



8H. xvL 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. 369 

way aoTois the monnt to Jerusalem. The middle summit of Olivet, Jehel-et-Tur, is, 
however, the traditional place of ascent. He has led ourselves further than to Bethany, 
for he has led us all our life till now ; while all the way by which he has led us has 
been strewn with blessings — blessings temporal and spiritual. When he had led them 
as far as to Bethany {eas els, or eus vphs, as far as towards Bethany, or the descent 
that led down to the village, or over against it), he lifted up his hands and blessed 
them. The high priest of the Aaronic order had three things to do — offer sacrifice, make 
intercessions, and bless the people in the name of the Lord. What a beautiful bene- 
diction was put into his' lips and pronounced upon the people, " The Lord bless thee, 
and keep thee : the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and he gracious unto thee : 
the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace"! Better and more 
beautiful, if that be possible, are the blessings which our great High Priest invokes on 
our behalf and commands upon us. Of these we have a specimen in his intercessory 
prayer, as contained in the seventeenth chapter of St. John. 

II. The pabtino. " He was parted from them," or " stood apart from them (tUar-i])," 
as it is expressed by St. Luke. Amid certain cheerful tones one sorrowful note is struck, 
one sad word occurs, one painful sentiment is expressed. Some find the motto of this world 
in the words, " Man weeps ; " others write it in the words, " We part ; " a yet higher and 
better authority has expressed it in the words, " Vanity of vanities, all is vanity." This 
last combines the other two, for this world is a vale of weeping and a place of parting. 
What tongue could tell the painful partings that from time to time take place ? Who 
could count the bitter tears that are shed ? Those partings ofttimes wring the stoutest 
heart and wet the manliest cheek. At the railway station, or before going on board the 
emigrant ship, many a sorrowful separation we have all seen. The separation caused 
by death usually lasts the longest, and is, therefore, in jiroportion sorrowful. Yet it is 
not all pain in the parting of a Christian ; this passage suggests an element of pleasure. 
When our Lord was parted from his disoiplea, he was carried up to heaven ; when the 
Christian is parted by death from friends, loving and beloved, he sleeps hy Jesus, and 
them that so sleep the Lord will bring with him. The day, moreover, is coming when 
Christian friends, parted by death, shall he caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and 
so shall we ever be with one another, and with our Lord. 

III. Thk Ascension itself. The expressions employed to describe our Lord's ascension 
are, " He was received up into heaven," St. Mark ; " Carried up into heaven," St. Luke ; 
while in Acts we read (1) that " he was taken up," an expression similar to that of either 
Gospel ; and again, (2) that "he went up " or " he went " (Revised Version). Here, then, 
we have the power of the Father and the Son. As he rose by his own and his Father's 
jjower, he ascended by the same. Further, it may be implied that he went up with joy- 
fulness to those realms of glory whence he had descended while the Father welcomed him 
home, and took him to that paternal bosom where he had been before all worlds. It must 
have been a splendid sight to witness. Some time ago we stood where many thousands 
were assembled to see an aeronaut ascend. With gradual ascent the aerial machine 
rose; ujiward and upward it glided ; higher and higher still it mounted, while majesti- 
cally and magnificently it moved. At length a silvery cloud received it, and screened 
it from the view ; again, on emerging from the cloud, it pursued its way along the sky 
till it dwindled to a dark spot in the distance, and then passed out of sight. How 
grand, we thought, must have been the sight, apart from every other consideration, of 
our Lord's ascent from that spot where his feet last stood on Olivet 1 If, when our 
Lord was transfigured, his face did shine as the sun, and his raiment became white as 
the light — if on that occasion his face and figure assumed somewhat of heavenly 
splendour — equally or more resplendent and heavenly, we may well su|ipose, was his 
appearance as he rose from earth in his journey through the sky. The glory of heaven 
was round about him ; that glorified body shot upward with wondrous buoyancy. Enoch 
wa» translated — we are not told how ; Elijah was borne up amid a whirlwind by a chariot 
of fire and horses of fire ; Jesus, who had walked upon the waves, now mounts upon 
the winds, making the cloud his chariot and upborne on the wings of the wind. 
Glorious in his appearance, glorious in his motion, glorious in all the indescribable 
grandeur of his heavenward ascent, he proceeded on his way till a cloud — a bright cloud, 
a cloud silver- lined and beautiful — coming underru-alu rioeived (JnriKafiiv^ him as in a 
chariot, and hid him from their eyes. 

MAKK — U. 2 B 



370 THE GOSPEL ACCOBDING TO ST. MARK. [cu. xvi. 1—^0, 



IV. His attendants. Neither went he alone ; thousands of invisible beings formed 
Lis escort and carried him aloft. To this perhaps the psalmist, foreseeing it in prophetic 
vision, may allude when, in the sixty-eighth psalm, he says, " The chariots of God art 
twenty thousand, even thousands of angels." No conqueror ever enjoyed such a 
triumph, no monarch ever had such a train. At length they reach the high battle- 
ments of heaven ; the accompanying angels demand admittance ; standing without the 
portals, they raise the voice like the sound of many waters as they say or sing, " Lift 
up your heads, ye gates r and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors ; and the King of 
glory shall come in." The angels within respond, making inquiry, " Who is this King 
of glory ? " Then both, uniting in full chorus together, sing, " The Lord of hosts, he 
is the King of glory." The Father everlasting takes him by the hand, and sets him 
at his side, and there he sits for ever at the right hand of the Majesty on high. 

" Who is this King of glory — who ? 
The Lord, for strength renown'd , 
It hattle mighty, o'er his foes 
Eternal Victor orown'd. 

" Who is this King of glory — who ? 
The Lord of hosts renown'd ; 
Of glory he alone is King, 
Who is with glory orowu'd." 

V. The witnesses op the scene. The witnesses of the scene were men on earth 
and angels from the sky — the one to testify that he rose from earth, the other to bear 
witness that he entered heaven. The former fact may perhaps be expressed by iTrfipBTi^ 
the other by aiii\ii<peiii ; while his intermediate progress and journey between may ba 
expressed by ayei^epero, imperfect, and wopewo/jcVoi;, participle — both marking his gradual 
ascent. The human spectatuis, strnck with the grandeur of the scene, stood as il 
riveted to the spot, and continued gazing up into heaven as though they would never 
be satisfied with seeing such a sight ; or perhaps the surprise it occasioned was blended 
with sorrow, as if their Lord and Master had gone from them never to return. But 
two angels, apparelled in white, comforted them with the assurance that " this same 
Jesus, which is taken up from them into heaven," shall come again in like manner 
through the riven sky visibly and gloriously. The human witnesses of the Ascension 
felt personally interested in the result, the angelic looked pryingly into the things con- 
nected therewith. The sorrow of the disciples was succeeded by great joy, for though 
they had lost his bodily presence, his spiritual presence — nearer, closer, in every place, 
and at all times — is promised them instead. 

VL The plaok whence he ascended. The place of the Ascension suggests • lesson 
of instruction and comfort. A garden on the western slope of Ohvet had been the 
place of his sorest trial and the scene of his deepest tribulation prior to the Crucifixion ; 
an upland on the eastern side, or near the summit of the same hill, was the place of his 
triumph. On one side was the dark enclosure, still noted for its sombre aspect and 
gloomy olives, where the Saviour agonized, sweating great drops of blood, and praying 
for the bitter cup, if possible, to pass; on the other side was the spot whence he 
ascended. There, too, men and angels met — men asleep from sorrow and oblivious of 
sympathy, an angel ministering strength and succour to the suflfering Son of God ; here 
men are rapt spectators, and angels swell his train. On one side of the mount were 
sorrow and suffering, on the other glory and triumph. May it not to some extent 
be the same with ourselves? The valley of Achor, which means " trouble," has often 
proved the door of hope. " We glory in tribulation also : knowing that tribulation 
worketh patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope." Humiliation 
goes before exaltation ; the cross precedes the crown : " If we suffer with him, we shall 
also be glorified together;" while our trials here shall enhance our triumph hereafter. 

VII. The purposes served by the Ascension. One purpose was triumph over his 
and our enemies. Having spoiled principalities, or reft them from him, he made a show 
of them openly. It was a custom of antiquity for a conqueror on the day of his 
triumph to have captives bound to his chariot and dragged along at his chariot-wheels. 
So with Christ. When he led captivity captive, he bound to his chariot- wheels sin, Satan, 
death, and helU Sin he buried in his own grave, having borne its penalty. As for 



m. XTL 1—20.] THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO ST. MAEK. 371 

Satan, the old serpent, he has bruised his head, destroying his works. Death he otm-" 
came by dying, and through death he has destroyed him that had the power of it ; 
while in him and by him we can adopt the tone of triumph and say, " Death, where 
IB thy Bting ? Grave, where is thy victory ? " Of the grave he has said, " I will be 
thy destruction;" and the day is hastening on apace when the earth shall cast forth 
her dead. Another purpose of the Ascension is the hestowai of gifts. On the day of a 
triumph the conqueror distributed many and costly gifts, sometimes dealing them out 
deliberately, and sometimes throwing them broadcast among the multitude. We read 
of Julius Cassar, on the occasion of a great triumph, bestowing munificent donations 
on his soldiery, and distributing many gifts of grain and gold to the people as they 
crowded around. A greater than C«sar or Solomon is here. Jesus, on the day 
of his triumph, having receiving gifts for triumphal distribution, " gave gifts imto 
men ... he gave some, apostles ; and some, prophets ; and some, evangelists ; and 
some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the 
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ." Even on the rebellious he has con- 
ferred his favours, " that the Lord God might dwell among them." Prom tlie day of hia 
ascension until now he has lavished on his people, with unstinted generosity and most 
bountiful hand, the benefits of salvation and the results of his redemptive work. 

VIII. Preparation above. Having made provision for us when he was here below, 
he is gone to prepare a place above. He ascended to provide a place for us ; and, having 
prepared it for us, he is now preparing us for it. In his Father's house are many 
mansions ; he is gone to prepare one of those mansions for each of his followers. A 
mansion ! Here is a word that denotes stability and implies duration. The most solid 
structure that ever man reared shall yield to the tooth of time. The pyramids of 
Egypt shall one day, we doubt not, be levelled with the sands of the desert that blow 
around them. The Roman Colosseum shall perish. The Parthenon of Athens shall 
be left without one pillar standing. St. Peter's and St. Paul's shall become heaps of 
rubbish. The castles of kings, that seem to defy decay, shall moulder. Earth itself 
shall be removed, and its everlasting hills shaken. But all the many mansions in glory 
ihall bs durable as the throne of God himself, and stable as the pillars of the universe, 

" O Lord, thy love's nnboonded — 

So full, BO vast, so free I 
Our thoughts are all confounded 

Whene'er we think on thee : 
For us thou oam'st from heaven. 

For us to bleed and die, 
That, purchased and forgiven, 

1ir« might ascend on high." 



HOMILETICAL INDEX 



TO 



THE GOSPEL ACCOIiDTNG TO ST. MARK. 



CHAPTEE I. 






rHEKK 




PAGE 


The Beginning of the Gospel 


8,28 


, 44 


The Ministry of the Forerunner 


y, 28 


,50 


The Baptism of Christ 


10,31 


,56 


The Temptation of Christ ... 


12,31 


,59 


The Divine Preacher ... 


• •■ 


13 


Fishers of Men ... 


14 


,47 


Christ's Authority in Teaching 


... 


16 


" Having Authority " 


••• 


17 


Clirist's Authority over Spirits 


»•• 


20 


Christ's Domestic Ministry... 


••• 


21 


The Healer of Multitudes ... 


••• 


22 


Prayer and Work... 


■ •• 


23 


Seeking Jesus ... ... 


••• 


24 


The Leper healed ... 


••• 


25 


" Moved with Compassion " 


••■ 


27 


John's Baptism and Christ's 


... 


2D 


The Call of the Disciples ... 


32,43 


,69 


The Authority of Je»us 


... 


33 


The Leper's Petition 


••• 


33 


Christ and the Demons 


••• 


34 


" The Region . . . round about " 


••• 


35 


The History of a Prayer of Chri^ 


t ... 


36 


The Ministry of Mercy 


••■ 


37 


Christ's Call to Busy Men ... 


••• 


38 


The Home and the Synagogue 


••« 


40 


Christ the Healer... 


••• 


41 


Glad Tidings 


».. 


42 


The Consecration of Jesus ... 


... 


43 


Soul-Emancipation ... 


... 


43 


The Progress of Health m 


.». 


44 


The Leper ... ... 


M. 


44 


The Offloial Preparation ... 


... 


46 



THEWn PAGI 

The Illustrative Example of Christ's 

Work 48 

The Cleansing of the Leper ... 49 

The Galilean Ministry ... ... 68 

The Healing of a Demoniac, etc. ... 73 

The Cure of Peter's Wife's Mother and 

Others ... ... ... 75 

A Physician for both Body and Soul 76 

The Cure of a Leper ... ... 78 

CHAPTEE IL 

Christ's Authority to Pardon ... 89 

Levi's Discipleship and Hospitality... 90 

Christianity and Asceticism ... 91 

The Sabbath ... ... ... 93 

Cure of the Paralytic 94, 97, 100, 104 

Levi's Feast ... ... ... 95 

The Sabbath made for Man ... 96 
Levi's Call from Dishonour to Disciple- 
ship ... ... ... ... 97 

On Fasting ... .„ 99, 102 

Matthew's House ... ... ... 100 

Love Greater than Law ... ... 101 

The Sick of the Palsy : the Spiritual 

and Physical Healing ... ... 104 

The Lord and the Law of the Sabbath 103 

Call of Levi: Feasting and Fasting... 108 

Sabbath Observance ... ». Ill 

CHAPTEE m. 
The Withered Hand ... 120, 127, 138 

Persecution and Popnlaritf m. 121 

The Twelve «• 124 



INDEX. 



PAGE 

Blasphemy ... — ... 125 
Kindred of Christ ... 126, 130 

" But they held their Peace" ... 127 
" Stretch forth thy Hand I " ... 128, 133 
The Choosing of the Apostles 128, 143 

Christ hindered by his Friends ... 129 

TheSaviourjudgedby the World ... 129 
" How can Satan cast out Satan ? " or, 

the Logic of Spiritual Forces ... 129 

The Unforgivable Sin ... «. 130 

Divine Belationships ... .m 130 

A Miracle of Healing ... «• 131 

The Saviour's View of Sin ... „. 132 

The Helpers of Jesus ... u. 135 

Betirement ... ... ... 136 

Sabbath Observance ... ... 137 

Testimony of EvU to Goodness ,„ 137 

The Need of Missionaries ... ... 137 

The Sin against the Holy Ghost ... 137 

Kinship to Jesus ... ... ... 138 

Popularity of Christ on the Increase... 142 

Mistaken Friends and Malignant Foes 144 

The Beal Relationship ... ... 155 

CHAPTEE IV. 

Spiritual Sowing ... ... ... 161 

The Word stolen from the Heart ... 162 

The Word starved in the Heart ... 162 

The Word choked in the Heart ... 163 

The Word fruitful in the Heart ... 164 

The Lamp of Parabolic Teaching ... 165 

Spiritual Growth ... ... ... 166 

The Mustard Seed 167, 173, ] 83, 208 

The Storm 168 

The Nature-Preaching of Christ ... 170 
The Parable of the Sower ... 170, 171 
Christ's Claim upon the Attention of 

Men 171 

The Eeward of Disoipleshlp ... 171 

From One Learn AU ... ... 171 

Revelation and not Concealment the 

Final Purpose of the Truth ... 171 

"Measure for Measure" ... ... 172 

The Seed oast upon the Earth ... 172 

Man used and then dispensed with ... 172 

" Wherennto shall we Liken it ? " ... 172 
"Without a Parable spake he not 

nntothem" ... ... ... 173 

The Parable m Instrument of Mercy 

and Judgment ... ... ... 171 

Obiist and hii Disoiplea in tha Stonn 171 

The Obiuoh in the World .„ ... 171 



The Christian's Extremity Christ's 

Opportunity ... ... ... 174 

Human and Divine Remonstrances ... 175 
Divine Teaching from the Fisherman's 

Boat ... ... ... ... 175 

Human Hearts tested by Truth ... 176 
The Perils and Prospects of tlie Good 

Seed of tlie Kingdom ... ... 177 

The Progress of Divine Life in the 

Soul ... ... ... ... 179 

Great Issues from Small Beginnings 180 
The Duty of faithfully Hearing the 

Word ... ... ... ... 181 

The Kingdom of God further illus- 
trated by Parables ... ... 182 

The Stilling of the Storm : the De- 
liverance of the Church ... ... 184 

The Process of Truth in the Soul ... 185 

The Use of the Spirit ... ... 185 

The Beauty of Growth ... ^. 186 

The Power of Ideas ... ... 186 

Storm and Calm ... ... ... 186 

Parabolic Teaching ... ... 187 

Light and Illumination ... ... 203 

Spiritual Vegetation, or Secret Growth 201 

CHAPTER V. 

The Lord of Spirits ... ,„ 214 

The Maiden's Spirit recalled ... 215 

Faith Conquering Timidity ... 216 

Legion ... ... ... ,.. 217 

Satanic Possession a Destruction of 

Personal Identity ... ... 217 

Prayers granted and denied ... 218 

Unfriendly Heralds of Christ ... 218 

Monumental Miracles ... ... 219 

Ministries Broken in upon ... ... 219 

Jairus's Daughter ... ... 219 

The Healing of the Issue of Blood ... 220 

Salvation without Money, eto. ... 220 

The Little of Things of Christ are 

Great Things for Men ... ... 220 

" Who touched me ? " ... ... 220 

" Why troublest thou the Master any 

further?" 221 

The Demoniao of Gadara ... ... 222 

The Rejection and the Beoeption of 

Jesus 223 

Desire and Duty ... ... ... 221 

The Faith of Jairus ... ^ S2J 

The Lord amongst the Needy «. 227 

The Touch of Fkitk ». m. 328 



INDEX. 



iii 



tHESTB PAOB 

The Dead Maiden ... ... 229 

A Man with an Unclean Spirit ... 230 

Avowed and Hidden Faith... ... 231 

Christ the Eedeemer of the Intellect 231 

The Magic of Faith 232 

Life Victorious ... ... ... 232 

Gadarene or Gergesene Demoniacs ... 2:i2 

Touching in the Throng ... ... 238 

CHAPTER VL 

Unbelief ... ... ... 250 

The Mission of the Twelve ... 251 

Sin-Hating Righteousness ... ... 2.52 

No Rest for Jebos ... ... 251 

"It is I" ... ... ... 255 

The Popularity of the Divine Phy- 
sician ... ... ... ... 255 

Jesus Visiting his own Country „. 256 
The Twofold Wonder awakened by 

the Gospel ... ... ... 256 

Detracting from the Divine Greatness 

of Christ 257 

Christ Ministering to the Villages ... 257 
The Mission of the Twelve 257, 278 

Accounting for Christ ... ... 258 

A Soul's Tragedy 259 

Telling Jesus ... ... ... 259 

Christ's Offer of Rest 260 

The Christian Worker's Rest ... 260 

" Coming and Going " ... ... 200 

Christ's Sympathy for Men ... 260 

The Shepherdly Emotion of Christ ... 260 

Feeding the Five Thouband ... 261 

Spiritual Economy ... ... 262 

Jesus Walking on the Sea ... 262, 270 

Christ's Retirement ... ... 263 

Secondary Benefits of the Gospel ... 263 

Jesus the Rejected Teacher ... 263 

"They were offended in him" ... 265 

Preparation for Preaching ... ... 266 

The Murderers of John the Baptist 267 

Recreative Rest ... ... ... 268 

Christian Care for the Needy ... 269 
The Carpenter; or, the Dignity of 

Honest Labour ... ... ... 271 

The Apostolic Commission ... ... 272 

Herod : the Disordered Oonscienoo ... 273 

The Miracle of the Loaves ... 273 

Chriat at Home ... ... ... 274 

Missionaries ... ... ... 275 

Wonder ud Fancy m« ••# 275 

The Heio'i Death m* — !275 



THKMB 




FAei 


Rest and Work ... ._ 


••. 


276 


The Multitude Fed 


... 


276 


The Vision on the Lake ... 


•.• 


276 


Commotion in Gennesaret ... 


M. 


277 


The Rejection at Nazanth 




277 


The Murder of the Baptist ... 


M. 


279 


Miraculous Provision 


... 


281 


Miraculous Protection ... 


... 


285 


CHAPTER VII. 







Ceremonialism and Spirituality ... 297 

The Alien's Faith ... ... 298 

The Deaf hears ; the Dumb speaks 299 

Externalism versus Righteousness ... 300 
The Prayer of the Syro-Phoenician 
Woman ... ... 301, 311 

"Ephphatha~ ... ... ... 303 

The Seclusion of Jesus ... m. 803 

" He could not be hid " ... ... 304 

Deaf and Dumb ... ... 305,309,312 

A Typical Cure ... ... ... 306 

The Ritual and the Reality of Purifi- 
cation ... ... ... 308 

The Heathen Mother ... ... 309 

The Tradition of Men in Competition 

with the Commandments of God ... 309 
The Real and the Imaginary Defile- 
ment ... ... ... ... 310 

Exposure of Pharisaism ... ... 813 

Daughter of a Syro-Phoenician Woman 

healed ... ... ... 320 

A Miracle of Restoration ... ... 325 

CHAPTER Vni. 

The Giver of Bread ... ... 336 

Whence shall Man's Soul be fed ? ... 337 

Signs ... ... ... ... 341 

Misunderstanding ... ... 341 

Sight for the Blind 342 

Seeking for a Sign ... 343, 358 

The Leaven of the Pharisees and of 

Herod... ... ... ... 344 

"Do ye not understand?" ... ... 344 

Restoring the Blind to Sight ... 34S 
The Saviour's Method in Dealing with 

Individual Souls ... ... 346 

Curing Spiritual Blindness ... 346 
Peter's Good Confession ... 846, 356 

Peter's Self-Contradiction ... ... 347 

The Christ foretelUng his own Career 848 

Covert Temptation ... ... 813 

The Master*! Summons to Ms Disoiplei 849 

Aihaued of Jemu itiid hi* Word* ^ SM 



IT 



INDEX. 



IHEME PAGE 

Christ's Beneficence and Economy ... 350 

The Blind Man of Bethsaida 351, 359 

The Worldlinjj; and the Christian ... 352 

A Sign from Heaven ... ... 353 

Leaven ... ... ... ... 351 

The Gradual Healing of the Blind 

Man m ». .» 355, 362 



THEME 

Discipleship ... 

Compassion for the Many 
Jesus the Messiah 
Unwelcome Prophecies 



PAGM 

357 
358 
359 
359 



The Feeding of the Four Thousand ... 360 
Secular Profit and Spiritual Loss ... 365 



VOLUME IL 



CHAPTER TX. 

Transfiguration ... 

The Lunatic Boy ... 

Death ffiretuld ... ,., 

True Griiitness ... 

The Judgment of Chiirity ... 

Warning's ... ... 

"Jesus only " ... ... 

The Saying that was kept ... 
Tlio Cure of the Demoiiiac Child 
The Omnipotence of Faith 
" Save Ijy Prayer ■ 



10, IS, 32 
... 12 
... 13 
... 14 
... 15 
... 17 
... 19 
... 19 
20,33 
... 22 
... 23 



The Gospel a Source of Sorrow and 

Perplexity ... ... ... 24 

"Who shall be Greatest ?"... ... 24 

The Comprehensiveness of Christ's 

Service ... ... ... 25 

The Value of Deliverance from Spi- 
ritual Snares ... ... .•■ 26 

Christian Purity ... ... ... 27 

Christ and the Child ... ... 28 

Christian Beneficence ... ._ 28 

Causes of Stumbling ... ... 30 

Better Die than Sin ... ... 31 

The Conditions of Success in Spiritual 

Work ... ... ... ... 84 

Honour ... ... ... ... 34 

Stumbling-Blocks... ... ... 35 

Glimpses of the Glory of Jesus 36, 39 

Dark Sayings ... ... ... 37 

The Demoniac ... ... 37, 48 

Renewed Prediction of Death 38, 53 

The Symbolic Child ... ... 38 

Marked Sins ... ... ... 38 

The Tribute Money ... ... 56 

The Lesson of Humility ... ... 57 

Eebnke of Sectarian Narrowness ... 67 

Christ's Love to his Little Ones, and 

Offence* ••• ... ... 68 



CHAPTER X. 



Marriage and Divorce 
Christ and the Children 
Loved, yet Lacking 
Christ must be All 
The Reiterated Prediction , 



67, 85, 91, 94 

68, 86 

... 69 

^ 70 

.. 71 



True Ministry is True Dignity ... 71 
Blind BartimsBUB ... 74, 80, 84, 90, 94 
Christ's Statement of the Divine Law 

of Marriage ... ... ... 75 

Jesus Blessing the Little Children 76, 91, 96 

The Great Inquiry ... .„ 77 

Riches a Spiritual Drawback ... 77 

The Hundredfold ... ... ... 73 

The Kingdom of God a Revolution of 

the World-Order ... ... 79 

The Greatness of the Son of Man ... 79 

" Saving Faith " ... ... ... 80 

The Excellences of the Young Ruler 81 
" One Thing thou laikest " ... 82 
The Request of the Sons of Zebedee 83 
The Rich Young Ruler ... 87, 101 
The Entry of the Rich into the King- 
dom of Heaven ... ... ... 88 

The Post of Honour ... ... 89 

The Rich Man's Tempfcition ... 91 

Moral Impossibilities ... ... 92 

Compensation ... ... ,,. 92 

The Coincidence of Oppiisitea ... 93 

Ambition ... ... ... -93' 

Riches and their Relation to the King- 
dom ... ... ... ... 107 

A Third Prediction by our Lord of 

his Passion and Resurrection ... 109 

The Ambition of the Apostles ... 110 

ThoCureof Two Blind Men At Jericho 111 

CHAPTER XI. 
The Triumphal Entry 124, 128, 187, 141 



INDEX. 



rHEHB FAGB 

The Fruit of the Fruitless Fig Tree... 125 

The Holy House ... ... ... 126 

Authority vindicated ... ... 127 

" The Lord hath Need of him " ... 129 

Jesus Surveying the Temple ... 130 
The Djstruction of the Fig Tree 

130, 138, 141, 147 

Jesus Cleansing the Temple 131, 136, 139 

The Church — Ideal and Actual ... 131 

Christ's Authority chuUeuged and 

defended ... ... ... 132 

Jesus the King ... ... ... 133 

Palm Sunday ... ... ... 134 

" And Jesus went into the Temple " 135 

Tlie Symbolic Triumph' ... ... 140 

God's House vindicated ... ... 140 

Critics criticized ... ... ... 141 

Christ's Autliority questioned .m 151 

CHAPTEK XII. 

Rebel Vine-Dressers m« m, 159 

Caesar's Due ... »• ••• 130 

Sadduoees confuted ... ... 161 

The Great Commandments ... 162 
" Not Far from the Kingdom" 165, 173 

Various Etfcots of Christ's Ministry 1G6 

The Scribes 167 

The Widow's Mites 167, 174, 176, 181, 19i; 
The Parable of the Vineyard 168, 178, 183 

The Politics of Christianity ... 169 

" Bring me a Penny " ... ... 170 

The Puzzle of the Sadducees ... 170 

Sources of Heresy ... ... 171 

The Law akin to the Gospel, but in- 
ferior to it ... ... ... 172 

" Great David's Greater Son " 173, 183 

" The Common People heard him 

gladly" 174 

Jesus Lingering in the Temple ... 175 
The Tribute Money ... 178, 190 

The Eesurrection from the Dead ... 179 

The Great Command ... ... 180 

The Evil Husbandmen ... m. 182 

The Dialectic of Jesus m« ••. 1S2 

Sadducean Error ... ... m. 1^2 

The Essence of Religion ... ... 183 

Traits of the Scribe ... ... 183 

The Gift of Poverty 183 

Question of the Sadducees touching the 

Resurrection ... ... ... 192 

Question about the Greatest Command- 

meni ... ... 191 



The Counter-Question of our Lord ... 195 
Warning against the Scribes and 

Pharisees ... ... ... 196 

CHAPTER XUI. 

The Downfall of the Temple ... 202 

The Witness of the Persecuted ... 204 

Warnings ... ... ... 205 

The Second Coming ... 206, 223 

" Watch 1" ... ^ 206,212 

Temple Admiration ... ... 208 

The Signs of the Coming of the Son 

of Man ... ... ... 209 

The Fulfilments of the Kingdom of 
God an Evidence of the Truth ot 

Christianity ... ... ... 210 

The Words of Christ and the World- 
Revolution with which they were 

associated ... ... ... 210 

The Element of Uncertainty in the 

Christian Revelation ... ... 211 

" To every Man his Woik '' ... 211 

Prophetic Adumbrations ... ... 213 

Dark Sayings ... ... ... 214 

Indefinable Triitli... ... ... 214 

Unexpected E\ciitd .„ »,, 214 

The End ImminBUt ... ... 220 

Preparation for Christ's Coming ^. 225 



CHAPTER XIV. 




The Plot 


... 239 


Tribute of Grateful Love ... 


239, 258 


The Traitor 


... 240 


Tlie Paschal Supper ... 241 


260, 273 


Anticipation 


... 242 



Getlisemaue 242, 256, 261, 271, 274, 288 
Betrayal and Arrest 245, 257, 268, 275 

The Trial before Caiaplias ... ... 247 

Peter's Denial ... ... 249, 258 

The Precious Spikenard; or, the Im- 
pulse of the Absolute ... ... 250 

The Spirjt that betrays ... ... 251 

Volunteering to betray ... ,„ 252 

Preparing for the Passover... ... 252 

The Betrayer denounced ... ... 253 

The Lord's Supper 254, 255, 261, 269 

Peter's Denial foretold ... ... 25."> 

Jesus at the Bar of Judaism ^, 257 

The Cup of Experience ... ... 262 

Sorrow, Sleep, and Sin ... ... -Ji;:' 

Following Afar off ... ... 21 ; I 

A Detected Disciple .^ .., 2Ui 



VJ 



INDEX. 



THEHB 




FAOB 


The Alabaster Cruge .^ 


... 


267 


Peter's Pall 270 


296 


Heaven's Righteous King at Earth's 




Unrighteous Judgment-Seat 


.. 


272 


Approach of the End 


.. 


272 


Anointing for Martyrdom ... 


... 


273 


Black Conspiracy ... ^ 


.. 


273 


Eucharistio Service 


.. 


273 


Warnings 


».. 


274 


Violence and Meekness ... 


,„ 


274 


First Trial of Jesus 


«•• 


275 


Extremes meet in Character 


... 


275 


The Old Dispensation merging in t 


lie 




New ... 


»•• 


280 


CHAPTER XV. 






The Trial before Pilate ^ 


•• 


311 


Christ mocked ... m« 


,, 


312 


The Crucifixion ... ... ; 


513 


,330 


The Death of Jesus ... : 


515 


330 



The Burial of Jesus 317, 321, 328, 331, 344 
Jesus at the Bar of the Roman Po^er 318 
Christ or Barabbas ... 319, 325 

The Mockery of Jesus ... „, 319 

7be Saviour's Helplesauuss... ^ 320 



THEMB FAOB 

Women Watching the Cross m. 321 

The Foes of Jesus ... ... 322 

Darkness around the Cross ... 323 

Joseph of Arimathsea ... ... 324 

The Crucifixion : the Human Deed ... 326 

The Crucifixion : the Divine Words... 327 

The Second Trial ... ... ... 329 

Judicial Processes ... ... 331 

The Closing Scene .^ ... 336 

CHAPTER XVI. 



The Empty Sepulchre 
Disbelief convinced 
The Great Commission 
Ascension 
Resurrection Proofs 



349, 361 

••• ••• OdJ. 

352 

353, 360, 362, 368 
356 



" Who shall roll us away the Stone ? " 357 

"He is not here" ... ... 357 

The Gospel the Word of the Ascended 

Lord ... ... ... ... 357 

The Stone rolled away ... ... 358 

The Resurrection ... ... ... 859 

Appearances of the Risen One ,„ 3€3 

Final Utterances ... ... ... 362 

An Eventful Day... ... .. SSI 



