era aecsteet ed 
oe 


1 Se 


THE COMING PRINCE 


OR 


The Sebenty Weeks of Daniel 


WITH AN ANSWER TO THE HIGHER CRITICISM 


RY 


ROBERT. AN DIERSON, -C.By LL.D: 


Assistant Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis 


AUTHOR OF 
‘'~HE SILENCE OF GOD,” ‘' DANIEL IN THE CRITICS’ DEN,” ETC. 


SIXTH EDITION 


LONDON 
HODDER AND STOUGHTON 
27, PATERNOSTER ROW 


MDCCCXCVIII 


Printed by Hazell, Watson, & Viney, Ld., London and Aylesbury, 


NOTE NOTE SIXTH EDITION: 


HE course of study which led to the writing 
of this book was begun under pressure of 
doubts whether the Bible could withstand the at- 
tacks of the sceptical movement known as “the 
Higher Criticism.” Therefore it was that I took 
up the Daniel controversy. For, whatever might be 
said on behalf of other parts of the Old Testament, 
the indictment of the Book of Daniel was supposed 
to be unanswerable; and as a matter of fact it 
appears at first sight to be overwhelming. 

No one who has much experience of judicial 
inquiries will feel surprise at the result. An utterly 
untenable case often appears complete and con- 
vincing when presented ex parte; and the apparent 
success of the critics is largely due to their abnormal 
capacity for one-sided statements. 

If any one of the visions of Daniel can be shown 


to be a Divine prophecy, the authority of the Book 


Vv 


Vi NOTE TO THE SIXTH EDITION. 


as a whole is established. And of this incontestable 
proof will be found in these pages. The elucidation 
here offered of the great vision of the Seventy 
Weeks may now be accepted without misgivings ; 
for the searching criticism to which it has been 
subjected for so many years has failed to detect 


in it an error or a flaw.* This is the special 


* One point may be worth notice in a footnote. The R.V. 
reading of Acts xiii. 20 seems to dispose of my solution of 
the perplexing problem of the 480 years of 1 King's vi. 1 (see 
pp. 81-83, gost). But here, in. accordance with their usual 
practice, and in neglect of the principles by which experts are 
guided in dealing with conflicting evidence, the Revisers 
slavishly followed certain of the oldest MSS. And the effect 
on this passage is disastrous. For it is certain that neither 
St. Paul said, nor St. Luke wrote, that Israel’s enjoyment of 
the tand was limited to 450 years, or that 450 years elapsed 
before the era of the Judges. The text adopted by the 
Revisers is, therefore, clearly wrong. Dean Alford regards 
it ‘‘as an attempt at correcting the difficult chronology of 
the verse”; and, he adds, ‘‘taking the words as they stand, 
no other sense can be given to them than that the time of 
the Judges lasted 450 years.” That is, as he goes on to 
explain, the era within which occurred the rule of the Judges. 
It is not that the Judges ruled for 450 years—in which case 
the accusative would be used, as in verse 18—but, as the use 
of the dative implies, that the period until Saul, characterised 
by the rule of the Judges, lasted 450 years. 

I need scarcely notice the objection that at p. 83 I fail 
to take account of the servitude mentioned in Judges x. 7, 8. 
This very ignorant criticism is sufficiently met by a reference 
to the R.V.: it may possibly be due to the heretical punctu- 


ation of the passage in Bagster’s Bibles. That servitude 
affected only the tribes beyond Jordan. 


WOTE TO THE SIXTH EDITION, vii 


subject of the present volume. The general attack 
upon the Book of Daniel I have dealt with in the 
“Preface to the Fifth Edition,’ and more recently 
in my Daniel in the Critics Den: a reply to Dean 
Farrar’s ‘ Book of Dantel. 

I will only add that were I now rewriting these 
pages, I should express myself with increased con- 
fidence respecting the main predictions of unfulfilled 
prophecy, but with still greater diffidence and re- 
serve in regard to all minor questions and details 
of interpretation. 

RAs 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/owb_KT-266-804 


PREFACE TO THE. FIFTH EDITION. 


A DEFENCE OF -THE BOOK Of DANIEL 
AGAINST THE “HIGHER CRITICISM.” 


HIS volume has been disparaged in some 

quarters because, it is alleged, it ignores 

the destructive criticism which is supposed to have 

led “all people of discernment” to abandon belief 
in the visions of Daniel. 

The charge is not altogether just. Not only are 
some of the chief objections of the critics answered 
in these pages, but in proving the genuineness of 
the great central prophecy of the book, the au- 
thenticity of the whole is established. And the 
absence of a special chapter upon the subject may 
be explained. The practice, too common in religious 
controversy, of giving an ex parte representation 
of the views of opponents, instead of accepting 
their own statement of them, is never satisfactory, 
and seldom fair. And no treatise was available 
on the critics’ side, concise enough to afford the 


basis of a brief excursus, and yet sufficiently full 
x 


x PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


and authoritative to warrant its being accepted as 
adequate. 

This want, however, has since been supplied by 
Professor Driver’s Introduction to the Literature of 
the Old Testament,* a work which embodies the 
results of the so-called “ Higher Criticism,” as ac- 
cepted by the sober judgment of the author. 
While avoiding the malignant extravagance of the 
German rationalists and their English imitators, he 
omits nothing which erudition can with fairness urge 
against the authenticity of the Book of Daniel. And 
if the hostile arguments he adduces can be shown 
to be faulty and inconclusive, the reader may fear- 
lessly accept the result as an “end of controversy” 
upon the subject.f 


* An Introduction to the Literature of the Old Testa- 
ment, by S. R. Driver, D.D., Regius Professor of Hebrew, 
and Canon of Christ Church, Oxford. Third edition. (T. & 
T. Clark, 1892.) I wish here to acknowledge Professor 
Driver’s courtesy in replying to various inquiries I have 
ventured to address to him. 

t In accordance with the plan of the work, Chapter XI. 
opens with a gréczs of the contents of Daniel, together with 
exegetical notes. With these notes I am not concerned, 
though they seem designed to prepare the reader for the 
sequel. I will dismiss them with two remarks. First, in 
his criticisms upon chap. ix. 24-27 he ignores the scheme 
of interpretation which I have followed, albeit it is adopted 
by some writers of more eminence than several of those 
he quotes; and the four points he enumerates against the 
‘commonly understood’’ Messianic interpretation are amply 
dealt with in these pages. And secondly, his comment on 


PREBACE LOD THE FIFTH EDITION, xi 


Here is the thesis which the author sets himself to 
establish :— 


“Tn face of the facts presented by the Book of Daniel, 
the opinion that it is the work of Daniel himself cannot be 
sustained. Internal evidence shows, with a cogency that 
cannot be resisted, that it must have been written not 
earlier than ¢. 300 B.c., and in Palestine ; and it is at least 
probable that it was composed under the persecution of 
Antiochus Epiphanes, B.c. 168 or 167.” 


Professor Driver marshals his proofs under three 
heads: (1) facts of a historical nature; (2) the 
evidence of the /anguage of Daniel; and (3) the 
theology of the Book. 

Under (1) he enumerates the following points :-— 


(a) ‘The position of the Book in the Jewish Canon, not 
among the prophets, but in the miscellaneous collection of 
writings called the Hagzographa, and among the latest o 
these, in proximity to Esther. Though little definite is 
known respecting the formation of the Canon, the division 
known as the ‘ Prophets’ was doubtless formed prior to the 
Hagiographa; and had the Book of Daniel existed at the 
time, it is reasonable to suppose that it would have ranked 
as the work of a prophet, and have been included among 
the former.” 

(6) “ Jesus, the son of Sirach (writing ¢. 200 B.c.), in his 
chap. xi., that ‘‘it can hardly be legitimate, in a con- 
tinuous description, with no apparent change of subject, 
to refer part to the type and part to the antitype,” disposes 
with extraordinary zazvefé of a canon of prophetic inter- 


pretation accepted almost universally from the days of the 
post-Apostolic Fathers down to the present hour! 


xii PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


ee 
enumeration of Israelitish worthies, ¢ 44-50, though he 
mentions Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and (collectively) the 
Twelve Minor Prophets, is silent as to Daniel.” 

(c) “That Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem and 
carried away some of the sacred vessels in ‘the ¢hzvd year 
of Jehoiakim’ (Dan. i. 1 f.), though it cannot, strictly 
speaking, be disproved, is highly improbable: not only is 
the Book of Kings silent, but Jeremiah, ix the following 
year (chap. xxv., etc.), speaks of the Chaldeans in a manner 
which appears distinctly to imply that their arms had not 
yet been seen in Judah.” 

(d) “The ‘Chaldeans’ are synonymous in Daniel with 
the caste of wise men. This sense ‘is unknown to the 
Assyro-Babyionian language, has, wherever it occurs, 
formed itself after the end of the Babylonian empire, and 
is thus an indication of the post-exilic composition of the 
Book * (Schrader).” 2. . 

(e) “Belshazzar is represented as King of Babylon ; and 
Nebuchadnezzar is spoken of throughout chap. v. (vv. 2, 11, 
13; 18, 22) as his father.” . 

(/) “ Darius, son of Ahasuerus, a AZede, after the death of 
Belshazzar, is ‘made king over the realm of the Chaldeans.’ 
There seems to be no room for such a ruler. Accord- 
ing to all other authorities, Cyrus is the immediate 
successor of Nabu-nahid, and the ruler of the entire 
Persian empire.” . . 

(g) “In ix. 2 it is stated that Daniel ‘understood by 
the books’ the number of years for which, according to 
Jeremiah, Jerusalem should lie waste. The expression 
used implies that the prophecies of Jeremiah formed part 
of a collection of sacred books, which nevertheless it may 
be safely affirmed, was not formed in 536 B.C.” 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xiii 


(4%) “Other indications adduced to show that the Book 
is not the work of a contemporary, are such as the- 
following”: The points are the improbability, first, that 
a strict Jew would have entered the class of the “wise 
men,” or that he would have been admitted by the wise 
men themselves; second, Nebuchadnezzar’s insanity and 
edict; third, the absolute terms in which he and Darius 
tecognise God, while retaining their idolatry. 

I dismiss (f) and (#) at once, for the author 
himself, with his usual fairness, declines to press them. 
“They should,” he admits, “be used with reserve.” 
The mention of “Darius the Mede” is perhaps the 
greatest difficulty which confronts the student of 
Daniel, and the problem it involves still awaits solu- 
tion. The unqualified rejection of the narrative by 
many eminent writers only proves the incapacity 
even of scholars of repute to suspend their judgment 
upon questions of the kind. The history of that 
age is too uncertain and confused to justify dog- 
matism, and, as Professor Driver justly remarks, “a 
cautious criticism will not build too much on the 
silence of the inscriptions, where many certainly 
remain to be brought to light” (p. 469). In Mr. 
Sayce’s recent work * this caution is neglected. He 
accepts, moreover, with a faith which is unduly 
simple, all that Cyrus says about himself. It was 
obviously his interest to represent the acquisition of 


* The Higher Criticism and the Verdict of the Monu- 
ments, by the Rev. A. H. Sayce. 


xiv PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


Babylonia as a peaceful revolution, and not a military 
conquest. But the Book of Daniel does not conflict 
with either hypothesis. Mr. Sayce here “reads into 
it,” as is so constantly done, what it in no way states 
or even implies. There is not a word about a siege 
or a capture. Belshazzar was “slain,” and Darius 
“received” the kingdom ; but how these events came 
about we must learn from other sources. Professor 
Driver here admits in express terms “that ‘ Darius 
the Mede’ may prove, after all, to have been a 
historical character”;* and this is enough for our 
present purpose. . 

The remaining points I proceed to discuss 


seviatim. 


* Page 479, mote. But the author’s appeal under (/) to 
‘all other authorities” is scarcely fair, as Daniel is the only 
contemporary historian, and the exploration of the ruins of 
Babylon has yet to be accomplished. 

And as regards (#) but little need be said. Professor 
Driver candidly owns that ‘‘there are good reasons for sup- 
posing that Nebuchadnezzar’s lycanthropy rests upon a basis 
of fact.’’ No student of human nature will find anything 
strange in the recorded action of these heathen kings when 
confronted with proofs of the presence and power of God 
We see its counterpart every day in the conduct of ungodly 
men when events which they regard as Divine judgments 
befall them. And no one accustomed to deal with evidence 
will entertain the suggestion that the story of Daniel’s 
becoming a “Chaldean” would be invented by a Jew 
trained under the strict ritual of post-exilic days. The sug- 
gestion that Daniel would have been refused admission to 


the college in the face of the great king’s order to admit 
him really deserves no answer. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. XV 


(2) This is rightly placed first, as being the most 
important. But its apparent importance grows less and 
less the more closely it is examined. Our English Bible, 
following the Vulgate, divides the Old Testament into 
thirty-nine books. The Jewish Canon reckoned only 
twenty-four. These were classified under three heads— 
the Zorah, the eveeim, and the Kethuvim (the Law, 
the Prophets, and the Other Writings). The first con- 
tained the Pentateuch. The second contained eight 
books, which were again classified in two groups. The 
first four—viz., Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and Kings—were 
called the “Former Prophets”; and the second four— 
viz., Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and “the Twelve” (ze. the 
minor prophets reckoned as one book)—were called the 
‘Latter Prophets.” The third division contained eleven 
books—viz., Psalms, Proverbs, Job, Song of Songs, Ruth, 
Lamentations, Ecclesiastes, Esther, Daniel, Ezra and 
Nehemiah (reckoned as one), and Chronicles. Now, 
an examination of this list makes either of two conclusions 
irresistible. Either the Canon was arranged under Divine 
guidance, or else the classification of the books between 
the second and third divisions was an arbitrary one. 
If any one adopts the former alternative, the inclusion of 
Daniel in the Canon is decisive of the whole question’ 
If, on the other hand, it be assumed that the arrangement 
was human and arbitrary, the fact that Daniel is in the 
third group proves—not that the book was regarded as 
of doubtful repute, for in that case it would have been 
excluded from the Canon, but that the great exile of the 
Captivity was not regarded as a “ prophet.” 

To the superficial this may seem to be giving up the 
whole case. But using the word “prophet” in its ordi- 


xvi PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


nary acceptation, Daniel has no claim whatever to the title, 
and but for Matt. xxiv. 15 it would probably never have 
been applied to him. His visions have their New Testa- 
ment counterpart, but yet no one speaks of “the prophet 
John.” According to 2 Pet. i. 21 the prophets “spake 
as they were. moved by the Holy Ghost.” This charac- 
terised the utterances of Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and 
“the Twelve.” They were the words of Jehovah by the 
mouth of the men who uttered them. The prophets 
stood apart from the people as witnesses for God; but 
Daniel’s position and ministry were wholly different. 
“Neither have we hearkened unto Thy servants the pro- 
phets which spake in Thy name”: such was his humble 
attitude. Higher criticism may slight the distinction here 
insisted on; but the question is how it was regarded by 
the men who settled the Canon; and in their judgment 
its importance was immense. Daniel contains the record, 
not of God-breathed words uttered dy the seer, but of the 
words spoken Zo him, and of dreams and visions accorded 
him. And the visions of the latter half of his book were 
granted him after more than sixty years spent in statecraft 
—years the record of which would fix his fame in the 
popular mind as statesman and ruler. 

The reader will thus recognise that the position of Daniel 
in the Canon is precisely where we should expect to find it. 
The critic speaks of it as being ‘in the miscellaneous col- 
lection of writings called the Hagiographa, and among the 
latest of these, in proximity to Esther.” But, in adopting 
this from earlier writers, the author is guilty of what may 
be described as unintentional dishonesty. Daniel comes 
before Ezra, Nehemiah, and Chronicles in a group of 
books which includes the Psalms—those Psalms than 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xvii 


which no part of their Canon was prized more highly 
by the Jews—those Psalms, many of which they rightly 
regarded as prophetic in the highest and strictest sense.* 
But Daniel, we are told, was placed “in proximity to 
Esther.” What does the critic mean by this? He cannot 
wish to suggest that Esther is held in low repute by the 
Jews, for he himself declares that it came to be “ranked 
by them as superior both to the writings of the prophets 
and to all other parts of the Hagiographa” (p. 452). As to 
Esther coming Jdefore Daniel, he cannot have overlooked 
that it is bracketed in the Canon with the four books which 
precede it—the Jeg7//oth. He cannot mean to imply that 
the books of the Kefhuvim are arranged chronologically ; 
and he certainly cannot wish tocreate an ignorant prejudice. 
The statement therefore is an enigma, and the discussion 
under this head may be closed by the general remark that 
(2) implies that the Jews esteemed the books in the third 
division of their Canon as less sacred than “ the prophets.” 
But this is wholly baseless. In common with the rest, they 
were, as Josephus tells us, “justly believed to be Divine, so 
that, rather than speak against them, they were ready to 
suffer torture, or even death.” f 

(4) But little need. be said in answer to this. Canon 
Driver admits that the argument is one “ which, standing 
alone, it would be hazardous to press,” and this is precisely 
its position if (a) be refuted. If it were a question of the 


* As the Psalms came first in the Kethuvim they gave their 
name to the whole; as ex. gy. when our Lord spoke of “‘ the 
Law of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms ’’ (Luke xxiv. 44) 
He meant the entire Scriptures. 

+ Against Apion, i. 8, 


xviii PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 
Eee 
omission of Daniel’s name from a formal list of the prophets 
everything above urged would apply here with equal force ; 
but the reader must not suppose that the son of Sirach 
gives any list of the kind. The facts are these. The 
Apocryphal Book of Ecclesiasticus, which is here re- 
ferred to, ends with a rhapsody in praise of ‘famous 
men.” This panegyric, it is true, omits the name of 
Daniel. But in what connection would his name be in- 
cluded? Daniel was exiled to Babylon in early youth, 
and never spent a single day of his long life among his 
people, never was openly associated with them in their 
struggles or their sorrows. The .critic, moreover, fails to 
notice that the Son of Sirach ignores also not only such 
worthies as Abel, and Melchisedec, and Job, and Gideon, 
and Samson, but also Ezra, who, unlike Daniel, played a 
most prominent part in the national life, and who also 
gave his name to one of the books of the Canon. Let 
the reader decide this matter for himself after reading the 
passage in which the names of Daniel and Ezra ought to 
appear.* If any one is so mentally constituted that the 
omission leads him to decide against the authenticity of 
these two books, no words of mine would influence 
him. 

(c) The historical statement with which the Book ot 
Daniel opens is declared to be improbable on two grounds : 
first, because “ the Book of Kings is silent ” on the subject ; 
and, secondly, because Jer. xxv. appears inconsistent with 
it. The first point is made apparently in error, for 
2 Kings xxiv. 1 states explicitly that in Jehoiakim’s days 


* This section of Ecclesiasticus begins with chap. xliy., but 
the passage here in question is chap. xlix., vv. 6-16. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xix 


Nebuchadnezzar came up against Jerusalem, and that the 
Jewish king became his vassal.* 

And the second point is overstated. Jer. xxv. is silent 
on the subject, and that is all that can be said. Now 
the weight to be given to the silence of a particular 
witness or document on any matter is a familiar problem 
in dealing with evidence. It entirely depends on circum- 
stances whether it counts for much, or little, or nothing. 
Kings being a historical record, its silence here would 
count for something. But why should a warning and a 
prophecy like Jer. xxv. contain the recital of an event 
of a few months before, an event which no one in Jerusalem 
could ever possibly forget ? + 

But further discussion on these lines is needless, for 
the accuracy of Daniel’s statement can be established 
on grounds which the critic ignores altogether. I refer to 


* Possibly the critic means to question whether Jerusalem 
was actually captured, ze. carried by storm, at this time. I 
have, I admit, assumed this in these pages. But Scripture 
nowhere says so. Taking all accounts together, we can only 
aver that Nebuchadnezzar came up against Jerusalem, and 
laid siege to it, that, in some way, Jehoiakim fell into his 
hands and was put in chains to carry him to Babylon, and 
that Nebuchadnezzar changed his purpose and left him as 
a vassal king in Judea. He may have gone out to the 
Chaldean king, as his son and successor afterwards did 
(2 Kings xxiv. 12); and it is very probable that Jehoiachin’s 
action in this respect was suggested by the leniency shown 
to his father. 

+ The words ‘‘ as it is this day,’’ in ver. 18, appear to be an 
allusion to the accomplished subjugation of Judea, According 
to ver. 19, Egypt was next to fall before Nebuchadnezzar ; 
and chap. xlvi. 2 records Nebuchadnezzar’s victory over the 
Egyptian army in this same year. 


xx PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


ee 


the chronology of the eras of the “ servitude ” and the 
“desolations.” Both are commonly confounded with the 
“captivity,” which was only in part concurrent with them. 
These several eras represented three successive judgments 
upon Judah (see p. 55 fost). The chronology of these is 
fully explained in the sequel, and a reference to the excursus 
at pp. 228-240 ost, or indeed a glance at the tables which 
follow (pp. 241-245), will supply proof absolute and com- 
plete that the servitude began in the third year of Jehoiakim, 
precisely as the Book of Daniel avers. 

(2) I will refer under the second head of the inquiry to 
the philological question here involved. It is not in any 
sense a istorical difficulty. 

(e) The reader will find this point dealt with at p. 221 
post. Canon Driver remarks: “It may be admitted as 
probable that Belsharuzur held command for his father 
in Babylon; .. . but it is difficult to think that this could 
entitle him to be spuken of dy a contemporary as king.” 
If Belshazzar was regent, as the narrative indicates, it is 
difficult to think that a courtier would speak of him other- 
wise than as king. To have done so might have cost 
him his head! Dan. v. 7, 16, 29 affords corroboration 
here in a manner all the more striking because it is 
wholly undesigned. Nebuchadnezzar had made Daniel 
second ruler in the kingdom: why does Belshazzar make 
him ¢Aird ruler? Presumably because he himself held but 
the second place. To avoid this the critics, trading upon 
a possible alternative rendering of the Aramaic (as given in 
the margin of the Revised Version), conjecture a “Board of 
three.” But assuming that the words used may mean a 
triumvirate in the sense of chap. vi. 2, the question whether 
this is their actual meaning must be settled by an appeal 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. XxXi 


to history. And history affords not the slightest hint that 
such a system of government prevailed in the Babylonian 
Empire. A true exegesis, therefore, must decide in favour 
of the alternative and more natural view, that Daniel was 
to rule as third, the absent king being first, and the king- 
regent second. 

But Belshazzar is called the sow of Nebuchadnezzar. 
The reader will find this objection fully answered by Dr. 
Pusey (Danie/, pp. 406-408). He justly remarks that “ inter- 
marriage with the family of a conquered monarch, or with 
a displaced line, is. so obviously a way of strengthening 
the newly acquired throne, that it is a friord probable 
that Nabunahit would so fortify his claim,” and Professor 
Driver himself allows (p. 468) that fosszdly the King may 
have married a daughter of Nebuchadnezzar, ‘‘ in which case 
the latter might be spoken of as Belshazzar’s father (= 
grandfather, by Hebrew usage).” I will only add two 
remarks: first, the critics forget that even on their own view 
of Daniel the existence of a tradition is prima facie proof 
of its truth; and, secondly, if the usurper chose to be 
called the son of Nebuchadnezzar, though with no sort 
of claim to the title, no one in Babylon would dare to 
thwart him. 

(g) Here are the words of Dan. ix. 2 (R.V.): “I Daniel 
understood by the books the number of the years, whereof 
the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, for 
the accomplishing of the desolations of Jerusalem, even 
seventy years.” The prophecy here referred to is ad- 
mittedly Jer. xxv. 11, 12. Now the word sefher, rendered 
“ book ” in Dan. ix. 2, means simply a scroll. It may denote 
a book, as it often does in Scripture, or merely a letter. 
See ex. gr. Jer. xxix. 1 (the /etfer which Jeremia wrote 


xxii PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 
ae SSS SS 


to the exiles in Babylon), or Isa. xxxvii. 14 (Sennacherib’s 
letter to King Hezekiah). ‘Then, again, Jer. xxxvi. I, 2 
records that in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, the very year 
in which the prophecy of Jer. xxv. was given, all the 
prophecies delivered up to that time were recorded in “a 
book.” And in Jer. li. 60, 61 we find that some ten 
years later a further “book” was written and sent to 
Babylon. Where, then, is the difficulty? Professor Driver, 
moreover, himself supplies a complete answer in his own 
criticism by adopting “the supposition that in some cases 
Jeremiah’s writings were in circulation for a while as single 
prophecies, or small groups of prophecies ” (p. 254). These 
may have been the scrolls or ‘ books ” of Dan. ix. 

But suppose, for the sake of argument, we admit that 
“the books” must mean the sacred writings up to that 
period, what warrant is there for affirming that no such 
“collection” existed in 536 B.c.? A more arbitrary asser- 
tion was never made, even in the range of controversy. 
Is it not absolutely incredible that the scrolls of the Law 
were not kept together? And considering Daniel’s intense 
piety, and the extraordinary resources and means he must 
have had at his disposal under Nebuchadnezzar, may it not 
“safely be affirmed” that there was not another man upon 


earth so likely as himself to have had copies of all the 
holy writings ? * 


* Professor Bevan’s suggestion on this point is, in my 
opinion, untenable. But I refer to it to show how an advanced 
exponent of the Higher Criticism can dispose of (g). Com- 
mentary on Daniel, p.146. I have no doubt whatever that 
if Leviticus was before Daniel, as well it might be, it was 


the law of the Sabbatical years he had in view and not 
XXVi. 18, etc. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xxiii 


I now turn to the critic’s second argument, which 
is based on the danguage of the Book of Daniel. He 
appeals, first, to the number of Perszan words it 
contains ; secondly, to the presence of Greek words; 
thirdly, to the character of the Avamaic in which part 
of the book is written ; and, lastly, to the character of 
the Hebrew. 

Underlying the argument founded on the presence 
of foreign words is the unexpressed assumption that 
the Jews were an uncultured tribe who had lived till 
then in boorish isolation. And yet four centuries 
before Daniel’s time the wisdom and wealth of 
Solomon were spoken of throughout the then known 
world. He was a naturalist, a botanist, a philosopher, 
and a poet. And why not a linguist also? Were 
all his communications with his many foreign wives 
carried on through interpreters? He traded with 
near and distant nations, and every one knows how 
language is influenced by commerce. And can we 
doubt that the fame of Nebuchadnezzar attracted 
foreigners to Babylon? What his relations were 
with foreign courts we know not. Why may not 
Daniel have been a Persian scholar? The position 
assigned to him under the Persian rule renders this 
extremely probable. The number of Persian words 
in the book, according to Professor Driver, is 
“probably at least fifteen”; and here is his com- 
ment upon them :—- 


XxiVv PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


“That such words should be. found in books written 
after the Persian Empire was organised, and when Persian 
influences prevailed, is not more than would be expected ” 


(P. 470). 

But it was precisely in these circumstances that the 
Bock of Daniel was written. The vision of chap. x. 
was given five years after the Persian rule had been 
established, and these visions were the basis of the 
book. Notes and records the writer doubtless had of 
the earlier and historical portions of it; but it is a 
reasonable assumption that the whole was written 
after the visions were accorded him. 

As regards the Aramaic and the Hebrew of 
Daniel, I can of course express no opinion of my 
own. But my position will be in no way prejudiced 
by my incompetency lin this respect. In the first 
place, there is nothing new here. The critic merely 
gives in a condensed form what the Germans have 
urged; and the whoie ground has been covered by 
Dr. Pusey and others, who, having examined it with 
equal erudition and care, have arrived at wholly 
different conclusions. But, in the second place, it 
is unnecessary; for the signal fairness with which 
Professor Driver states the results of his argument 
enables me to concede all he says in this regard 
and to dismiss the discussion of it to the sequel. 
Here are his words :— 


“The verdict of the language of Daniel is thus clear, 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. XXV 


The Persian words presuppose a period after the Persian 
Empire had been well established ; the Greek words demand, 
the Hebrew supports, and the Aramaic permits, a date after 
the conquest of Palestine by Alexander the Great (B.c. 332). 
With our present knowledge this is as much as the language 
authorises us definitely to affirm” (p. 476). 


May I restate this in other words? The Persian 
terms raise a presumption that Daniel was written 
after a certain date. The Hebrew strengthens this 
presumption, the Aramaic is consistent with it, and 
the Greek words used establish the truth of it. 
Problems precisely similar to this claim decision every 
day in our courts of justice. The whole strength of 
the case depends on the last point stated. Any 
number of argumentative presumptions may be 
rebutted ; but here, it is alleged, we have proof which 
admits of no answer: the Greek words demand a date 
which destroys the authenticity of Daniel. 

Will the reader believe it that the only foundation 
on which this superstructure rests is the allegation 
that ¢wo Greek words are found in the list of musical 
instruments given in the third chapter? At a 
bazaar held some time ago in one of our cathedral 
towns, under the patronage of the bishop of the 
diocese, the alarm was given that a thief was at work 
among the company, and two ladies present had lost 
their purses. In the excitement which followed, the 
stolen purses, emptied of course of their contents, 


xxvi PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


ue a te De ee 
were found in the bishop’s pocket! The “ Higher 
Criticism” would have handed him over to the 
police! Perhaps an apology is due for this digres- 
sion; but, in sober earnestness, surely the inquiry is 
opportune whether these critics understand the very 
rudiments of the science of weighing evidence. The 
presence of the two stolen purses did not “ demand” 
the conviction of the bishop. Neither should the 
presence of two Greek words decide the fate o 
Daniel.* The question would still remain, How did 
they come to be there ? According to Professor Sayce, 
himself a hostile authority, the evidence of the monu- 
ments has entirely refuted this argument of the critics. 
It now appears that there were Greek colonies in 
Palestine as early as the days of Hezekiah, and that 


*T speak of two Greek words only, for £ztharos is prac- 
tically given up. Dr. Pusey denies that these words are 
of Greek origin. (Dazzel, pp. 27-30.) Dr. Driver urges 
that in the fifth century B.c. “‘the arts and inventions of 
civilised life streamed then into Greece from the East, and 
not from Greece Eastwards.’’ But surely the figure he uses 
here distorts his judgment. The influences of civilisation do 
not ‘‘stream’’ in the sense in which water streams. There is 
and always must be an interchange; and arts and inventions 
carried from one country to another carry their names with 
them. I am compelled to pass by these philological questions 
thus rapidly, but the reader will find them fully discussed by 
Pusey and others. Dr. Pusey remarks, ‘“‘ Aramaic as well 
as Aryan words suit his real age,’’ and “his Hebrew 


is just what one would expect at the age in which he 
lived’’ (p. 578). 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. XXVii 


there was intercourse between Greece and Canaan at 
a still earlier period. 

But let us admit, for the sake of argument, that 
the words are really Greek, and that no such words 
were known in Babylon in the days of the exile. Is 
the inference based on their presence in the book a 
legitimate one? While some apologists of Daniel 
have pressed unduly the hypothesis of a revision, 
such a hypothesis affords a most reasonable expla- 
nation of difficulties of this particular kind. Why 
should we doubt the truth of the Jewish tradition 
that “the men of the great synagogue wrote” (that 
is, edzted) the Book of Daniel? And if true, these 
Greek words may be easily accounted for. If in 
the list of musical instruments, and in the title of 
the “wise men,” the editors found terms which were 
foreign and strange to them, how natural for them 
to substitute words which would be familiar to the 
Jews of Palestine How natural, too, to spell 
such names as Nebuchadnezzar and Abednego 
in the manner then become usual. These are pre- 
cisely the sort of changes which they would adopt ; 
changes of no vital moment, but fitted to make the 
book more suitable for those on whose behalf they 
vere revising it. 

The critic’s last ground of attack is the theology of 


* Higher Criticism and the Monuments, pp. 424 and 494. 
+ On this subject see the Bishop of Durham’s article in 
Smith’s Bzble Dictionary. 


evil PREFACE 1O THE FIFTH EDITION. 


the Book of Daniel. This, he declares, “ points to a 
later age than that of the exile.” No charge of evror 
is suggested, for Professor Driver is careful at the 
outset to repudiate what he calls the “ exaggerations ” 
of the German rationalists and their English imi- 
tators. But his alliance with such men warps his 
judgment, and betrays him into adopting statements 
begotten of their mingled ignorance and malice. 
Let one instance suffice. “It is remarkable also,” he 
says, “that Daniel—so unlike the prophets generally 
—should display no interest in the welfare or pro- 
spects of his contemporaries.” Not even in theological 
controversy could another statement be found more 
flagrantly baseless and false. In the entire history of 
the prophets, in the whole range of Scripture, the 
ninth chapter of Daniel has no parallel for touching, 
earnest, passionate “interest in the welfare and pro- 
spects”” of contemporaries. 

Now the question here is, not whether the doctrine 
of the Book be true, for that is not disputed, but 
whether truth of such an advanced and definite 
character could have been’ revealed at so early a 
period in the scheme of revelation. It is not easy to 
fix the principles on which such a question should be 
discussed. And the discussion may be avoided by 
raising another question, the answer to which will 
decide the whole matter in dispute. We know the 
“orthodox view” of the Book of Daniel. What 


PIEEAGCE  LOVWMHE FIFTH EDITION. XXIX 


alternative does the critic propose for our acceptance ? 
Here he shall speak for himself, and the two quota- 
tions following will suffice :— 


“ Daniel, it cannot be doubted, was a historical person, 
one of the Jewish exiles in Babylon, who, with his three 
companions, was noted for his staunch adherence to the 
principles of his religion, who attained a position of 
influence at the Court of Babylon, who interpreted Nebu 
chadnezzar’s dreams, and foretold as a seer something 
of the future fate of the Chaldean and Persian empires” 
(p. 479): 

“On the other hand, if the author be a prophet living in 
the time of the trouble itself, all the features of the Book 
may be consistently explained. He lives in the age in 
which he manifests an interest, and which needs the con- 
solations which he has to address to it. He does not write 
after the persecutions are ended (in which case his 
prophecies would be pointless), but at their beginning, 
when his message of encouragement would have a value for 
the godly Jews in the season of their trial. He thus utters 
genuine predictions ; and the advent of the Messianic age 
follows closely on the end of Antiochus, just as in Isaiah or 
Micah it follows closely on the fall of the Assyrian: in both 
cases the future is foreshortened ” (p. 478). 


The first of these quotations refers to Daniel 
himself, the second to the supposed author of the 
Book which bears his name. In the first we pass 
for a moment out of the mist and cloud of mere 
theory and argument into the plain, clear light of 
fact. “It cannot be doubted,” or, in other words 


XXX PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


it is absolutely certain, that. Daniel was not only 
“a historical person,’ but “a seer”—that is to say, 
a prophet. But plunging back again at once into 
the gloom, we go on to conjecture the existence of 
another prophet in the days of Antiochus—a veal 
prophet, for “he utters genuine predictions” for the 
encouragement of “the godly Jews in the season 
of their trial.” 

Now the position of the sceftzc is in a sense un- 
assailable. He is like the obstinate juror who puts 
his back against the wall and refuses to believe 
the evidence. But mark what this suggested com- 
promise involves. As already noticed, Daniel had 
no pretensions to the prophet’s mantle in the sense 
in which Jeremiah and Ezekiel wore it. He him- 
self laid no claim to it (see chap. ix. 10). He, more- 
over, passed his life in the splendid isolation of 
the Court of Babylon, while they were central 
figures among their people—one in the midst of 
the troubles in Jerusalem, the other among the 
exiles. It would not be strange therefore if Daniel’s 
name and fame had no such place as theirs in the 
popular memory. But here we are asked to believe 
that another prophet, raised up within historic times, 
whose “message of encouragement” must have 
been on every man’s lips throughout the noble 
Maccabean struggle, passed clean out of the 
memory of the nation. The historian of this struggle 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. XXXI 


cannot have been removed from him by more than a 
single generation, yet he ignores his existence, though 
he refers in the plainest terms to the Daniel of the 
Captivity.* The prophet’s voice had been silent for 
centuries ; with what wild and passionate enthusiasm 
the nation would have hailed the rise of a new seer 
at such a time! And when the issue of that fierce 
struggle set the seal of truth upon his words, his 
fame would have eclipsed that of the old prophets 
of earlier days. But in fact not a vestige of his fame 
or name survived. No writer, sacred or secular, 
seems to have heard of him. No tradition of him 
remained. Was there ever a figment more untenable 
than this? 

No such compromise between faith and unbelief is 
possible. From either of two alternatives there is no 
escape. Either the Book of Daniel is what it claims 
to be, or else it is wholly worthless. “All must be 
true or all imposture.” It is idle to talk of it as 
being the work of some prophet of a later epoch. 
It dates from Babylon in the days of the Exile, or 
else it is a literary fraud, concocted after the time 
of Antiochus Epiphanes. But how then could it 
come to be quoted in the Maccabees—quoted, not 
incidentally, but in one of the most solemn and 


* 1 Macc. ii. 60; see also chap. i. 54. The First Book of 
Maccabees is a history of the highest repute, and the 
accuracy of it is universally acknowledged. 


xxxii PREFACE TO 7HE FIFTH EDITION. 


a ee ee Eee 
striking passages in the entire book, the dying words 
of old Mattathias? And how could it come to be 
included in the Canon? The critics make much of 
its position in the Canon: how do they account for 
its having a place in it at all? 

It is reasonably certain that the first two divisions 
of the Canon were settled by the Great Synagogue 
long before the days of the Maccabees, and that its 
completion was the work of the Great Sanhedrim, 
not later than the second century B.c. And we are 
asked to suppose that this great College, composed 
of the most learned men of the nation, would have 
accepted a literary fraud of modern date, or could 
have been duped by it. This is one of the wildest 
and most reckless hypotheses imaginable. Nor 
would this argument be sensibly weakened if the 
critics should insist that the Canon may still have 
been open for a hundred years after the death of 
Antiochus.* If it was thus kept open, the fact would 
be a further pledge and proof that the most jealous 
and vigilant care must have been unceasingly ex- 
ercised. The presence of the Book of Daniel in the 


Jewish Canon is a fact more weighty than all the 
criticisms of the critics. 


* The Sanhedrim, though scattered during the Maccabean 
revolt, was reconstituted at its close. See Dr. Ginsburg’s 


articles “Sanhedrim”’ and ‘ Synagogue”’ in Kitto’s Cyclo- 
peda. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION.  xxxiii 


Thousands there are who cling to the Book of 
Daniel, and yet dread to face this destructive criticism 
lest faith should give way under the influence. And 
yet this is all it has to urge, as formulated by one of 
its best exponents. Of all these hostile arguments 
there is not so much as one which may not be refuted 
at any moment by the discovery of further inscrip- 
tions. In presence of some newly found cylinder 
from the as yet unexplored ruins of Babylon,* all 
this theorising about improbabilities and peddling 
over words might be silenced in a day. And this 
being so, it is obvious to any one in whom the 
judicial faculty is not wanting that the critics ex- 
aggerate the importance of their criticisms. Even 
if all they urge were true and weighty, it should 
lead us only to suspend our judgment. But the 
critics are specialists, and it is proverbial that 
specialists are bad judges. And here it is possible 
for one who cannot pose as a theologian or a scholar 
to meet them on more than equal terms. With them 
it is enough that evidence of a certain kind pcints in 
one direction. But they in whom the judicial faculty 
is developed will pause and ask, “What is to be 
said upon the other side?” and “ Will the proposed 


* The ruins of Borsippa are practically unexplored; and 
considering the character of the inscriptions found on other 
Chaldean sites, we may expect to obtain hereafter very full 
State records of the capital. 

cé 


xxxiv PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


decision harmonise with all the facts?” Questions of 
this kind, however, have no existence for the critics. 
If they ever presented themselves to Professor Driver’s 
mind, it is to be regretted that he failed to take 
account of them when stating the general results of 
his inquiry. And if ignored by an author so willing 
to reach the truth, they need not be looked for in 
the writings of the sceptics and apostates. 

I have hitherto been dealing with presumptions 
and inferences and arguments. To deny that these 
have weight would be both dishonest and _ futile. 
It may be conceded that if the Book of Daniel had 
been brought to light within the Christian era, they 
would suffice to bar its admission to the Canon. 
But to the Christian the Book is accredited by the 
Lord Jesus Christ Himself; and in presence of this 
one fact the force of these criticisms is dispelled 
like mist before the sun. The very prediction which 
the rationalists most cavil at, He has adopted in 
that discourse which is the key to all unfulfilled 
prophecy ;* and if Daniel be proved a fraud, He 
whom we own as Lord is discredited thereby. 

Such an argument as this the rationalists of the 
German school despise. And with them the mention 
of Daniel in the Book of Ezekiel counts for nothing, 


though according to their own canons it ought to 


* Matt. xxiv. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xxxv_ 


outweigh much of the negative evidence they adduce. 
Daniel is not mentioned by other prophets ; therefore, 
they argue, Daniel isa myth. Three times the pro- 
phecies of Ezekiel speak of him; therefore, they 
infer, some other Daniel is intended. Their argu- 
ment is based on the silence of the sacred and other 
books of the Jews. A man so eminent as the Daniel 
of the exile would not, they urge, have been thus 
ignored. And yet they conjecture the career of 
another Daniel of equal, or even greater eminence, 
whose very existence has been forgotten! It is not 
easy to deal with such casuists. But there is one 
argument, at least, which they cannot rob us of. 

They have got rid of the second chapter and the 
seventh, and the closing vision of the Book, but the 
great central prophecy of the Seventy Weeks remains ; 
and this affords proof of the Divine authority of 
Daniel, which cannot be destroyed. Let them fix the 
date of the Book where they will, they fail to account 
for this. From one definitely recorded historical 
event—the edict to rebuild Jerusalem, to another 
definitely recorded historical event—the public mani- 
festation of the Messiah, the length of the intervening 
period was predicted ; and with accuracy absolute 
and to the very day the prediction has been 
fulfilled. 

To elucidate that prophecy this volume has been 


written, and as the result constitutes my personal 


xxxvi PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


ee a ae eS 


contribution to the controversy, I may be pardoned 
for explaining the steps by which it has been reached. 
The vision refers to 70 sevens of years, but I deal 
here only with the 69 “weeks” of the twenty-fifth 
verse. Here are the words :— ; 

“ Know therefore and discern that from the going 
forth of the commandment to restore and to build 
Jerusalem unto the Messiah, the Prince, shall be 
seven weeks and threescore and two weeks: it shall 
be built again with street and moat, even in troublous 
times.” * 

Now it is an undisputed fact that Jerusalem was 
rebuilt by Nehemiah, under an edict issued by Arta- 
xerxes (Longimanus), in the twentieth year of his 
reign. Therefore, notwithstanding the doubts which 
controversy throws upon everything, the conclusion is 
obvious and irresistible that this was the epoch of the 
prophetic period. But the month date was Nisan, 
and the sacred year of the Jews began with the phasis 
of the Paschal moon. I appealed, therefore, to the 
Astronomer Royal, the late Sir George Airy, to cal- 
culate for me the moon’s place for March in the year 
in question, and I thus ascertained the date required 
—March 14th, B.c. 445, 

This being settled, one question only remained, 
Of what kind of year does the era consist? And 


* I follow the marginal reading of the R.V., which was the 
reading adopted by the American Company. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xxxvii 


the answer to this is definite and clear. That it is 
the ancient year of 360 days* is plainly proved in 
two ways. First, because, according to Daniel and 
the Apocalypse, 3} prophetic years are equal to 1,260 
days; and, secondly, because it can be proved that 
the 70 years of the “Desolations” were of this 
character ; and the connection between the period of 
the “ Desolations” and the era of the “weeks” is one 
of the few universally admitted facts in this con- 
troversy. The “Desolations” began on the 1oth 
Tebeth, B.c. 589 (a day which for four-and-twenty 
centuries has been commemorated by the Jews asa 
fast), and ended on the 24th Chisleu, B.C. 520. 
Having thus settled the Zevmznus a quo of the 
“weeks,” and the form of year of which they are 
composed, nothing remains but to calculate the dura- 
tion of the era. Its terminus ad quem can thus with 
certainty be ascertained. Now 483 years (69 x 7) 
of 360 days contain 173,880 days. And a period 
ot 173,880 days, beginning March 14th, B.c. 445, 
ended upon that Sunday in the week of the cruci- 
fixion, when, for the first and only time in His 
ministry, the Lord Jesus Christ, in fulfilment of 
Zechariah’s prophecy, made a public entry into 
Jerusalem, and caused His Messiahship to be 


ST See py OS-Pos7. 
+ See pp. 55, 69-71, and 237 fost. 


xxxvili PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


openly proclaimed by “the whole multitude of the 
disciples.” * 

I need not discuss the matter further here. In the 
following chapters every incidental question involved 
is fully dealt with, and every objection answered.f 
Suffice it to repeat that in presence of the facts and 
figures thus detailed no mere negation of belief is 
possible. These must be accounted for in some way. 
“ There is a point beyond which unbelief is impossible, 
and the mind, in refusing truth, must take refuge in 
a misbelief which is sheer credulity.” 


It was not till after the preceding pages were in 
print that Archdeacon Farrar’s Daniel reached my 
hands. Some apology is due, perhaps, to Professor 
Driver for bracketing such a work with his, but Zhe 
Exposttor's Bible will be read by many to whom 
The Introduction is an unknown book. Both writers 
agree in impugning the authenticity of the Book of 
Daniel; but their relative positions are widely dif- 
ferent, and no less so are their arguments and 
methods. The Christian scholar writes for scholars, 
desirous only to elucidate the truth. The popular 
theologian retails the extravagances of German 
scepticism for the enlightenment of an easily deluded 
public. As we turn from the one book to the other, 


* Luke xix, 
+ See chaps. v.-x. Zos¢, and specially pp. 121-8, 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION.  xxxix 


we are reminded of the difference between a criminal 
trial when in charge of a responsible law officer of 
the Crown, and when promoted by a vindictive 
private prosecutor. In the one case the lawyer’s 
aim is solely to assist the Court in arriving at a 
just verdict. In the other, we may be prepared for 
statements which are reckless, if not unscrupulous. 
And here we must distinguish between the Higher 
Criticism as legitimately used by Christian scholars 
in the interests of truth, and the rationalistic move- 
ment which bears that name. If that movement 
leads to unbelief, it is in obedience to the law that 
like begets like. It is itself the offspring of scepticism. 
Its reputed founder set out with the deliberate design 
of eliminating God from the Bible. From the sceptic’s 
point of view Eichhorn’s theories were inadequate, 
and De Wette and others have improved upon them. 
But their aim and object are the same. The Bible 
must be accounted for, and Christianity explained, 
on natural principles. The miracles therefore had 
to be got rid of, and prophecy is the greatest miracle 
of all. In the case of most of the Messianic Scrip- 
tures the scepticism which had settled like a night 
mist upon Germany made the task an easy one; 
but Daniel was a difficulty. Such passages as the 
fifty-third chapter of Isaiah could be jauntily disposed 
of, but the infidel could make nothing of these 
visions of Daniel. The Book stands out as a witness 


xl PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


for God, and by fair means or foul it must be silenced. 
And one method only of accomplishing this is possible. 
The conspirators set themselves to prove that it was 
written after the events it purports to predict. The 
evidence they have scraped together is of a kind which 
would not avail to convict a known thief of petty 
larceny—much of it indeed has already been dis- 
carded ; but any sort of evidence will suffice with a 
prejudiced tribunal, and from the very first the Book 
of Daniel was doomed. 

Dr. Farrar’s bock reproduces every shred of this 
evidence in its baldest and crudest form. His 
original contributions to the controversy are limited 
to the rhetoric which conceals the weakness of falla- 
cious arguments, and the dogmatism with which 
he sometimes disposes of results accredited by the 
judgment of authorities of the highest eminence. 
Two typical instances will suffice. The first relates 
to a question of pure scholarship. Referring to the 
fifth chapter of Daniel he writes :— 

‘“Snatching at the merest straws, those who try to 
vindicate the accuracy of the writer . .. think that they 
improve the case by urging that Daniel was made ‘the 
third ruler in the kingdom ’—Nabunaid being the first, 
and Belshazzar being the second! Unhappily for their 
very precarious hypothesis, the translation ‘third ruler’ 


appears to be entirely untenable. It means ‘one of a 
board of three.’” 


“Entirely untenable!” In view of the decision of 


PREFACE TO CHE PTD LE DITLON, xli 


the Old Testament Company of the Revisers on this 
point, the statement denotes extraordinary careless- 
ness or intolerable arrogance. And I have authority 
for stating that the Revisers gave the question full 
consideration, and that it was only at the last re- 
vision that the alternative rendering, “rule as one 
of three,” was admitted into the margin. On no 
occasion was it contemplated to accept it in the 
text* 

The right rendering of ch. v. 29 is admittedly 
“the third ruler” in the kingdom; but the authori- 
ties differ as to verses 7 and 16. Professor Driver 
tells me that, in his opinion, the absolutely literal 
rendering there is “rule as a third part in the king- 
dom,” or, slightly paraphrasing the words, “rule as 
one of three” (as in R.V. margin). Professor Kirk- 
patrick, of Cambridge, has been good enough to refer 
me to Kautzsch’s Dee Hezlige schrift des alten Testa- 
ments, aS representing the latest and best German 
scholarship, and his rendering of verse 7 is “third 
ruler in the kingdom,” with the note, “ze. either as 
one of three over the whole kingdom (compare vi. 3), 
or as third by the side of the king and the king’s 
mother.” And the Chief Rabbi (whose courtesy to 


me here I wish to acknowledge) writes :— 


“T cannot absolutely find fault with —— for translating 


* As I have taken up this as a test question I have inves- 
tigated it closely. 


xlil PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


the words ‘the third part of the kingdom,’ as he follows 
herein two of our Hebrew Commentators of great repute, 
Rashi and Ibn Ezra. On the other hand, others of our 
Commentators, such as Saadia, Jachja, etc., translate the 
passage as ‘he shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.’ 
This rendering seems to be more strictly in accord with 
the literal meaning of the words, as shown by Dr. Winer 
in his Grammatik des Chaldoismus. It also receives 
confirmation from Sir Henry Rawlinson’s remarkable dis- 
covery, according to which Belshazzar was the eldest son 
of King Nabonidus, and associated with him in the 
Government, so that the person next in honour would 
be the ¢hird.” 


It is perfectly clear, therefore, that Dr. Farrar’s 
statement is utterly unjustifiable. Is it to be attri- 
buted to want of scholarship, or to want of candour? 

Again, referring to the prophet’s third vision, 
Archdeacon Farrar writes :-— 


“The attempt to refer the prophecy of the seventy 
weeks primarily or directly to the coming and death of 
Christ . . . can only be supported by immense manipula- 
tions, and by hypotheses so crudely impossible, that they 
would have made the prophecy practically meaningless 
both to Daniel and to any subsequent reader” (p. 287). 


It is not easy to deal with such a statement with 
even conventional respect. No honest man will 
deny that, whether the ninth chapter of Daniel be 
a prophecy or a fraud, the blessings specified in the 
twenty-fourth verse are Messianic. Here all Christian 


PREPACH ROVE E PLE DRT EDIMION, xiii 


expositors are agreed. And though the views of 
some of them are marked by startling eccentricities, 
even the wildest of them will contrast favourably 
with Kuenen’s exegesis, which, in all its crude 
absurdity, Archdeacon Farrar adopts.* 

Professor Driver’s opinions are entitled to the 
greatest weight within the sphere in which he is 
so high an authority.t But I have ventured to 
suggest that his eminence as a scholar lends undue 
weight to his d@cfa on the general topics involved, 
and that he shares in the proverbia! disability of 
experts in dealing with a mass of apparently con- 


flicting evidence. The tone and manner in which 


* His chapter on Zhe Seventy Weeks provokes the excla- 
mation, Is this what English theology has come to! I do 
not allude to such vulgar blunders as calling Gabriel ‘‘ the 
Archangel’’ (p. 275), or confounding the era of the Servitude 
with that of the Desolations (p. 289), but to the style and 
spirit of the excursus asa whole. For ‘‘immense manipula- 
tions’? and ‘‘crudely impossible hypotheses’? no recent 
English treatise can compare with it. 

+ I allude to his attempt to fix the date of the Book by the 
character of its Hebrew and Aramaic. This, moreover, is a 
point on which scholars differ. I have already quoted Dr, 
Pusey’s @zctum. Professor Cheyne says: ‘‘ From the Hebrew 
of the Book of Daniel no important inference as to its date can 
be safely drawn’? (Zxcyc. Brit., “‘ Daniel,’ p. 804); and one 
of the greatest authorities in England, who has been quoted 
in favour of fixing a late date for Daniel, writes, in answer to 
an inquiry I have addressed to him: ‘‘I am nowof opinion 
that it is a very difficult task to settle the age of any portion 
of that Book from its language. I do not think, therefore, 
that my name should be quoted any more in the contest.”’ 


xliv PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


his inquiry is conducted shows a readiness to re- 
consider his position in the light of any new 
discoveries hereafter. In contrast with this there 
are no reserves in Dr. Farrar’s denunciations. For 
him retreat is impossible, no matter what the future 
may disclose. But to review his book is not my 
purpose. The only serious counts in the indictment 
of Daniel have been already noticed. His treatise, 
however, raises a general question of transcendent 
importance, and to this I desire in conclusion to 
refer. 

With him the Book of Daniel is the merest fiction, 
differing from other fiction of the same kind by 
reason of the inultiplicity of its inaccuracies and 
errors. Its history is but idle legend. Its miracles 
are but baseless fables. It is, in every part of it, a 
work of the imagination. “ Avowed fiction” (p. 43), 
he calls it, for it is so obviously a romance that the 
charge of fraud is due solely to the stupidity of the 
Christian Church in mistaking the aim and purpose 
of “the holy and gifted Jew” (p. 119) who wrote it. 

Such are the results of his criticisms. What action 
shall we take upon them? Shall we not sadly, but 
with deliberate purpose, tear the Book of Daniel from 
its place in the Sacred Canon? By no means. 

“These results,” Dr. Farrar exclaims, “are in no way 


derogatory to the preciousness of this Old Testament 
Apocalypse. No words of mine can exaggerate the value 


PREFACE TO TTE FIFTH EDITION, xlv 


which I attach to this part of our Canonical Scriptures. . . . 
Its right to a place in the Canon is undisputed and indis- 
putable, and there is scarcely a single book of the Old 
Testament which can be made more richly profitable 
for teaching, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in 
righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, 
completely furnished unto every good work” (p. 4). 

This is not an isolated statement such as charity 
might attribute to thoughtlessness. Like words are 
used again and again in praise of the book.* Daniel 
is nothing more than a religious novel, and yet “there 
is scarcely a single book of the Old Testament” of 
greater worth! 

The question here is not the authenticity of Daniel, 
but the character and value of the Holy Scriptures. 
Christian scholars whose researches lead them to 
reject any portion of the Canon are wont to urge 
that, in doing so, they increase the authority, and 
enhance the value, of the rest. But the Archdeacon 
of Westminster, in impugning the Book of Daniel, 
takes occasion to degrade and throw contempt upon 
the Bible as a whole. 

Bishop Westcott declares that no writing in the 
Old Testament had so great a share in the develop- 
ment of Christianity as the Book of Daniel.f Or, 


to quote a hostile witness, Professor Bevan writes: 


PESCee13e 7, PDs GONG OO LO, 125 < 
+ Smith’s Bzble Dict., ‘‘ Daniel.” 


xlvi PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


SS ee 


“In the New Testament Daniel is mentioned only 
once, but the influence of :the book is apparent 
almost everywhere.”* “There are few books,” says 
Hengstenberg, “whose Divine authority is so fully 
established by the testimony of the New Testament, 
and in particular by our Lord Himself, as the Book 
of Daniel.” Just as mist and storm may hide the 
solid rock from sight, so this truth may be obscured 
by casuistry and rhetoric ; but when these have spent 
themselves it stands out plain and clear. In all this 
controversy one result of the rejection of the Book of 
Daniel is entirely overlooked. or studiously concealed. 
If “the Apocalypse of the Old Testament” be banished 
from the Canon, the Apocalypse of the New Testament 
must share in its exclusion. The visions of St. John 
are so inseparably interwoven with the visions of the 
great prophet of the exile, that they stand or fall 
together. This result the critic is entitled to disregard. 
But the homilist may by no ineans ignore it. And it 
brings into prominence the fact so habitually for- 
gotten, that the Higher Criticism claims a position 
which can by no means be accorded to it. Its true 
place is not on the judgment seat, but in the witness 
chair. The Christian theologian must take account 
of much which criticism cannot notice without entirely 
abandoning its legitimate sphere and function. 


* Com. Daniel, p. 15. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xlvii 


No one falls back upon this position more freely 
when it suits his purpose, than Archdeacon Farrar. 
He evades the testimony of the twenty-fourth chapter 
of St. Matthew by refusing to believe that our Lord 
ever spoke the words attributed to Him. But this 
undermines Christianity ; for, I repeat, Christianity 
rests upon the Incarnation, and if the Gospels be not 
inspired, the Incarnation is a myth. What is his 
answer to this? I quote his words :— 


“But our belief in the Incarnation, and in the miracles 
of Christ, rests on evidence which, after repeated examina- 
tion, is to us overwhelming. Apart from all questions of 
personal verification, or the Inward Witness of the Spirit, 
we can show that this evidence is supported, not only by 
the existing records, but by myriads of external and 
independent testimonies.” 


This deserves the closest attention, not merely 
because of its bearing on the question at issue, but 
as a fair specimen of the writer’s reasoning in this 
extraordinary contribution to our theological literature. 
Here is the Christian argument: “The Nazarene 
was admittedly the son of Mary. The Jews declared 
that He was the son of Joseph ; the Christian worships 
Him as the Son of God. The founder of Rome was 
said to be the divinely begotten child of a vestal 
virgin. And in the old Babylonian mysteries a 
similar parentage was ascribed to the martyred son 
of Semiramis, gazetted Queen of Heaven. What 


xlviii PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. 


grounds have we then for distinguishing the miraculous 
birth at Bethlehem from these and other kindred 
legends of the ancient world? To point to the resur- 
rection is a transparent begging of the question. To 
appeal to human testimony is utter folly. At this 
point we are face to face with that to which no con- 
sensus of mere human testimony could lend even an 
a prior’ probability.” * 

On what then do we base our belicf of the great 
central fact of the Christian system? Here the 
dilemma is inexorable: to disparage the Gospels, 
as this writer does, is to admit that the foundation 
of our faith is but a Galilean legend. By no means, 
Dr. Farrar tells us; we have not only “personal 
verification, and the Inward Witness of the Spirit, 
but we have also myriads of external and inde- 
pendent witnesses.” No Christian will ignore the 
Witness of the Spirit. But the question here, remem- 
ber, is one of fact. The whole Christian system 
depends upon the truth of the last verse of the first 
chapter of St. Matthew—I will not quote it. How 
then can the Holy Spirit impart to me the know- 
ledge of the fact there stated, save by the written 
Word? I believe the fact because I accept the 
record as God-breathed Scripture, an authoritative 
revelation from heaven. But to talk of personal 


* A Doubter’s Doubts, p. 76. 


PREFACE TO THE FIFTH EDITION. xlix 


verification, or to appeal to some _ transcendental 
instinct, or to tens of thousands of external wit- 
nesses, is to divorce words from thoughts, and to 
pass out of the sphere of intelligent statement and 


common sense.* 
RACA: 


* Professor Driver has since called my attention to a note 
in the ‘‘ Addenda” to the third edition of his Ltroduction, 
qualifying his admissions respecting Belshazzar. He has 
also informed me that Professor Sayce is the “high Assyrio- 
logical authority’’ there referred to. This enables us to 
discount his retractation. When writing on (e) in the above 
Preface, I had before me pp. 524-9 of the Higher Criticism 
and the Monuments, and I was impressed by the force of 
the objections there urged against the Daniel story of Bel- 
shazzar. Great was my revulsion of feeling when I discovered 
that Professor Sayce’s argument depends upon his misreading 
of the Annalistic tablet of Cyrus. That tablet admittedly 
refers throughout to Belshazzar as ‘‘the son of the King’”’ ; 
but when it records his death at the taking of Babylon, 
Professor Sayce reads ‘‘ wife of the King’’ instead of ‘‘ son of 
the King,’’ and goes on to argue that, as Belshazzar is not 
mentioned in the passage, he cannot have been in Babylon 
at the time! That ‘contract tablets’’ would be dated with 
reference to the reign of the A7zzg, and not of the Regent, 
is precisely what we should expect. 

I have dealt fully with the Belshazzar question in my Danzel 
in the Critics Den, to which I would refer also for a fuller 
reply to Dean Farrar’s book. Having regard to the testi- 
mony of the Annalistic tablet, that question may be looked 
upon as settled. And if, when writing that work, I had had 
before me what the Rev. J. Urquhart brings to light about 
Darius the Mede, in his Zzspiration and Accuracy of Holy 
Scripture, 1 should have considered that this, the only 
remaining difficulty in the Daniel controversy, was no longer 
a serious one. 


d 


PREPACETO-tHE THIRD EDITION, 


Vi I entered upon the inquiry of which 

these pages are the outcome, Professor 
Tyndall’s Birmingham address on “Science and 
Man” had recently been given to the _ public. 
“Does,” he demanded, “the song of the Herald 
Angels, ‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth 
peace, good will toward men,’ express the exalta- 
tion and the yearning of a human soul? or does it 
describe an optical and acoustical fact—a visible 
host and an audible song? If the former, the 
exaltation and the yearning are man’s imperishable 
possession—a ferment long confined to individuals, 
but which may by-and-bye become the leaven of 
the race. If the latter, then belief in the entire 
transaction is wrecked by non-fulfilment. Look 


to the East at the present moment as a comment 


lii PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 


on the promise of peace on earth and good will 
toward men. The promise is a dream ruined by 
the experience of cighteen centuries, and in that 
ruin is involved the claim of the ‘heavenly host’ 
to prophetic vision.” 

The Coming Prince is an answer to that 
criticism, and to the challenge it implies. 

It is not “the claim of the ‘heavenly host’ 
to prophetic vision” which is discredited “by the 
history of eighteen centuries,’ but the claim of 
theologians to be true interpreters of the angels’ 
song. Theology indeed has never seriously at- 
tempted the task, The study of prophecy has 
been for the most part relegated to specialists, 
and the specialists have generally ranked with 
soothsayers and astrologers and the professors 
of other occult and mystic arts. I do not 
speak here of the charlatans whose foolish and 
profane predictions pander to the tastes of the 
ignorant and the vulgar, I am _ referring to 
writers of a very different stamp, men whose 
works appeal to the thoughtful and devout. 
And my complaint is that they write as 
specialists and mystics. They discern both in 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. liii 


Scripture and in history what common men 
perplex their minds in vain to find there, and 
they fail to see what lies before them on the 
open page. 

In contrast with this, the study is here at- 
tempted on Baconian lines, for Lord Bacon’s 
estimate of prophecy was wholly free from the 
scorn bestowed on it by the lofty intellects of 
this Victorian age. 

When I was preparing the second edition for 
the press, it was earnestly urged upon me that 
the predicted revival of the Roman empire 
implies a restoration of the ancient bounda- 
ries, and therefore that Ireland, which never 
came under the sceptre of the Caesars, must in- 
evitably be lost to the English crown. I was 
much tempted by the bait thus thrown to me. 
The intimate acquaintance I possessed of the 
real aims of the Irish conspiracy and of its dis- 
honesty and utter hollowness, the special know- 
ledge I enjoyed of the views then held upon the 
Irish question by leading statesmen of both 
political parties, and the mistaken estimate I had 


formed of English determination and Scotch 


liv PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION. 


sturdiness of character, combined to make me 
regard the speedy collapse of the agitation as a 
certainty; and it was only the extreme pressure 
of my engagements at the time which saved me 
from the folly of embodying my lucubrations in 
a new chapter. 

I have profited by the lesson; and when these 
same perilous counsellors now appeal to the 
political situation of to-day in proof of the near 
fulfilment of their predictions, I refuse to be drawn 
into the snare. A glance at the calendar reminds 
me that I am writing on the anniversary of the 
Jewish Fast of Esther. It commemorates one of 
the darkest days in all the eventful history of 
that mysterious race. Given up to utter and 
hopeless destruction, it seemed that a miracle 
alone could save them. The miracle was not 
wanting, but it assumed the guise of a series of 
events most commonplace, and twelve months 
afterwards the Feast of Purim was inaugurated 
by the happy and triumphant people. ~ 

I refuse the réle of a prophecy-monger. As 
Dr. Pusey warns us, “Prophecy was not given to 


enable us to prophesy.” I have no misgivings as 


PREFACE TO THE. THIRD EDITION. lv 


to the truth of Scripture, but I distrust our 
powers to unravel in detaii its meaning when it 
treats of events still future. 

Mine has been the humbler aim of “ sorting,” 
as Bacon phrases it, one great prophecy “with the 
events fulfilling the same, for the better illumina- 
tion of the Church touching those parts of 
prophecies which are yet unfulfilled.” The illumina- 
tion is much needed at this moment, when the 
Church is honeycombed by scepticism—a scepticism, 
moreover, which is the outcome, not of fuller 
knowledge or more matured thought, but of the 
intellectual conceit and levity which are marked 
characteristics of the age. 

Where chronology is involved I have adopted 
the standard dates of history, as settled by the 
ablest of modern chronologers. As regards the 
regnal years of Jewish kings, however, Fynes 
Clinton’s month dates are modified in accordance 
with the Hebrew J/ishna, which was a sealed 
book to English readers when the Paste Hellenici 
was written. With reference to one date of 
cardinal importance I am_ specially indebted to 


Canon Rawlinson and the late Astronomer Royal. 


PREFACE 70 THE THIRD EDITION. 


lvi 


To prevent any possible misconception as to 
the meaning of the title, in which some are said 
to have suspected an allusion to Messiah, the 
head of Antiochus Epiphanes, “the antichrist 
of the Old Testament,” has been placed upon the 
title-page. The engraving is taken from a coin 
in the British Museum. I may add that the 
Babylonian cylinders referred to at page 221 
will be found on the third shelf of the first 
pier-case in the northern gallery of the Assyrian 


rooms of the Museum. 


Rev: 


39, LINDEN GARDENS, W, 
March 14th, 1889 


SONG EINES: 


CHAPTER I. 

PAGE 

INTRODUCTORY . : ; A : ; : ; 3 I 
CHAPTER II. 

DANIEL AND HIS TIMES : 2 5 : : ; 19 
CHAPTER III. 

THE KING’S DREAM AND THE PROPHET’S VISIONS : = he 
CHAPTER IV. 

THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULAI . : : 4 a) AT 
CHAPTER V. 

THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE. : , : : é ‘ ee I 
CHAPTER VI. 


THE PROPHETIC YEAR . ; : ‘ 5 3 : 77 


wii CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER VII. 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS 


CHAPTER VIII. 


“ MESSIAH THE PRINCE” 


CHAPTER IX. 


THE PASCHAL SUPPER . 


CHAPTER xX 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY . 


CHAPTER XI. 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION . 


CHAPTER XII. 


THE FULNESS OF THE GENTILES . 


CHAPTER XIIL 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 


CHAPTER XIV. 


THE PATMOS VISIONS . 


CHAPTER Vs 


THE COMING PRINCE 


PAGE 


88 


106 


119 


130 


149 


159 


171 


190 


CONTENTS. lix 


AP Pie bt Or Ss: 


APPENDIX I. 


PAGE 
CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES 5 ° + 220 


APPENDIX II. 


NOTE A.—ARTAXERXES LONGIMANUS AND THE CHRONO- 
LOGY OF HIS REIGN ° . . : - 251 

NOTE B.—THE DATE OF THE NATIVITY . . . - 257 

NOTE C.—THE CONTINUOUS HISTORICAL SYSTEM OF PRO- 
PHETIC INTERPRETATION . . . . 264. 


NOTE D.—THE TEN KINGDOMS . . . . . - 271 


APPENDIX III. 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY . . : . . » 279 


CHRONOLOGICAL DIAGRAM OF THE HISTORY OF JUDAH + 305 


INDEX ; 5 ‘ p : ; : : 3 S07, 


CHAP TIER. I. 
INTRODUCTORY. 


O living men no time can be so solemn as 

“the living present,” whatever its characteristics; 
and that solemnity is immensely deepened in an age 
of progress unparalleled in the history of the world. 
But the question arises whether these days of ours 
are momentous beyond comparison, by reason of 
their being in the strictest sense the Jast? Is the 
world’s history about to close? The sands of its 
destiny, are they almost run out, and is the crash 
of all things near at hand ? 

Earnest thinkers will not allow the wild utterances 
of alarmists, or the vagaries of prophecy-mongers, 
to divert them from an inquiry at once so solemn 
and so reasonable. It is only the infidel who doubts 
that there is a destined limit to the course of “this 
present evil world.” That God will one day put 
forth His power to ensure the triumph of the good, 
is in some sense a matter of course. The mystery 
of revelation is not that He zw7// do this, but that He 
delays to do it. Judged by the public facts around 

I 


2 THE COMING PRINCE. 


ee 


us, He is an indifferent spectator of the unequal 
struggle between good and evil ‘upon earth. “I con- 
sidered all the oppressions that are done under the 
sun; and, behold, the tears of the oppressed, and 
they had no comforter; and on the side of their 
oppressors there was power, but ¢ey had no com- 
”* And how can such things be, if indeed 
the God who rules above is almighty and all-good ? 


forter. 


Vice and godlessness and violence and wrong are 
rampant upon every side, and yet the heavens above 
keep silence. The infidel appeals to the fact in 
proof that the Christian’s God: is but a myth.t The 


* Eccles. iv. I. 

+ According to Mill, the course of the world gives proof that 
both the power and the goodness of God are limited. His 
Essays on Religion clearly show that scepticism is an attitude 
of mind which it is practically impossible to maintain. Even 
with a reasoner so clear and able as Mill, it inevitably degene- 
rates to a degrading form of fazth, “The rational attitude of a 
thinking mind towards the supernatural” (he declares) “ is that 
of scepticism, as distinguished from belief on the one hand, and 
from atheism on the other ;” and yet he immediately proceeds 
to formulate a creed. It is not that there is a God, for that is 
only probable, but that ifthere be a God He is of almighty, and 
His goodness toward man is limited. (Zssays, etc., pp. 242, 
243.) He does not prove his creed, of course. Its truth is 
obvious toa “thinking mind.” It is equally obvious that the 
sun moves round the earth. A man only needs to be as igno- 
rant of astronomy as the infidel is of Christianity, and he will 


find the most indisputable proof of the fact every time he 
surveys the heavens ! 


INTRODUCTORY. 3 


Christian finds in it a further proof that the God 
he worships is patient and longsuffering—“ patient 
because He is eternal,” longsuffering because He is 
almighty, for wrath is a last resource with power. 

But the day is coming when “ our God shall come 
and shall not keep silence.” * This is not a matter 
of opinion, but of faith, He who questions it has 
no claim whatever to the name of Christian, for it is 
as essentially a truth of Christianity as is the record 
of the life and death of the Son of God. The old 
Scriptures teem with it, and of all the writers of the 
New Testament there is not so much as one who 
does not expressly speak of it. It was the burden 
of the first prophetic utterance which Holy Writ 
records ;¢ and the closing book of the sacred Canon, 
from the first chapter to the last, confirms and 
amplifies the testimony. | 

The only inquiry, therefore, which concerns us 
relates to the nature of the crisis and the time of 
its fulfilment. And the key to this inquiry is the 
Prophet Daniel’s vision of the seventy weeks. Not 
that a right understanding of the prophecy will enable 
us to prophesy. That is not the purpose for which 
it was given.t But it will prove a sufficient safeguard 
against error in the study. Notably it will save us 


* Psalm |. 3. t+ Jude 14. 
¢ “Prophecy is not given to enable us to prophesy, but as a 
witness to God when the time comes.”—PUSEY, Dazzed, p. 80. 


4 THE COMING PRINCE. 


from the follies into which false systems of prophetic 
chronology inevitably lead those who follow them. 
It is not in our time only that the end of the world 
has been predicted. It was looked for far more con- 
fidently at the beginning of the sixth century. All 
Europe rang with it in the days of Pope Gregory 
the Great. And at the end of the tenth century the 
appehension of it amounted to a general panic. “It 
was then frequently preached on, and by breathless 
crowds listened to; the subject of every one’s 
thoughts, every one’s conversation.” “Under this 
impression, multitudes innumerable,” says Mosheim, 
“having given their property to monasteries or 
churches, travelled to Palestine, where they expected 
Christ to descend to judgment. Others bound them- 
selves by solemn oaths to be serfs to churches or to 
priests, in hopes of a milder sentence on them as 
being servants of Christ’s servants. In many places 
buildings were let go to decay, as that of which there 
would be no need in future. And on occasions of 
eclipses of sun or moon, the people fled in multitudes 
for refuge to the caverns and the rocks.” * 

And so in recent years, one date after another has 
been confidently named for the supreme crisis ; but 
still the world goes on. A.D. 581 was one of the first 


$$ eee 


* Elliott, Hore Apoc. (3rd Ed.), I., 446 : and see also ch. iii., 
pp. 362-376. 


INTRODUCTORY. 5 


years fixed for the event,* 1881 is among the last. 
These pages are not designed to perpetuate the folly 
of such predictions, but to endeavour in a humble 
way to elucidate the meaning of a prophecy which 
ought to deliver us from all such errors and to rescue 
the study from the discredit they bring upon it. 

No words ought to be necessary to enforce the 
importance of the subject, and yet the neglect of 
the prophetic Scriptures, by those even who profess 
to believe all Scripture to be inspired, is proverbial. 
Putting the matter on the lowest ground, it might be 
urged that if a knowledge of the past be important, 
a knowledge of the future must be of far higher value 
still, in enlarging the mind and raising it above the 
littlenesses produced by a narrow and unenlightened 
contemplation of the present. If God has vouchsafed 
a revelation to men, the study of it is surely fitted 
to excite enthusiastic interest, and to command the 
exercise of every talent which can be brought to bear 
upon it. 

And this suggests another ground on which, in our 
own day especially, prophetic study claims peculiar 
prominence ; namely, the testimony it affords to the 
Divine character and origin of the Scriptures. Though 
infidelity was as open-mouthed in former times, it 
had its own banner and its own camp, and it shocked 


* Elliott, I., 373. Hippolytus predicted A.D. 500, 


6 THE COMING PRINCE. 


the mass of mankind, who, though ignorant of the 
spiritual power of religion, clung nevertheless with 
dull tenacity to its dogmas. But the special feature 
of the present age—well fitted to cause anxiety and 
alarm to all thoughtful men—is the growth of what 
may be termed religious scepticism, a Christianity 
which denies revelation—a form of godliness which 
denies that which is the power of godliness.* 

Faith is not the normal attitude of the human 
mind towards things Divine; the earnest doubter, 
therefore, is entitled to respect and sympathy. But 
what judgment shall be meted out to those who 
delight to proclaim themselves doubters, while claim- 
ing to be ministers of a religion of which FAITH is 
the essential characteristic ? 

There are not a few in our day whose belief in the 
Bible is all the more deep and unfaltering just because 
they have shared in the general revolt against priest- 
craft and superstition; and such men are scarcely 
prepared to take sides in the struggle between free 
thought and the thraldom of creeds and clerics. But 
in the conflict between faith and scepticism within the 
pale, their sympathies are less divided. On the one 
side there may be narrowness, but at least there is 
honesty ; and in such a case surely the moral element 
is to be considered before a claim to mental vigour and 


"2. Jim, ilies, 


INTRODUCTORY. 7 


independence can be listened to. Moreover any claim 
of the kind needs looking into. The man who asserts 
his freedom to receive and teach what he deems truth, 
howsoever reached, and wheresoever found, is not to 
be lightly accused of vanity or self-will. His motives 
may be true, and right, and praiseworthy. But if he 
has subscribed to a creed, he ought to be careful in 
taking any such ground. It is not on the side of 
vagueness that the creeds of our British Churches 
are in fault, and men who boast of being free- 
thinkers would deserve more respect if they showed 
their independence by refusing to subscribe, than by 
undermining the doctrines they are both pledged 
and subsidized to defend and teach. 

But what concerns us here is the indisputable fact 
that rationalism in this its most subtle phase is leaven- 
ing society. The universities are its chief seminaries. 
The pulpit is its platform. Some of the most popular 
religious leaders are amongst its apostles. No class 
is safe from its influence. And if even the present 
could be stereotyped, it were well; but we are entered 
on a downward path, and they must indeed be blind 
who cannot see where it is leading. If the authority 
of the Scriptures be unshaken, vital truths may be 
lost by one generation, and recovered by the next; 
but if that be touched, the foundation of all truth is 
undermined, and all power of recovery is gone, The 
Christianized sceptic of to-day will soon give place 


8 THE COMING PRINCE. 


to the Christianized infidel, whose disciples and suc- 
cessors in their turn will be infidels without any gloss 


of Christianity about them. Some, doubtless, will 
escape; but as for the many, Rome will be the 
only refuge for those who dread the goal to which 


society is hastening. Thus the forces are marshal- 
ling for the great predicted struggle of the future 
between the apostasy of a false religion and the 
apostasy of open infidelity.* 

Is the Bible a revelation from God? This is now 


* I cannot refrain from giving the following extract from an 
article by Professor Goldwin Smith, in Macmillan’s Magazine 
for February 1878 :— 

“The denial of the existence of God and of the future state, 
in a word, is the dethronement of conscience ; and society will 
pass, to say the least, through a dangerous interval before social 
science can fill the vacant throne.... But in the meantime man- 
kind, or some portions of it, may be in danger of an anarchy 
of self-interest, compressed, for the purpose of political order, 
by a despotism of force. 

“That science and criticism, acting—thanks to the liberty of 
opinion won by political effort—with a freedom never known 
before, have delivered us from a mass of dark and degrading 
superstitions, we own with heartfelt thankfulness to the de- 
liverers, and in the firm conviction that the removal of false 
beliefs, and of the authorities or institutions founded on them, 
cannot prove in the end anything but a blessing to mankind. 
But at the same time the foundations of general morality have 
inevitably been shaken, and a crisis has been brought on, the 
gravity of which nobody can fail to see, and nobody but a fanatic 
of materialism can see without the most serious misgiving. 

“ There has been nothing in the history of man like the present 


INTRODUCTORY. | 9 


become the greatest and most pressing of all ques- 
tions. We may at once dismiss the quibble that 
the Scriptures admittedly contaiz a revelation. Is 
the sacred volume no better than a lottery bag from 
which blanks and prizes are to be drawn at random, 
with no power of distinguishing between them till 
the day when the discovery must come too late! 
And in the present phase of the question it is no less 
a quibble to urge that passages, and even books, 
may have been added in error to the Canon. We 
refuse to surrender Holy Writ to the tender mercies 
of those who approach it with the ignorance of 
pagans and the animus of apostates. But for the 
purpose of the present controversy we might consent 
to strike out everything on which enlightened criti- 
cism has cast the shadow of a doubt. This, however, 
would only clear the way for the real question at 


situation. The decadence of the ancient mythologies is very far 
from affording a parallel. . .. The Reformation was a tremendous 
earthquake : it shook down the fabric of medizval religion, and 
as a consequence of the disturbance in the religious sphere, filled 
the world with revolutions and wars. But it left the authority 
of the Bible unshaken, and men might feel that the destructive 
process had its limit, and that adamant was still beneath their 
feet. But a world which is intellectual and keenly alive to the 
significance of these questions, reading all that is written about 
them with almost passionate avidity, finds itself brought to a 
crisis the character of which any one may realize by distinctly 
presenting to himself the idea of existence without a God.” 


ie) THE COMING PRINCE. 


issue, which is not as to the authenticity of one por- 
tion or another, but as to the character and value 
of what is admittedly authentic. We are now far 
beyond discussing rival theories of inspiration ; what 
concerns us is to consider whether the holy writings 
are what they claim to be, “the oracles of God.” * 
In the midst of error and confusion and uncer- 
tainty, increasing on every side, can earnest and 
devout souls turn te an open Bible, and find there 
“words of eternal life”? “The rational attitude of 
a thinking mind towards the supernatural is that of 
scepticism.” + Reason may bow before the shibboleths 
and tricks of priestcraft—“the voice of the Church,” 
as it is called; but this is sheer credulity. But if 
GoD speaks, then scepticism gives place to /azth. 


* ra Adyia Tod Oeod (Rom. iii. 2). The old Hebrew Scriptures 
were thus regarded by those who were the divinely-appointed 
custodians of them (zd.) Not only by the devout among the 
Jews, but, as Josephus testifies, by all, they “ were justly believed 
to be Divine,” so that men were willing to endure tortures of all 
kinds rather than speak against them, and even “willingly to 
die for them” (Josephus, Afzon, I., 8). This fact is of immense 
importance in relation to the Lord’s own teaching on the subject. 
Dealing with a people who believed in the sanctity and value of 
every word of Scripture, He never missed an opportunity to 
confirm them in that belief. The New Testament affords abun- 
dant proof how unreservedly He enforced it upon His disciples. 
(As regards the limits and date of closing of the Canon of 
Scripture, see Pusey, Daniel, p. 294, etc.) 

t Mill, Essays on Religion. 


INTRODUCTORY. II 


Nor is this a mere begging of the question. The 
proof that the voice is really Divine must be absolute 
and conclusive. In such circumstances, scepticism 
betokens mental or moral degradation, and faith is 
not the abnegation of reason, but the highest act of 
reason. To maintain that such proof is impossible, 
is equivalent to asserting that the God who made us 
cannot so speak to us that the voice shall carry with 
it the conviction that it is from Him; and this is not 
scepticism at all, but disbelief and atheism. “ It 
pleased God to reveal His Son in me,” was St. Paul’s 
account of his conversion. The grounds of his faith 
were subjective, and could not be produced. In 
proof to others of their reality he could only appeal 
to the facts of his life; though these were entirely 
the result, and in no sense or degree the basis, of 
his conviction. Nor was his case exceptional. St. 
Peter was one of the favoured three who witnessed 
every miracle, including the transfiguration, and yet 
his faith was not the result of these, but sprang from 
a revelation to himself. In response to his con- 
fession, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living 
God,” the Lord declared, “Flesh and blood hath 
not revealed it unto thee, but my Father who is 
in heaven.”* Nor, again, was this a special grace 
accorded only to apostles. “To them that have 


© Matt. xvi. 16, 17. 


12 THE COMING PRINCE. 


obtained like precious faith with us,”* was St. Peter’s 
address to the faithful generally. He describes them 
as “born again by the Word of God.” So also 
St. John speaks of such as “born, not of blood, nor 
of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but 
of God.”t “Of His own will begat He us with 
the word of truth” is the kindred statement of 
St. James.¢ 

Whatever be the meaning of such words, they 
must mean something more than arriving at a sound 
conclusion from sufficient premises, or accepting facts 
upon sufficient evidence. Nor will it avail to urge 
that this birth was merely the mental or moral 
change naturally caused by the truth thus attained 
by natural means. The language of the Scripture 
is unequivocal that the power of the testimony to 
produce this change depended on the presence and 
operation of God. Pages might be filled with quota- 
tions to prove this, but two may suffice. St. Peter 
declares they preached the Gospel “ with the Holy 
Ghost sent down from heaven;”§ and St. Paul’s 
words are still more definite: “Our Gospel came not 


unto you in word only, but also in power and in the 
Holy Ghost.’ || 


Seo abeters ats + John i. 13. 

ft James i. 18. § 1 Peter 1. 12° 

|| GANG Kai ev Suvdper kal cv mvetipare dyip. (1 Thess. i. 5.) 
‘But also in power, even in the Holy Ghost.” There is no 


INTRODUCTORY. 13 


' And if the new birth and the faith of Christianity 
were thus produced in the case of persons who 
received the Gospel immediately from the Apostles, 
nothing less will avail with us who are separated 
by eighteen centuries from the witnesses and their 
testimony. God is with His people still. And 
He speaks to men’s hearts, now, as really as He did 
in early times ; not indeed through inspired Apostles, 
and still less by dreams or visions, but through the 
Holy Writings which He Himself inspired ;* and as 
the result believers are “born of God,” and obtain 
the knowledge of forgiveness of sins and of eternal 
life. The phenomenon is not a natural one, resulting 
from the study of the evidences; it is supernatural 
altogether. “Thinking minds,” regarding it object- 
ively, may, if they please, maintain towards it what 
they deem “a rational attitude;” but at least let 
them own the fact that there are thousands of credible 


contrast intended between God on the one hand, and power on 
the other, nor yet between different sorts of power. To object 
that this referred to miracles which accompanied the preaching 
is to betray ignorance of Scripture. Acts xvii. represents the 
preaching to which the Apostle was alluding. That miraculous 
power existed in Gentile Churches is clear from 1 Cor. xii.; but 
the question is, did the gospel which produced those Churches 
appeal to miracles to confirm it? Can any one read the first 
four chapters of 1 Cor. and retain a doubt as to the answer? 

* God is omnipresent ; but there is a real sense in which the 
Father and the Son are not on earth but in heaven, and in that 
same sense the Holy Spirit is not in heaven but on earth. 


14 THE COMING PRINCE. 


people who can testify to the reality of the experi- 
ence here spoken of, and further let them recognise 
that it is entirely in accordance with the teaching of 
the New Testament. 

And such persons have transcendental proof of the 
truth of Christianity. Their faith rests, not on the 
phenomena of their own experience, but on the great 
objective truths of revelation. Yet their primary 
conviction that these ave Divine truths does not 
depend on the “evidences” which scepticism delights 
to criticise, but on something which scepticism takes 
no account of.* 

“No book can be written in behalf of the Bible 
like the Bible itself. Man’s defences are man’s 
word ; they may help to beat off attacks, they may 
draw out some portion of its meaning. The Bible 
is God’s word, and through it God the Holy Ghost, 
who spake it, speaks to the soul which closes not 
itself against it.” f 

But more than this, the well-instructed believer 
will find within it inexhaustible stores of proof that 
it is from God. The Bible is far more than a text- 
book of theology and morals, or even than a guide 


* Such faith is inseparably connected with salvation, and 
salvation is the gift of God (Eph. ii. 8). Hence the solemn 
words of Christ, “I thank Thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and 
earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the wise and 
prudent, and hast revealed thera unto babes” (Matt. xi. 2 5). 

t Pusey, Danzel, Pref., p. xxv. 


INTRODUCTORY. 15 


to heaven. It is the record of the progressive reve- 
lation God has vouchsafed to man, and the Divine 
history of our race in connection with that revelation. 
Ignorance may fail to see in it anything more than 
the religious literature of the Hebrew race, and of 
the Church in Apostolic times; but the intelligent 
student who can read between the lines will find 
there mapped out, sometimes in clear bold outline, 
sometimes dimly, but yet always discernible by the 
patient and devout inquirer, the great scheme of 
God’s counsels and workings in and for this world 
of ours from eternity to eternity. 

And the study of prophecy, rightly understood, 
has a range no narrower than this. Its chief value 
is not to bring us a knowledge of “ things to come,” 
regarded as isolated events, important though this 
may be; but to enable us to link the future with 
the past as part of God’s great purpose and plan 
revealed in Holy Writ. The facts of the life and 
death of Christ were an overwhelming proof of the 
inspiration of the Old Testament. When, after His 
resurrection, He sought to confirm the disciples’ 
faith, “beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, 
He expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the 
things concerning Himself.’* But many a promise 
had been given, and many a prophecy recorded, 


MEuke xxlveo7. 


16 THE COMING PRINCE. 


which seemed to be lost in the darkness of Israel’s 
national extinction and Judah’s apostasy. The ful- 
filment of them all depended on Messiah; but now 
Messiah was rejected, and His people were about 
to be cast away, that Gentiles might be taken up 
for blessing. Are we to conclude then that the 
past is wiped out for ever, and that God’s great 
purposes for earth have collapsed through human 
sin? As men now judge of revelation, Christianity 
dwindles down to be nothing but a “plan of salva- 
tion” for individuals, and if St. John’s Gospel and 
a few of the Epistles be left them they are content. 
How different was the attitude of mind and heart 
displayed by St. Paul! In the Apostle’s view the 
crisis which seemed the catastrophe of everything 
the old prophets had foretold of God’s purposes for 
earth, opened up a wider and more glorious purpose 
still, which should include the fulfilment of them 
all; and rapt in the contemplation, he exclaimed, 
“Qh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom 
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are His 
judgments, and His ways past finding out!” * 
True prophetic study is an inquiry into these 
unsearchable counsels, these deep riches of Divine 
wisdom and knowledge. Beneath the light it gives 
the Scriptures are no longer a heterogeneous com- 


> 


* Rom. xi. 33: 


INTRODUCTORY. — 17 


pilation of religious books, but one harmonious 
whole, from which no part could be omitted without 
destroying the completeness of the revelation. And 
yet the study is disparaged in the Churches as being 
of no practical importance. If the Churches are 
leavened with scepticism at this moment, their 
neglect of prophetic study in this its true and 
broader aspect has done more than all the ration- 
alism of Germany to promote the evil. Sceptics 
may boast of learned Professors and Doctors of 
Divinity among their ranks, but we may challenge 
them to name a single one of the number who has 
given proof that he knows anything whatever of 
these deeper mysteries of revelation. 

The attempt to put back the rising tide of scep- 
ticism is hopeless. Indeed the movement is but 
one of many phases of the intense mental activity 
which marks the age. The reign of creeds is past. 
The days are gone for ever when men will believe 
what their fathers believed, without a question. 
Rome, in some phase of its development, has a 
strange charm for minds of a certain caste, and 
rationalism is fascinating to not a few; but ortho- 
doxy in the old sense is dead, and if any are to be 
delivered it must be by a deeper and more thorough 
knowledge of the Scriptures. 

These pages are but a humble effort to this end ; 
but if they avail in any measure to promote the 

2 


18 THE COMING PRINCE. 


study of Holy Writ their chief purpose will be 
fulfilled. The reader therefore may expect to find 
the accuracy of the Bible vindicated on points which 
may seem of trifling value. When David reached 
the throne of Israel and came to choose his generals, 
he named for the chief commands the men who had 
made themselves conspicuous by feats of prowess or 
of valour. Among the foremost three was one of 
whom the record states that he defended a tract of 
ientiles, and drove away a troop of the Philistines.* 
To others it may have seemed little better than a 
patch of weeds, and not worth fighting for, but it 
was precious to the Israelite as a portion of the 
divinely-given inheritance, and moreover the enemy 
might have used it as a rallying ground from which 
to capture strongholds. So is it with the Bible. It 
is all of intrinsic value if indeed it be from God; 
and moreover, the statement which is assailed, and 
which may seem of no importance, may prove to 
be a link in the chain of truth on which we are 
depending for eternal life. 


% 2 Sam, xxiii, 11, 12. 


CHAPTER: II; 
DANIEL AND HIS TIMES. 


id ANIEL the prophet.” None can have a higher 

title to the name, for it was thus Messiah spoke 
of him. And yet the great Prince of the Captivity 
would himself doubtless have disclaimed it. Isaiah, 
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest, “spake as they were 
moved by the Holy Ghost ;”* but Daniel uttered no 
such “God-breathed ” words.f Like the “ beloved 
disciple” in Messianic times, he beheld visions, and 
recorded what he saw. The great prediction of the 
seventy weeks was a message delivered to him by an 
angel, who spoke to him as man speaks with man. A 
stranger to prophet’s fare } and prophet’s garb, he 


2) Peteri, 21: 
+ My belief in the Divine character of the Book of Daniel 


| will, I trust, appear plainly in these pages. The distinction I 
| desire to mark here is between prophecies which men were 
' inspired to utter, and prophecies like those of Daniel and 


St. John, who were merely the recipients of the revelation. 
With these, inspiration began in the recording what they had 
received. 

ft To quote Dan. i. 12in opposition to this involves an obvious 
anachronism. The word “pulse,” moreover, in the Hebrew 


20 THE COMING PRINCE. 


lived in the midst of all the luxury and pomp of an 
Eastern court. Next to the king, he was the foremost 
man in the greatest empire of antiquity; and it was 
not till the close of a long life spent in statecraft that 
he received the visions recorded in the latter chapters 
of his book. 

To understand these prophecies aright, it is essen- 
tial that the leading events of the political history 
of the times should be kept in view. 

The summer of Israel’s national glory had proved 
as brief as it was brilliant. The people never ac- 
quiesced in heart in the Divine decree which, in 
distributing the tribal dignities, entrusted the sceptre 
to the house of Judah, while it adjudged the birth- 
right to the favoured family of Joseph; * and their 
mutual jealousies and feuds, though kept in check 
by the personal influence of David, and the surpassing 
splendour of the reign of Solomon, produced a national 
disruption upon the accession of Rehoboam. In 
revolting from Judah, the Israelites also apostatized 
from God; and forsaking the worship of Jehovah, 
they lapsed into open and flagrant idolatry. After 


points generally to vegetable food, and would include a dish 
as savoury as that for which Esau sold his birthright (comp. 
Gen. xxv. 34). To eat animal food from the table of Gentiles 
would have involved a violation of the law; therefore Daniel 
and his companions became “ vegetarians.” 

* “Judah prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the 
chief ruler ; but the birthright was Joseph’s ” (1 Chron. v. 2). 


DANIEL AND HIS TIMES. 21 


two centuries and a half unillumined by a single 
bright passage in their history, they passed into 
captivity to Assyria; * and on the birth of Daniel a 
century had elapsed since the date of their national 
extinction. 

Judah still retained a nominal independence, 
though, in fact, the nation had already fallen into 
a state of utter vassalage. The geographical posi- 
tion of its territory marked it out for such a fate. 
Lying half-way between the Nile and the Euphrates, 
suzerainty in Judea became inevitably a test by 
which their old enemy beyond their southern frontier, 
and the empire which the genius of Nabopolassar 
was then rearing in the north, would test their rival 
claims to supremacy. The prophet’s birth fell about 
the very year which was reckoned the epoch of 
the second Babylonian Empire.t He was still a boy 
at the date of Pharaoh Necho’s unsuccessful invasion 
of Chaldea. In that struggle his kinsman and 
sovereign, the good king Josiah, took sides with 
Babylon, and not only lost his life, but compromised 
still further the fortunes of his house and the freedom 
of his country. } 

The public mourning for Josiah had scarcely ended 


* The disruption was in B.C. 975, the captivity to Assyria 
about B.C. 721. 

i B.C, 625, 

t 2 Kings xxiii, 29 ; 2 Chron, xxxv. 20, 


22 THE COMING PRINCE. 


when Pharaoh, on his homeward march, appeared 
before Jerusalem to assert his suzerainty by claiming 
a heavy tribute from the land and settling the suc- 
cession to the throne. Jehoahaz, a younger son of 
Josiah, had obtained the crown on his father’s death, 
but was deposed by Pharaoh in favour of Eliakim, 
who doubtless recommended himself to the king of 
Egypt by the very qualities which perhaps had in- 
duced his father to disinherit him, Pharaoh changed 
his name to Jehoiakim, and established him in the 
kingdom as a vassal of Egypt.* 

In the third year after these events, Nebuchad- 
nezzar, Prince Royal of Babylon, + set out upon an 
expedition of conquest, in command of his father’s 
armies; and entering Judea he demanded the sub- 
mission of the king of Judah. After a siege of which 
history gives no particulars, he captured the city and 
seized the king as a prisoner of war. But Jehoiakim 
regained his liberty and his throne by pledging his 
allegiance to Babylon; and Nebuchadnezzar with- 
drew with no spoil except a part of the holy vessels 
of the temple, which he carried to the house of his 
god, and no captives save a few youths of the seed 


* 2 Kings xxiii. 33-35 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 3, 4. 
+ Berosus avers that this expedition was in Nabopolassar’s 
lifetime (Jos., Afion, i. 19), and the chronology proves it. See 


App. I. as to the dates of these events and the chronology of 
the period. 


DANIEL AND HIS TIMES. 23 


royal of Judah, Daniel being of the number, whom 
he selected to adorn his court as vassal princes.* 
Three years later Jehoiakim. revolted; but, although 
during the rest of his reign his territory was fre- 
quently overrun by “bands of the Chaldees,” five 
years elapsed before the armies of Babylon returned 
to enforce the conquest of Judea.+ 

Jehoiachin, a youth of eighteen years, who had 
just succeeded to the throne, at once surrendered 
with his family and retinue,{ and once more Jeru- 
salem lay at the mercy of Nebuchadnezzar. On 
his first invasion he had proved magnanimous and 
lenient, but he had now not merely to assert 
supremacy but to punish rebellion. Accordingly he 
ransacked the city for everything of value, and 
“carried away all Jerusalem,” leaving none behind 
“save the poorest sort of the people of the land.” § 


* 2 Kings xxiv. 1 ; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6, 7; Dan. i. 1, 2. 

+ 2 Kings xxiv. 1,2. According to Josephus (Azz, x. 6, § 3) 
Nebuchadnezzar on his second invasion found Jehoiakim still 
on the throne, and he it was who put him to death and made 
Jehoiachin king. He goes on to say that the king of Babylon 
soon afterwards became suspicious of Jehoiachin’s fidelity, and 
again returned to dethrone him, and placed Zedekiah on the 
throne. These statements, though not absolutely inconsistent 
with 2 Kings xxiv., are rendered somewhat improbable by 
comparison with it. They are adopted by Canon Rawlinson in 
the Five Great Monarchies (vol. iii., p. 491), but Dr. Pusey 
adheres to the Scripture narrative (Danze, p. 403). 

{ 2 Kings xxiv. 12. § 2 Kings xxiv. 14. 


24 THE COMING PRINCE. 


Jehoiachin’s uncle Zedekiah was left as king or 
governor of the despoiled and depopulated city, 
having sworn by Jehovah to pay allegiance to his 
Suzerain. This was “King Jehoiachin’s captivity,” 
according to the era of the prophet Ezekiel, who was 
himself among the captives. * 

The servitude to Babylon had been predicted as 
early as the days of Hezekiah; and after the 
fulfilment of Isaiah’s prophecy respecting it, Jeremiah 
was charged with a Divine message of hope to the 
captivity, that after seventy years were accomplished 
they would be restored to their land.t{ But while 
the exiles were thus cheered with promises of good, 
King Zedekiah and “the residue of Jerusalem that 
remained in the land” were warned that resistance 
to the Divine decree which subjected them to the 
yoke of Babylon would bring on them judgments far 
more terrible than any they had knowiu, Nebuchad- 
nezzar would return to “destroy them utterly,” and 
make their whole land “a desolation and an astonish- 
ment.” § False prophets rose up, however, to feed 
the national vanity by predicting the speedy restora- 
tion of their independence,|| and in spite of the 
solemn and repeated warnings and entreaties of 
Jeremiah, the weak and wicked king was deceived 


* Ezek. 1. 2. t 2 Kings xx. 17. £ Jer. xxix. ro. 
§ Jer. xxiv. 8-10; xxv. 9; xxvii. 3-8 || Jer. xxviii, 1-4. 


DANIEL AND HIS TIMES. 25 


by their testimony, and having obtained a promise 
of armed support from Egypt, * he openly revolted. 

Thereupon the Chaldean armies once more sur- 
rounded Jerusalem, Events seemed at first to justify 
Zedekiah’s conduct, for the Egyptian forces hastened 
to his assistance, and the Babylonians were com- 
pelled to raise the siege and withdraw from Judea.t 
But this temporary success of the Jews served only 
to exasperate the King of Babylon, and to make 
their fate more terrible when at last it overtook 
them. Nebuchadnezzar determined to inflict a signal 
chastisement on the rebellious city and people; 
and placing himself at the head of all the forces of 
his empire,t he once more invaded Judea and laid 
siege to the Holy City. 

The Jews resisted with the blind fanaticism which 
a false hope inspires; and it is a signal proof of 
the natural strength of ancient Jerusalem, that for 
eighteen months § they kept their enemy at bay, and 
yielded at last to famine and not to force. The 
place was then given up to fire and sword. Nebu- 
chadnezzar “slew their young men with the sword 
in the house of their sanctuary, and had no com- 
passion upon young man or maiden, old man, or 
him that stooped for age; he gave them all into his 


* Ezek. xvil. 15. + Jel XXXVI, 5; 11. 
t 2 Kings xxv. 1; and see jer. xxxiv. I. 
§ 2 Kings xxv. I-3. 


26 THE COMING PRINCE. 


hand. And all the vessels of the house of God, 
great and small, and the treasures of the house of 
the Lord, and the treasures of the king and of his 
princes, all these he brought to Babylon. And 
they burnt the house of God, and brake down the 
wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof 
with fire, and destroyed all the goodly vessels 
thereof. And them that had escaped from the 
sword carried he away to Babylon, where they were 
servants to him and his sons, until the reign of the 
kingdom of Persia: to fulfil the word of the Lord 
by the mouth of Jeremiah.” * 

As He had borne with their fathers for forty years 
in the wilderness, so for forty years this last judg- 
ment lingered, “ because He had compassion on His 
people and on His dwelling place.”t For forty years 
the prophet’s voice had not been silent in Jerusalem ; 
“but they mocked the messengeis of God, and 
despised His words, and misused His prophets, until 
the wrath of the Lord arose against His people, till 
there was no remedy.”+ 


* 2 Chron, xxxvi. 17-21, 

+ Lbid. xxxvi.15. 

T Zid. v. 16. This period is no doubt the forty years of 
Judah’s sin, specified in Ezek. iv. 6. Jeremiah prophesied from 
the thirteenth year of Josiah (B.C. 627) until the fall of Jerusalem 
in the eleventh year of Zedekiah (B.C. 587). See Jer. i. 3, and 
XXV. 3. 

The 390 years of Israel’s sin, according to Ezek. iv. 5, appear 


DANIEL AND HIS TIMES. © 27 


Such is the sacred chronicler’s description of the 
first destruction of Jerusalem, rivalled in later times 
by the horrors of that event under the effects of 
which it still lies prostrate, and destined to be sur- 
passed in days still to come, when the predictions 
of Judah’s supreme catastrophe shall be fulfilled.* 


to have been reckoned from the date of the covenant of blessing 
to the ten tribes, made by the prophet Ahijah with Jeroboam, 
presumably in the second year before the disruption, z.¢., B.C. 977 
(1 Kings xi. 29-39). 

* The horrors of the siege and capture of Jerusalem by Titus 
surpass everything which history records of similar events. 
Josephus, who was himself a witness of them, narrates them in 
all their awful details. His estimate of the number of Jews who 
perished in Jerusalem is 1,100,000. “The blood runs cold, and 
the heart sickens, at these unexampled horrors ; and we take 
refuge in a kind of desperate hope that they have been exagge- 
rated by the historian.” “ Jerusalem might almost seem to bea 
place under a peculiar curse ; it has probably witnessed a far 
greater portion of human misery than any other spot upon the 
earth.”—MILMAN, fist, Fews, 


CHAPTERS 


THE KING’S DREAM AND THE PROPHETS 
VISIONS. 


“THE distinction between the Hebrew and the 

Chaldee portions of the writings of Daniel* 
affords a natural division, the importance of which 
will appear on a careful consideration of the whole. 
But for the purpose of the present inquiry, the book 
will more conveniently divide itself between the first 
six chapters and the last, the former portion being 
primarily historical and didactic, and the latter con- 
taining the record of the four great visions granted 
to the prophet in his closing years. It is with the 
visions that here we are specially concerned. The 
narrative of the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth chapters 
is beyond the scope of these pages, as having no 
immediate bearing upon the prophecy. The second 
chapter, however, is of great importance, as giving 
the foundation of the later visions.f 


* “The Chaldee portion of Daniel commences at the fourth 


verse of the second chapter, and continues to the end of the 
seventh chapter.”—TREGELLES, Daniel, p. 8. 

t The following analysis of the Book of Daniel may help the 
study of it :— 


THE KING'S DREAM. 29 


In a dream, King Nebuchadnezzar saw a great 
image, of which the head was gold, the breasts and 
arms silver, the body brass, the legs iron, and the feet 
partly iron and partly potter’s ware. Then a stone, 
hewn without hands, struck the feet of the image and 
it fell and crumbled to dust, and the stone became 
a great mountain and filled the whole earth.* 

The interpretation is in these words :— 

“Thou, O king, art a king of kings; for the God 


Chap. I. The capture of Jerusalem. The captivity of Daniel 
and his three companions, and their fortunes in Babylon 
(B.C. 606). 

Chap. II. Nebuchadnezzar’s dream of THE GREAT IMAGE 
(B.C. 603-2). 

Chap. III. Nebuchadnezzar’s golden image set up for all his 
subjects to worship. Daniel’s three companions cast into the 
fiery furnace. 

Chap. IV. Nebuchadnezzar’s dream about his own insanity, 
and Daniel’s interpretation of it. Its fulfilment. 

Chap. V. Belshazzar’s feast. Babylon taken by Darius the 
Mede (B.C. 538). 

Chap. VI. Daniel is promoted by Darius ; refuses to worship 
him, and is cast into a den of lions. His deliverance and 
subsequent prosperity (? B.C. 537). 

Chap. VII. Daniel’s vision of THE FOUR BEASTS (? B.C. 541). 

Chap. VIII. Daniel’s vision of THE RAM AND THE GOAT 
(? B.C. 539). 

Chap. IX. Daniel’s prayer: the prophecy of THE SEVENTY 
WEEKS (B.C. 538). 

Chaps. X.- XII. Daniel’s LAST VISION (B.C. 534). 

* The difficulty connected with the date of this vision (the 
second year of Nebuchadnezzar) is considered in App. I. Bost. 


30 THE COMING PRINCE. 


of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, and 
strength and glory. And wheresoever the children of 
men dwell, the beasts of the field and the fowls of 
the heaven hath He given into thine hand, and hath 
made thee ruler over them all. Thou art this head 
of gold. And after thee shall arise another kingdom 
inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, 
which shall bear rule over all the earth. And the 
fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron; forasmuch 
ag iron breaketh in pieces and subdueth all things: 
and as iron that breaketh all these, shall it break in 
pieces and bruise. And whereas thou sawest the feet 
and toes part of potter's clay and part of iron, the 
kingdom shall be divided; but there shall be in it of 
the strength of the iron, forasmuch as thou sawest 
the iron mixed with miry clay. And as the toes of . 
the feet were part of iron and part of clay, so the 
kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken. 
And whereas thou sawest iron mixed with miry clay, 
they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men; 
but they shall not cleave one to another, even as iron 
is not mixed with clay. And in the days of these 
kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom 
which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom 
shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in 
pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall 
stand for ever. Forasmuch as thou sawest that the 
stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and 


THE KING’S DREAM. 31 


that it brake in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, 
the silver, and the gold; the great God hath made 
known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter: 
and the dream is certain, and the interpretation 
thereof sure.” * 

The predicted sovereignty of Judah passed far be- 
yond the limits of mere supremacy among the tribes 
of Israel. It was an imperial sceptre which was 
entrusted to the Son of David. “I will make him 
my firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth.” f¢ 
“All kings shall fall down before him, all nations 
shall serve him.” { Such were the promises which 
Solomon inherited ; and the brief glory of his reign 
gave proof how fully they might have been realized,§ 
had he not turned aside to folly, and bartered for 
present sensual pleasures the most splendid prospects 
which ever opened before mortal man. Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s dream ofthe great image, and Daniel’s vision 
in interpretation of that dream, were a Divine revela- 
tion that the forfeited sceptre of the house of David 
had passed to Gentile hands, to remain with them 
until the day when “the God of heaven shall set up 
a kingdom which shall never be destroyed.” || 

It is unnecessary here to discuss in detail the 
earlier portions of this prophecy. There is, in fact, 


* Dan. ii. 37-45. § 2 Chron, ix. 22-28, 
+ Psalm Ixxxix. 27. || Dan. ii. 44. 
t Psalm Ixxii. 11. 


32 THE COMING PRINCE. 


no controversy as to its general character and scope ; 
and bearing in mind the distinction between what 
is doubted and what is doubtful, there need be no 
controversy as to the identity of the empires therein 
described with Babylonia, Persia, Greece, and Rome. 
That the first was Nebuchadnezzar’s kingdom is 
definitely stated,* and a later vision as expressly 
names the Medo-Persian empire and the empire of 
Alexander as being distinct “kingdoms” within the 
range of the prophecy.t The fourth empire, there- 
fore, must of necessity be Rome. But it is sufficient 
here to emphasize the fact, revealed in the plainest 
terms to Daniel in his exile, and to Jeremiah in the 
midst of the troubles at Jerusalem, that thus the 
sovereignty of the earth, which had been forfeited by 
Judah, was solemnly committed to the Gentiles. 


* Dan. ii. 37, 38. + Dan. viii. 20, 21. 

{ CG Dan. ii. 38, and Jer. xxvii. 6, 7,—The statement of 
Gen. xlix. Io may seem at first sight to clash with this: “ The 
sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a law-giver from be- 
tween his feet, until Shiloh come.” But, as events prove, this 
cannot mean that royal power was to be exercised by the house 
of Judah until the advent of Christ. Hengstenberg has rightly 
interpreted it (Chrzstology, Arnold’s trans., § 78) : “ Judah shall 
not cease to exist as a tribe, nor lose its superiority, until it 
shall be exalted to higher honour and glory through the great 
Redeemer, who shall spring from it, and whom not only the 
Jews, but all the nations of the earth shall obey.” As he points 
out, “wntil not unfrequently means up ¢o and afterwards.” 
(See ex. gr. Gen xxviii, 15.) The meaning of the prophecy, 


THE KING’S DREAM. 33 


The only questions which arise relate, first to the 
character of the final catastrophe symbolized by the 
fall and destruction of the image, and secondly to the 
time of its fulfilment ; and any dificulties which have 
been raised depend in no way upon the language of 
the prophecy, but solely upon the preconceived views 
of interpreters. No Christian doubts that the “stone 
cut out without hands” was typical either of Christ 
Himself or of His kingdom. It is equally clear that 
the catastrophe was to occur when the fourth empire 
should have become divided, and be “partly strong 
and partly brittle.” Therefore its fulfilment could not 
belong to the time of the first advent. No less clear 
is it that its fulfilment was to be a sudden crisis, to 
be followed by the establishment of “a kingdom which 
shall never be destroyed.” Therefore it relates to 
events stillto come. We are dealing here, not with 
prophetic theories, but with the meaning of plain 
words; and what the prophecy foretells is not the rise 
and spread of a“ sfirztual kingdom” in the midst of 
earthly kingdoms, but the establishment of a kingdom 
which “shall break in pieces and consume all these 


kingdoms.’* 


therefore, was not that Judah was to exercise royal power 
until Christ, and then lose it, which is the lame and unsatis- 
factory gloss usually adopted; but that the pre-eminence of 
Judah is to be irrevocably established in Christ—not spiritually» 
but in fact, in the kingdom of which Daniel prophesies. 

* To believe that such a prophecy can ever be realized may 


3 


34 THE COMING PRINCE. 


The interpretation of the royal dream raised the 
captive exile at a single bound to the Grand-Vizier- 
ship of Babylon,* a position of trust and honour 
which probably he held until he was either dismissed 
or withdrew from office under one or other of the two 
last kings who succeeded to Nebuchadnezzar’s throne. 
The scene on the fatal night of Belshazzar’s feast 
suggests that he had been then so long in retirement, 
that the young king-regent knew nothing of his fame.f 
But yet his fame was still so great with older men, 
that notwithstanding his failing years, he was once 
more called to the highest office by Darius, when 
the Median king became master of the broad-walled 
city.t 

But whether in prosperity or in retirement, he was 
true to the God of his fathers. The years in which 
his childhood in Jerusalem was spent, though poli- 
tically dark and troubled, were a period of the 
brightest spiritual revival by which his nation had 


seem to betoken fanaticism and folly, but at least let us accept 
the language of Scripture, and not lapse into the blind absurdity 
of expecting the fulfilment of theories based on what men con- 
jecture the prophets ought to have foretold. 

Se Daneites os 

+ This appears from the language of the queen-mother, 
Dan. v. 10-12, But chap. viii. 27 shows that Daniel, even then, 
held some appointment at the court. 

~ Dan. vi. 1, 2. Daniel cannot have been less than eighty 
years of age at this time. See chron, table, App. I. fos¢, 


THE KING’S DREAM. C43 


ever been blessed, and he had carried with him to 
the court of Nebuchadnezzar a faith and piety that 
withstood all the adverse influences which abounded 


in such a scene.* 

The Daniel of the second chapter was a young 
man just entering ona career of extraordinary dignity 
and power, such as few have ever known. The 
Daniel of the seventh chapter was an aged saint, 
who, having passed through the ordeal scathless, still 
possessed a heart as true to God and to His people 
as when, some threescore years before, he had entered 
the gates of the broad-walled city a captive and 
friendless stranger. The date of the earlier vision 
was about the time of Jehoiakim’s revolt, when their 
ungovernable pride of race and creed still led the 
Jews to dream of independence. At the time of the 
later vision more than forty years had passed since 
Jerusalem had been laid in ruins, and the last king 
of the house of David had entered the brazen gates 
of Babylon in chains. 

Here again the main outlines of the prophecy seem 


* It is improbable that Daniel was less than twenty-one 
years of age when placed at the head of the empire in the 
second year of Nebuchadnezzar. The age to which he lived 
makes it equally improbable that he was more. His birth 
would thus fall, as before suggested, about B.C. 625, the epoch 
of Nabopolassar’s era, and some three years later was Josiah’s 
passover, the like of which had never been held in Israel from 
the days of Samuel (2 Chron. xxxv. 18, 19). 


36 THE COMING PRINCE. 


clear. As the four empires which were destined suc- 
cessively to wield sovereign power during “the times 
of the Gentiles” are represented in Nebuchadnezzar’s 
dream by the four divisions of the great image, they 
are here typified by four wild beasts* The ten toes 


* The following is the vision as recorded in Daniel vii. 2-14 :— 

“Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, 
behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea. 
And four great beasts came up from the sea, diverse one from 
another. The first was like a lion, and had eagle’s wings: I 
beheld till the wings thereof were plucked, and it was lifted up 
from the earth, and made stand upon the feet as a man, and 
2 man’s heart was given to it. And, behold, another beast, a 
second, like to a bear, and it raised up itself on one side, and 
it had three ribs in the mouth of it between the teeth of it: and 
they said thus unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. After this I 
beheld, and, lo, another, like a leopard, which had upon the 
back of it four wings of a fowl; the beast had also four heads ; 
and dominion was given to it. After this I saw in the night 
visions, and, behold, a fourth beast, dreadfui and terrible, and 
strong exceedingly; and it had great iron teeth: it devoured 
and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet of 
it: and it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it ; 
and it had ten horns. I considered the horns, and, behold, 
there came up among them another little horn, before whom 
there were three of the first horns plucked up by the roots; 
and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man, and 
a mouth speaking great things. I beheld till the thrones were 
cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, whose garment was 
white as snow, and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his 
throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as buining fire. 
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him: thou- 
sand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times 


THE KING’S DREAM. 37 


of the image in the second chapter have their cor- 
relatives in the ten horns of the fourth beast in. the 
seventh chapter. The character and course of the 
fourth empire are the prominent subject of the later 
vision, but both prophecies are equally explicit that 
that empire in its ultimate phase will be brought 
to a signal and sudden end by a manifestation of 
‘Divine power on earth. 

The details of the vision, though interesting and 
important, may here be passed unnoticed, for the 
interpretation given of them is so simple and so 
definite that the words can leave no room for doubt 
in any unprejudiced mind. “These great beasts, 
which are four, are four kings” (z¢, kingdoms; 
compare verse 23), “which shall arise out of the 
earth; but the saints of the Most High shall 


ten thousand stood before him: the judgment was set, and the 
books were opened. I beheld then, because of the voice of 
the great words which the horn spake: I beheld even till the 
beast was slain, and his body destroyed, and given to the 
burning flame. As concerning the rest of the beasts, they had 
their dominion taken away: yet their lives were prolonged for 
a season and time. I saw in the night visions, and, behold, 
one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven, and 
came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before 
him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a 
kingdom, that all people, nations, and languages, should serve 
him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall 
not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be 
destroyed.” 


38 THE COMING PRINCE. 


take the kingdom and possess, the kingdom for 


ever.” * 


The prophet then proceeds to recapitulate the 
vision, and his language affords an explicit answer 
to the only question which can reasonably be raised 
upon the words just quoted, namely, whether the 
“kingdom of the saints” shall follow immediately 
upon the close of the fourth Gentile empire.t} “Then,” 
he adds, “I would know the truth of the fourth beast, 
which was diverse from all the others, exceeding 
dreadful, whose teeth were of iron, and his nails of 
brass ; which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped 
the residue with his feet; and of the ten horns that 


* Verses 17, 18. 

+ Certain writers advocate an interpretation of these visions 
which allots the “four kingdoms” to Babylonia, Media, Persia, 
and Greece. This view, with which Professor Westcott’s name 
is identified, claims notice merely in order to distinguish it from 
another with which it has been confounded, even in a work of 
such pretensions as The Speaker's Commentary (Vol. vi., p. 333, 
Excursus on the Four Kingdoms). ‘The learned author of the 
Ordo Seclorum (§ 616, etc.), quoting Maitland, who in turn 
follows Lacunza (Ben Ezra), argues that the accession of Darius 
the Mede to the throne of Babylon did not involve a change of 
empire. These writers further urge that the description of the 
third kingdom resembles Rome rather than Greece. According 
to this view, therefore, the kingdoms are 1st Babylon, including 
Persia, 2nd Greece, 3rd Rome, 4th a future kingdom to arise in 
the last days. But as already noticed (p. 32, amfe), the book 
of Daniel expressly distinguishes Babylon, Medo-Persia, and 
Greece as “kingdoms” within the scope of the prophecy. 


THE KING’S DREAM. 39 


were in his head, and of the other which came up, 
and before whom three fell, even of that horn that 
had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great things, 
whose look was more stout than his fellows. I 
beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints, 
and prevailed against them; until the Ancient of 
days came, and judgment was given to the saints 
of the Most High; and the time came that the saints 
possessed the kingdom.” 

Such was the prophet’s inquiry. Here is the in- 
terpretation accorded to him in reply. “ The fourth 
beast shall be the fourth kingdom upon earth, which 
shall be diverse from all kingdoms, and shall devour 
the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break 
it in pieces. And the ten horns out of this kingdom 
are ten kings that shall arise: and another shall 
arise after them; and he shall be diverse from the 
first, and he shall subdue three kings. And he 
shall speak great words against the Most High, 
and shall wear out the saints of the Most High, 
and think to change times and laws; and they 
shall be given into his hand, until a time and 
times and the dividing of time. But the judgment 
shall sit, and they shall take away his dominion, to 
consume and to destroy it unto the end. And the 
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the 
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given 
to the people of the saints of the Most High, 


40 THE COMING PRINCE. 


whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all 
dominions shall serve and obey Him.” * 

Whether history records any event which may be 
within the range of this prophecy is a matter of 
opinion, That it has not been fulfilled is a plain 
matter of fact.t The Roman earth shall one day 
be parcelled out in ten separate kingdoms, and out 
of one of these shall arise that terrible enemy of 
God and His people, whose destruction is to be 
one of the events of the second advent of Christ. 


* Dan. vii. 19-27, On this vision see Pusey, Daziel, 
pp. 78, 79. 

t+ The state of Europe at or after the dismemberment of 
the Roman Empire has been appealed to as a fulfilment of 
it, ignoring the fact that the territory which Augustus ruled : 
included a considerable district both of Asia and Africa. 
Nor is this all. There is no presumption against finding in 
past times a partial accomplishment of such a prophecy, but 
the fact that twenty-eight different lists, including sixty-five 
“kingdoms,” have been put forward in the controversy, is a 
proof how worthless is the evidence of any such fulfilment. 
In truth the historical school of interpreters have here, as on 
many other points, brought discredit upon their entire system, 
containing, as it does, so much that claims attention (see App. 
II., Note C). 


CHAPTER CIV, 
THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULAI. 


“ HE times of the Gentiles;” thus it was that 
Christ Himself described the era of Gentile 
supremacy. Men have come to regard the earth 
as their own domain, and to resent the thought of 
Divine interference in their affairs. But though 
monarchs seem to owe their thrones to dynastic 
claims, the sword or the ballot-box,—and in their 
individual capacity their title may rest solely upon 
these,—the power they wield is divinely delegated, 
for “the Most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, 
and giveth it to whomsoever He will.”* In the 
exercise of this high prerogative He took back the 
sceptre He had entrusted to the house of David, 
and transferred it to Gentile hands ; and the history 
of that sceptre during the entire period, from the 
epoch to the close of the times of the Gentiles, is 
the subject of the prophet’s earlier visions. 
The vision of the eighth chapter of Daniel has a 


narrower range. It deals only with the two king- 


* Dan. iv. 25. 


42 THE COMING PRINCE. 


doms which were represented by the middle portion, 
or arms and body, of the image of the second chapter. 
The Medo-Persian Empire, and the relative supe- 
riority of the younger nation, are represented by a 
ram with two horns, one of which was higher than 
the other, though the last to grow. And the rise of 
the Grecian Empire under Alexander, followed by 
its division among his four successors, is typified 
by a goat with a single horn between its eyes, 
which horn was broken and gave place to four 
horns that came up instead of it. Out of one of 
these horns came forth a little horn, representing a 
king who should become infamous as a blasphemer 
of God and a persecutor of His people. 

That the career of Antiochus Epiphanes was in 
a special way within the scope and meaning of this 
prophecy is unquestioned. That its ultimate fulfil- 
ment belongs to a future time, though not so 
generally admitted, is nevertheless sufficiently clear. 
The proof of it is twofold. First, it cannot but be 
recognized that its most striking details remain 
wholly unfulfilled.* And secondly, the events de- 
scribed are expressly stated to be “in the last end 
of the indignation,” ¢ which is “the great tribulation ” 


* I allude to the 2,300 days of verse 14, and to the statement 
of verse 25, “He shall also stand up against the Prince of 
Princes, but he shall be broken without hand.” 

+ Dan, viii. 19. 


THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULLAL 43 


of the last days,* “the time of trouble” which is 
immediately to precede the complete deliverance 
of Judah.t 

It is unnecessary, however, further to embarrass 
the special subject of these pages by any such dis- 
cussion. So far as the present inquiry is imme- 
diately concerned, this vision of the ram and the 
he-goat is important mainly as explanatory of the 
visions which precede it.} 


* Matt. xxiv. 21. 

+ “And there shall be a time of trouble such as never 
was since there was a nation even te that same time; and at 
that time thy people shall be delivered,”—z.e., the Jews 
(Dan. xii. i). 

_ { The following is the vision of the eighth chapter :— 

“And I saw in a vision; and it came to pass, when I saw, 
that I was at Shushan, in the palace, which is in the province of 
Elam ; and I saw in a vision, and I was by the river of Ulai. 
Then I lifted up mine eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood 
before the river aram which had two horns. And the two horns 
were high; but one was higher than the other, and the higher 
came up last. I saw theram pushing westward, and northward, 
and southward ; so that no beasts might stand before him, 
neither was there any that could deliver out of his hand ; but 
he did according to his will, and became great. And as I was 
considering, behold, an he goat came from the west, on the 
face of the whole earth, and touched not the ground: and the 
goat had a notable horn between his eyes. And he came to the 
ram that had two horns, which I had seen standing before the 
river, and ran unto him inthe fury of his power. And I saw him 
come close unto the ram, and he was moved with choler against 


44 THE COMING PRINCE. 


One point of contrast with the prophecy of the 
fourth Gentile kingdom demands a very emphatic 
notice. The vision of Alexander’s reign, followed 


him, and smote the ram, and brake his two horns ; and there 
was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him 
down to the ground, and stamped upon him: and there was 
none that could deliver the ram out of his hand. Therefore the 
he goat waxed very great; and when he was strong, the great 
horn was broken ; and for it came up four notable ones, toward 
the four winds of heaven. And out of one of them came forth 
a little horn, which waxed exceeding’ great, toward the south, 
and toward the east, and toward the pleasant land. And it 
waxed great, even to the host of heaven ; and it cast down 
some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and stamped 
upon them. Yea, he magnified himself even to the prince of 
the host, and by hiin the daily sacrifice was taken away, and 
the place of his sanctuary was cast down. And an host was 
given him against the daily sacrifice by reason of transgression, 
and it cast down the truth to the ground; and it practised, 
and prospered. Then I heard one saint speaking, and another 
saint said unto that certain saint which spake, How long shall 
be the vision concerning the daily sacrifice, and the trans- 
gression of desolation, to give both the sanctuary and the host 
to be trodden under foot? And he said unto me, Unto two 
theusand and three hundred days; then shall the sanctuary 
be cleansed. And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had 
seen the vision, and sought for the meaning, then, beho!d, 
there stood before me as the appearance of a man. And I 
heard a man’s voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, 
and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision. 
So he came near where I stood: and when he came, I was 
afraid, and fell upon my face; but he said unto me, Under- 
stand, QO son of man; for at the time of the end shall be 


THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULAI. 45 


by the fourfold division of his empire, suggests a 
rapid sequence of events, and the history of the three- 
and-thirty years that intervened between the battles 
of Issus and of Ipsus* comprises the full realization 


the vision. Now, as he was speaking with meI was in a deep 
sleep on my face toward the ground: but he touched me, and 
set me upright. And he said, Behold, I will make thee know 
what shall be in the last end of the indignation: for at the time 
appointed the end shall be. The ram which thou sawest having 
two horns are the kings of Media and Persia. And the rough 
goat is the king of Grecia: and the great horn that is between 
his eyes is the first king. Now that being broken, whereas four 
stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, 
but not in his power. And in the latter time of their kingdom, 
when the transgressors are come to the full, a king of fierce 
countenance, and understanding dark sentences, shall stand up. 
And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power : and 
he shall destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, 
and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. And through 
his policy also he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand ; and 
he shall magnify himself in his heart, and by peace shall destroy 
many ; he shall also stand up against the Prince of princes ; 
but he shall’ be broken without hand. And the vision of the 
evening and the morning which was told is true; wherefore 
shut thou up the vision ; for it shall be for many days.” 

* It was the battle of Issus in B.C. 333, not the victory of 
Granicus in the preceding year, which made Alexander master 
of Palestine. The decisive battle which brought the Persian 
empire to an end, was at Arbela in B.C. 331. Alexander died 
B.C. 323, and the definite distribution of his territories among 
his four chief generals, followed the battle of Ipsus B.C. 301. 
In this partition Seleucus’s share included Syria (“the king 
of the north”), and Ptolemy held the Holy Land with Egypt 


46 THE COMING PRINCE. 

Os ee oe 
of the prophecy. But the rise of the ten horns upon 
the fourth beast in the vision of the seventh chapter, 
appears to lie within as brief a period as was the 
rise of the four horns upon the goat in the eighth 
chapter; whereas it is plain upon the pages of his- 
tory that this tenfold division of the Roman empire 
has never yet taken place. A definite date may be 
assigned to the advent of the first three kingdoms of 
prophecy ; and if the date of the battle of Actium be 
taken as the epoch of the hybrid monster which filled 
the closing scenes of the prophet’s vision—and no 
later date will be assigned to it—it follows that in 
interpreting the prophecy, we may eliminate the 
history of the world from the time of Augustus to 
the present hour, without losing the sequence of the 
vision.* Or in other words, the prophet’s glance into 
the future entirely overlooked these nineteen centuries 
of our era. As when mountain peaks stand out 
together on the horizon, seeming almost to touch, 
albeit a wide expanse of river and field and hill may 
lie between, so there loomed upon the prophet’s 


(“the king of the south”); but Palestine afterwards was con- 
quered and held by the Seleucide. Cassander had Macedon 
and Greece; and Lysimachus had Thrace, part of Bithynia, 
and the territories intervening between these and the Meander. 

* The same remark applies to the vision of the second chapter, 
the rise of the Roman empire, its future division, and its final 
doom, being presented at a single view. 


THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULAL. 49 


vision these events of times now long gone by, and 
times still future. 

And with the New Testament in our hands, it 
would betray strange and wilful ignorance if we 
doubted the deliberate design which has left this 
long interval of our Christian era a blank in Daniel’s 
prophecies. The more explicit revelation of the 
ninth chapter, measures out the years before the first 
advent of Messiah. But if these nineteen centuries 
had been added to the chronology of the period to 
intervene before the promised kingdom could be 
ushered in, how could the Lord have taken up the 
testimony to the near fulfilment of these very pro- 
phecies, and have proclaimed that the kingdom was 
at hand?* He who knows all hearts, knew well 
the issue; but the thought is impious that the pro- 
clamation was not genuine and true in the strictest 
sense ; and it would have been deceptive and untrue 
had prophecy foretold a long interval of Israel’s 
rejection before the promise could be realized. 

Therefore it is that the two advents of Christ are 
brought seemingly together in Old Testament Scrip- 
tures. The surface currents of human responsibility 
and human guilt are unaffected by the changeless and 
deep-lying tide of the fore-knowledge and sovereignty 


* 7¢.e., the kingdom as Daniel had prophesied of it. On this 
see Pusey, Daniel, p. 84. 


48 THE COMING PRINCE. 


of God. Their responsibility was real, and their guilt 
was without excuse, who rejected their long-promised 


King and Saviour. They were not the victims of an 
inexorable fate which dragged them to their doom, 
but free agents who used their freedom to crucify the 
Lord of Glory. “His blood be on us and on our 
children,” was their terrible, impious cry before the 
judgment-seat of Pilate, and for eighteen centuries 
their judgment has been meted out to them, to reach 
its appalling climax on the advent of the “time of 
trouble such as never was since there was a nation.”* 

These visions were full of mystery to Daniel, and 
filled the old prophet’s mind with troubled thoughts. 
A long vista of events seemed thus to intervene 
before the realization of the promised blessings to 
his nation, and yet these very revelations made those 


* Dan. xiil.1; Matt. xxiv. 21. To discuss what would have 
been the course of events had the Jews accepted Christ is mere 
levity. But it is legitimate to inquire how the believing Jew, 
intelligent in the prophecies, could have expected the kingdom, 
seeing that the tenfold division of the Roman empire and the 
rise of the “little horn” had to take place first. The difficulty 
will disappear if we notice how suddenly the Grecian empire 
was dismembered on Alexander’s death. In like manner, the 
death of Tiberius might have led to the immediate disruption 
of the territories of Rome, and the rise of the predicted per- 
secutor. In a word, all that remained unfulfilled of Daniel’s 
prophecy might have been fulfilled in the years which had still 
to run of the seventy weeks. 

+ Dan. vii. 28 ; viii. 27. 


THE VISION BY THE RIVER OF ULAT. 49 


blessings still more sure. Ere long he witnessed the 
crash of the Babylonian power, and saw a stranger 
enthroned within the broad-walled city. But the 
change brought no hope to Judah. Daniel was 
restored, indeed, to the place of power and dignity 
which he had held so long under Nebuchadnezzar,* 
but he was none the less an exile; his people were 
in captivity, their city lay in ruins, and their land was 
a wilderness. And the mystery was only deepened 
when he turned to Jeremiah’s prophecy, which fixed 
at seventy years the destined era of “the desolations 
of Jerusalem.” So “by prayer and supplications, 
with fastings, and sackcloth and ashes,” he cast him- 
self on God; as a prince among his people, con- 
fessing their national apostasy, and pleading for their 
restoration and forgiveness. And who can read that 
prayer unmoved? “QO Lord, according to all Thy 
righteousness, I beseech Thee, let Thine anger and 
Thy fury be turned away from Thy city Jerusalem, 
Thy holy mountain; because for our sins, and for 
the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and Thy 
people are become a reproach to all that are about 
us. Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of 
Thy servant, and his supplications, and cause Thy 
face to shine upon Thy Sanctuary that is desolate, 
for the Lord’s sake. O my God, incline Thine ear, 


Mane 4 Orn Vle ey +) Danvixa2: 


4 


50 THE COMING PRINCE. 


and hear ; open Thine eyes, and behold our desola- 
tions, and the city which is called by Thy name: 
for we do not present our supplications before Thee 
for our righteousnesses, but for Thy great mercies. 
O Lord, hear; O Lord, forgive; O Lord, hearken 
and do; defer not, for Thine own sake, O my God ; 
for Thy city and Thy people are called by Thy 
name”* 

While Daniel was thus “speaking in prayer’ 
Gabriel once more appeared to him,f—that same 
angel messenger who heralded in after times the 
Saviour’s birth in Bethlehem,—and in answer to his 
supplication, delivered to the prophet the great 
prediction of the seventy weeks, 


* Dan. ix. 16-109. 
t Dan. ix. 21, See chap. viii. 16. 


CHAPTER. V. 
THE ANGEL’S MESSAGE. 


“Seventy weeks are decreed upon thy people and upon thy 
holy city, to finish transgression, and to make an end of sins, 
and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting 
righteousness, and to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint 
the most holy,* Know therefore and discern, that from the going 
forth of the commandment ft to restore and to build Jerusalem, 
unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and three- 
score and two weeks: it shall be built again, with street and 
moat, even in troublous times. And after the threescore and two 
weeks shall Messiah be cut off, and shall have nothing: and the 
people of the Prince that shall come shall destroy the city and 
the sanctuary; and his end thereof shall be with a flood, and 
even unto the end shall be war; desolations are determined. 
And he shall make a firm covenant { with many for one week. 


* “The expression does not in a single case apply to any 
person.” —TREGELLES, Dazzel, p. 98. 

“These words are applied to the Nazarene, although this 
expression is never applied to a person throughout the Bible, 
but invariably denotes part of the temple, the holy of holies,”— 
Dr. HERMAN ADLER, Sermzozs, p. 109 (Triibner, 1869). 

{ “From the issuing of the decree.”—TREGELLES, Daniel, 
p. 96. 

t Not ¢he covenant (as in A.V.: see margin). This word is 
rendered covenant when Divine things are in question, and 
league when, as here, an ordinary treaty is intended (Cf ex. gv, 
Josh, ix.6, 7, 11..15, 16). 


52 THE COMING PRINCE. 


and for the half of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the 
oblation to cease, and upon the wing of abominations shall come 
one that maketh desolate, even until the consummation, and that 
determined, shall wrath be poured out upon the desolator.”— 
Dan. ix. 24-27. R.V. (See marginal readings.) 


UCH was the message entrusted to the angel in 
response to the prophet’s prayer for mercies 
upon Judah and Jerusalem. 

To whom shall appeal be made for an interpre- 
tation of the utterance? Not to the Jew, surely, for 
though himself the subject of the prophecy, and of 
all men the most deeply interested in its meaning, 
he is bound, in rejecting Christianity, to falsify not 
only history, but his own Scriptures. Nor yet to 
the theologian who has prophetic theories to vin- 
dicate, and who on discovering, perhaps, some era 
of seven times seventy in Isracl’s history, concludes | 
that he has solved the problem, ignoring the fact 
that the strange history of that wonderful people is 
marked through all its course by chronological cycles 
of seventy and multiples of seventy. But any man 
of unprejudiced mind who will read the words with 
no commentary save that afforded by Scripture itself 
and the history of the time, will readily admit that 
on certain leading points their meaning is unequivo- 
cal and clear. 

I. It was thus revealed that the full meed of 
blessing promised to the Jews should be deferred til] 


THE ANGELS MESSAGE. 63 


the close of a period of time, described as “seventy 
sevens,” after which Daniel’s city and people* are 
to be established in blessing of the fullest kind. 

II. Another period composed of seven weeks and 
sixty-two weeks is specified with equal certainty. 

III. This second era dates from the issuing of an 
edict to rebuild Jerusalem,—not the temple, but ce 
city; for, to remove all doubt, “the street and 
wall” f are emphatically mentioned ; and a definite 
event, described as the cutting. off of Messiah, 
marks the close of it. 

IV. The beginning of the week required (in addi- 
tion to the sixty-nine) to complete the seventy, is 
to be signalized by the making of a covenant or 
treaty by a personage described as “the Prince that 
shall come,” or “the coming Prince,” which covenant 
he will violate in the middle of the week by the 
suppression of the Jews’ religion.t 


* If the words of verses 24 and 25 do not themselves carry 
conviction that Judah and Jerusalem are the subjects of the 
prophecy, the reader has but to compare them with the pre- 
ceding verses, especially 2, 7, 12, 16, 18, and 19. 

+ Literally the ‘“‘trench” or “scarped rampart.”—TRE- 
GELLES, Danzel, p. go 

{ The personage referred to in verse 27 is not the Messiah, 
but the second prince named inverse 26. The theory which has 
gained currency, that the Lord made a seven years’ compact 
with the Jews at the beginning of His ministry, would deserve 
a prominent place in a cyclopedia of the vagaries of religious 


$4 THE COMING PRINCE. 


V. And therefore the complete era of seventy 
weeks, and the lesser period of sixty-nine weeks, 
date from the same epoch.* 

The first question, therefore, which arises is 
whether history records any event which unmistak- 
ably marks the beginning of the era. 

Certain writers, both Christian and Jewish, have 
assumed that the seventy weeks began in the first 
year of Darius, the date of the prophecy itself; and 
thus falling into hopeless error at the very threshold 
of the inquiry, all their conclusions are necessarily 
erroneous. The words of the angel are unequivocal ; 
“From the issuing of the decree to restore and build 
Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince, shall be 
seven weeks and sixty-two weeks.” That Jerusalem 
was in fact rebuilt as a fortified city, is absolutely 
certain and undoubted; and the only question in the 
matter is whether history records the edict for its 
restoration. 


thought. We know of the old covenant, which has been abro- 
gated, and of the new covenant, which is everlasting ; but the 
extraordinary idea of a seven years’ covenant between God and 
men has not a shadow of foundation in the letter of Scripture, 
and is utterly opposed to its spirit. 

* “The whole period of seventy weeks is divided into three 
successive periods,—seven, sixty-two, one, and the last week is 
subdivided into two halves. It is self-evident that since these 
parts, seven, sixty-two, one, are equal to the whole, viz., seventy, 
it was intended that they should be.”—Pusry, Daniel, p. 170. 


THE ANGELS MESSAGE. $5 


When we turn to the book of Ezra, three several 
decrees of Persian kings claim notice. The opening 
verses speak of that strange edict by which Cyrus 
authorized the building of the temple. But here 
“the house of the Lord God of Israel” is specified 
with such an exclusive definiteness that it can in no 
way satisfy the words of Daniel. Indeed the date 
of that decree affords conclusive proof that it was 
not the beginning of the seventy weeks. Seventy 
years was the appointed duration of the servitude to 
Babylon.* But another judgment of seventy years’ 
“ desolations” was decreed in Zedekiah’s reign,f 
because of continued disobedience and rebellion. 
As an interval of seventeen years elapsed between 
the date of the servitude and the epoch of the 
“ desolations,” so by seventeen years the second 
period overlapped the first. The servitude ended 
with the decree of Cyrus. The desolations continued 
till the second year of Darius Hystaspes.~ And 


* Jer. xxvii. 6-17; xxviii, 143 xxix. Io, 

+ It was foretold in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, 7.2. the 
year after the servitude began (Jer. xxv. I, II). 

{ Scripture thus distinguishes three different eras, all in part 
concurrent, which have come to be spoken of as ‘‘ the captivity.” 
First, the servitude ; second, Jehoiachin’s captivity ; and third, 
the desolations. ‘‘ The servitude” began in the third year of 
Jehoiakim, 7z.¢., B.c. 606, or before 1st Nisan (April) B.c. 605, 
and was brought to a close by the decree of Cyrus seventy 
years later. ‘The captivity ” began in the eighth year of Nebu- 


56 THE COMING PRINCE. 


it was the era of the desolations, and not of the 
servitude which Daniel had in view.* ; 

The decree of Cyrus was the Divine fulfilment of 
the promise made to the captivity in the twenty- 
ninth chapter of Jeremiah, and in accordance with 
that promise the fullest liberty was granted to the 
exiles to return to Palestine. But till the era of the 
desolations had run its course, not one stone was 
to be set upon another on Mount Moriah. And 
this explains the seemingly inexplicable fact that 
the firman to build the temple, granted to eager 
agents by Cyrus in the zenith of his power, remained 
in abeyance till his death; for a few refractory 
Samaritans were allowed to thwart the execution 
of this the most solemn edict ever issued by an 
Eastern despot, an edict in respect of which a 
Divine sanction seemed to confirm: the unalterable 
will of a Medo-Persian king.f 


chadnezzar, according to the Scriptural era of his reign, z2., 
in B.C. 598; and the deso/ations began in his seventeenth year, 
B.C. 589, and ended in the second year of Darius Hystaspes— 
again a period of seventy years. See App. I. upon the chrono- 
logical questions here involved. 

* Dan. ix. 2 is explicit on this point :—“1I, Daniel, understood 
by books the number of the years whereof the word of the 
Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, chat he would accomplish 
seventy years tn the desolations of Ferusalem.” 

t “The law of the Medes and Persians, which altereth not” 
(Dan. vi. 12). Canon Rawlinson assumes that the temple was 


THE ANGEUS MESSAGE. 84 


When the years of the desolations were expired, 
a Divine command was promulgated for the building 
of the sanctuary, and in obedience to that command, 
without waiting for permission from the capital, the 
Jews returned to the work in which they had so long 
been hindered.* The wave of political excitement 
which had carried Darius to the throne of Persia, was 
swelled by religious fervour against the Magian 
idolatry.t| The moment therefore was auspicious for 
the Israelites, whose worship of Jehovah commanded 
the sympathy of the Zoroastrian faith ; and when the 
tidings reached the palace of their seemingly sedi- 
tious action at Jerusalem, Darius made search among 
the Babylonian archives of Cyrus, and finding the 


fifteen or sixteen years in building, before the work was stopped 
by the decree of the Artaxerxes mentioned in Ezra iv. (Five 
Great Mon., vol. iv., p. 398.) But this is entirely opposed to 
Scripture. The foundation of the temple was laid in the 
second year of Cyrus (Ezra iii. 8-11), but no progress was made 
till the second year of Darius, when the foundation was again 
laid, for not a stone of the house had yet been placed (Hag. 
ii, 10, 15, 18). The building, once begun, was completed 
within five years (Ezra vi. 15). It must be borne in mind that 
the a/tar was set up, and sacrifice was renewed immediately 
after the return of the exiles (Ezra iii. 3, 6). 

* Ezra v. 152, 5- 

+ Five’Great Mon., vol. iv., p. 405. But Canon Rawlinson 
is wholly wrong in inferring that the known religious zeal 
of Darius was the motive which led to the action of the Jews. 
See Ezra v. 


58 THE COMING PRINCE. 


decree of his predecessor, he issued on his own behalf 
a firman to give effect to it.* 

And this is the second event which affords a 
possible beginning for the seventy weeks.t But 
though plausible arguments may be urged to prove 
that, either regarded as an independent edict, or as 
giving practical effect to the decree of Cyrus, the act 
of Darius was the epoch of the prophetic period, the 
answer is clear and full, that it fails to satisfy the 
angel’s words. However it be accounted for, the fact 
remains, that though the “desolations” were accom- 
plished, yet neither the scope of the royal edict, nor 
the action of the Jews in pursuance of that edict, 
went beyond the building of the Holy Temple, 
whereas the prophecy foretold a decree for the 
building of the czty, not the street alone, but the 
fortifications of Jerusalem. 

Five years sufficed for the erection of the building 
which served as a shrine for Judah during the five 
centuries which followed.{ But, in striking contrast 
with the temple they had reared in days when the 
magnificence of Solomon made gold as cheap as 


brass in Jerusalem, no costly furniture adorned the 


* Ezra vi. 

+ This is the epoch fixed upon by Mr. Bosanquet in AZesszah 
the Prince. 

t The temple was begun in the second, and completed in 
the sixth year of Darius (Ezra iv. 24; vi. 15.) 


THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE. $9 


second house, until the seventh year of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus, when the Jews obtained a firman “to 
beautify the house of the Lord.”* This letter further 
authorized Ezra to return to Jerusalem with such 
of the Jews as desired to accompany him, and there 
to restore fully the worship of the temple and the 
ordinances of their religion. But this third decree 
makes no reference whatever to building, and it might 
be passed unnoticed were it not that many writers 
have fixed on it as the epoch of the prophecy. The 
temple had been already built long years before, and 
the city was still in ruins thirteen years afterwards, 
The book of Ezra therefore will be searched in vain 
for any mention of a “commandment to restore and 
build Jerusalem.” But we only need to turn to the 
book which follows it in the canon of Scripture to 
find the record which we seek. 

The book of Nehemiah opens by relating that 
while at Susa,t where he was cup-bearer to the great 
king, “an honour of no small account in Persia,” } 
certain of his brethren arrived from Judea, and he 
“asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, 
which were left of the captivity, and concerning 


* Ezra vii. See verses 19 and 27. 

t For a description of the ruins of the great palace at Susa, 
see Mr. Wm. Kennett Loftus’s Zravels and Researches in 
Chaldea and Susiana, chap. xxviii. 

} Herodotus, #i., 34. 


60 THE COMING PRINCE. 


Jerusalem.” The emigrants declared that all were 
“in great affliction and reproach,” “the wall of 
Jerusalem also was broken down, and the gates 
thereof were burned with fire.” * The first chapter 
closes with the record of Nehemiah’s supplication to 
“the God of heaven.” The second chapter narrates 
how “in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of 
Artaxerxes,” he was discharging the duties of his 
office, and as he stood before the king his counte- 
nance betrayed his grief, and Artaxerxes called on 
him to tell his trouble. “ Let the king live for ever,” 
Nehemiah answered, “why should not my counte- 
nance be sad, when ¢he city, the place of my fathers’ 
sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned 
with fire!” “For what dost thou make request?” 
the king demanded in reply. Thereupon Nehemiah 
answered thus: “If it please the king, and if thy 
servant have found favour in thy sight, ¢lat thou 
wouldest send me unto Fudah, unto THE CITY 
of my fathers sepulchres, THAT I MAY BUILD 
IT.’+ Artaxerxes fiated the petition, and forthwith 
issued the necessary orders to give effect to it. 
Four months later, eager hands were busy upon 
the ruined walls of Jerusalem, and before the Feast 
of Tabernacles the city was once more enclosed by 
gates and a rampart.} 


*® Neh. i. 2. + Neh. ii. 5. ft Neh. vi. 15. 


THE ANGELS MESSAGE. 61 


— 


But, it has been urged, “The decree of the twentieth 
year of Artaxerxes is. but an enlargement and renewal 
of his first decree, as the decree of Darius confirmed 
that of Cyrus.” * If this assertion had not the sanction 
of a great name, it would not deserve even a passing 
notice. If it were maintained that the decree of the 


seventh year of Artaxerxes was “ but an enlargement 


* Pusey, Daniel, p. 171. Dr. Pusey adds, “ The little colony 
' which Ezra took with him of 1,683 males (with women and chil- 
dren some 8,400 souls) was itself a considerable addition to 
those who had before returned, and involved a rebuilding of 
Ferusalem. This rebuilding of the city and reorganization of 
the polity, begun by Ezra, and carried on and perfected by 
Nehemiah, corresponds with the words of Daniel, ‘From the 
going forth of a commandment to restore and build Jerusalem’” 
(p. 172). This argument is the feeblest imaginable, and indeed 
this reference to the decree of the seventh year of Artaxerxes 
is a great blot on Dr. Pusey’s book. If an immigration of 8,400 
souls involved a rebuilding of the city, and therefore marked 
the beginning of the seventy weeks, what shall be said of the 
immigration of 49,697 souls seventy-eight years before? (Ezra _ 
ii. 64, 65.) Did this not involve a rebuilding? But, Dr. Pusey 
goes on to say, ‘‘ The term also corresponds,” z.e., the 483 years, 
to the time of Christ. Here is obviously the real ground for 
his fixing the date B.C. 457, or more properly B.C. 458, as given 
by Prideaux, whom unfortunately Dr. Pusey has followed at 
this point. With more zaiveté the author of the Connection 
pleads that the years will not tally if any other date be assigned, 
and therefore the decree of the seventh of Artaxerxes must 
be right! (Prid., Cow.,1., 5, B.c. 458.) Such a system of inter- 
pretation has done much to discredit the study of prophecy 
altogether, 


62 THE COMING PRINCE. 


and renewal” of his predecessors’ edicts, the state- 
ment would be strictly accurate. That decree was 
mainly an authority to the Jews “to beautify the 
House of the Lord. which is in Jerusalem,” * in exten- 
sion of the decrees by which Cyrus and Darius per- 
mitted them to duz/d it. The result was to produce 
a gorgeous shrine in the midst of a ruined city. The 
movement of the seventh of Artaxerxes was chiefly 
a religious revival,f sanctioned and subsidized by 
royal favour; but the event of his twentieth year was 
nothing less than the restoration of the autonomy 
of Judah. The execution of the work which Cyrus 
authorized was stopped on the false charge which the . 
enemies of the Jews carried to the palace, that their 
object was to build not merely the Temple, but the 
city. “A rebellious city” it had ever proved to each 
successive suzerain, “ for which cause”—they declared 
with truth—its destruction was decreed. “We certify 
the king” (they added) “that zf this city be builded 
again, and the walls thereof set up, thou shalt have 
no portion on this side the river.’ t To allow the 
building of the temple was merely to accord to a 
conquered race the right to worship according to 
the law of their God, for the religion of the Jew 
knows no worship apart from the hill of Zion. It 


FE zranvile 27 + Ezra vii. 10, 
t te, Euphrates. Ezra iv, 16, 


THE ANGEL'S MESSAGE. 63 


was a vastly different event when that people were 
permitted to set up again the far-famed fortifications 
of their city, and entrenched behind those walls, to 
restore under Nehemfah the old polity of the Judges.* 
This was a revival of the national existence of 
Judah, and therefore it is fitly chosen as the epoch 
of the prophetic period of the seventy weeks. 

The doubt which has been raised upon the point 
may serve as an illustration of the extraordinary bias 


* “This last is the only decree which we find recorded in 
Scripture which relates to the restoring and building of the city. 
It must be borne in mind that the very existence of a place as 
a city depended upon such a decree; for before that any who 
returned from the land of captivity went only in the condition 
of sojourners; it was the decree that gave them a recognized 
and distinct political existence.” —TREGELLES, Daniel, p. 98. 

“Ona sudden, however, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, 
Nehemiah, a man of Jewish descent, cup-bearer to the king, 
received a commission to rebuild the city with all possible 
expedition. The cause of this change in the Persian politics is 
to be sought, not so much in the personal influence of the Jewish 
cup-bearer, as in the foreign history of the times. The power 
of Persia had received a fatal blow in the victory obtained at 
Cnidos by Conon, the Athenian admiral. The great king was 
obliged to submit to a humiliating peace, among the articles of 
which were the abandonment of the maritime towns, and a 
stipulation that the Persian army should not approach within 
three days’ journey of the sea. Jerusalem, being about this 
distance from the coast, and standing so near the line of com- 
munication with Egypt, became a post of the utmost importance.” 
—MILMAN, fest. Jews (3rd Ed.), i., 435. 


Of THE COMING PRINCE. 


which seems to govern the interpretation of Scripture, 
in consequence of which the plain meaning of words 
is made to give place to the remote and theless 
probable. And to the same cause must be attributed 
the doubt which some have suggested as to the identity 
of the king here spoken of with Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus.* 

The question remains, whether the date of this 
edict can be accurately ascertained. And here a most 
striking fact claims notice. In the sacred narrative 
the date of the event which marked the beginning of 
the seventy weeks is fixed only by reference to the 
regnal era of a Persian king. Therefore we must 
needs turn to secular history to ascertain the epoch, 
and history dates from this very period. Herodotus, 
“the father of history,’ was the contemporary of 
Artaxerxes, and visited the Persian court.t Thucy- 
dides, “the prince of historians,’ also was his con- 
temporary. In the great battles of Marathon and 
Salamis, the history of Persia had become interwoven 
with events in Greece, by which its chronology 


* “ Artaxerxes I. reigned forty years, from 465 to 425. He 
is mentioned by Herodotus once (vi. 98), by Thucydides fre- 
quently. Both writers were his contemporaries. There is every 
reason to believe that he was the king who sent Ezra and 
Nehemiah to Jerusalem, and sanctioned the restoration of the 
fortifications.” RAWLINSON, Herodotus, vol. iv., p. 217. 

+ The year in which he is said to have recited his writings at 
the Olympic games, was the very year of Nehemiah’s mission. 


THE ANGEL’S MESSAGE. 65 


can be ascertained and tested ; and the chief chrono- 
logical eras of antiquity were current at the time.* 
No. element is wanting, therefore, to enable us with 
accuracy and certainty to fix the date of Nehemiah’s 
edict. 

True it is that in ordinary history the mention of 
“the twentieth year of Artaxerxes” would leave in 
doubt whether the era of his reign were reckoned from 
his actual accession, or from his father’s death;f but 
the narrative of Nehemiah removes all ambiguity upon 
this score. The murder of Xerxes and the beginning 
of the usurper Artabanus’s seven months’ reign was 
in July Bc. 465; the accession of Artaxerxes 
was in February B.c. 464. One or other of these 


* The era of the Olympiads began B.C. 776; the era of Rome 
(A.U.C.) B.C. 753 ; and the era of Nabonassar, B.C. 747. 

+ “The seven months of Artabanus were by some added to 
the last year of Xerxes, and by others were included in the reign 
of Artaxerxes.”—CLINTON, Fasti Hellenicz, vol. ii., p. 42. 

+ It has been shown already that the accession of Xerxes is 
determined to the beginning of 485 B.c. His twentieth year was 
completed in the beginning of 465 B.c., and his death would 
happen in the beginning of the Archonship of Lysitheus. The 
seven months of Artabanus, completing the twenty-one years, 
would bring down the accession of Artaxerxes (after the removal 
of Artabanus) to the beginning of 464, in the year of Nabonassar 
284, where it is placed by the canon. JVote 6: “We may place 
the death of Xerxes in the first month of that Archon (z.2., of 
Lysitheus), July B.c. 465, and the succession of Artaxerxes in the 
eighth month, February B.c. 464.,—CLINTON, Fasti Hellenict, 
vol. ii., p. 380. 

5 


66 THE COMING PRINCE. 


dates, therefore, must be the epoch of Artaxerxes’ 
reign. But as Nehemiah mentions the Chisleu 
(November) of one year, and the following Nisan 
(March) as being both in the same year of his master’s 
reign, it is obvious that, as might be expected from 
an official of the court, he reckons from the time of 
the king’s accession de jure, that is from July B.C. 465. 
The twentieth year of Artaxerxes therefore began 
in July B.C. 446, and the commandment to rebuild 
Jerusalem was given in the Nisan following. The 
epoch of the prophetic cycle is thus definitely fixed 
as in the Jewish month Nisan of the year B.C. 445.* 


* See Appendix II., Note A, on the chronology of the reign 
of Artaxerxes Longimanus. 


CHAPTER VI. 
THE PROPHETIC YEAR. 


ie English ears it must sound pedantic to speak of 
“weeks” in any other than the familiar accepta- 
tion of the term. But with the Jew it was far other- 
wise. The effect of his laws was fitted “to render the 
word week capable of meaning a seven of years almost 
as naturally as a seven of days. Indeed the gene- 
rality of the word would have this effect at any rate. 
Hence its use to denote the latter in prophecy is not 
mere arbitrary symbolism, but the employment of a 
not unfamiliar and easily understood language.”* 
Daniel’s prayer referred to seventy years fulfilled: 
the prophecy which came in answer to that prayer 
foretold a period of seven times seventy still to come. 
But here a question arises which never has received 
sufficient notice in the consideration of this subject. 
None will doubt that the era is a period of years; 
but of what kind of year is it composed? That the 
Jewish year was lunisolar appears to be reasonably 


* Smith’s B20. Dict., I11., 1726, “Week.” Greek and Latin 
philosophers too have known of ‘weeks of years.’” — PUSEY, 
Daniel, p. 107. 


68 THE COMING PRINCE. 


certain. If tradition may be trusted, Abraham pre- 
served in his family the year of 360 days, which he 
had known in his Chaldean home.* The month 
dates of the flood (150 days being specified as the 
interval between the seventeenth day of the second 
month, and the same day of the seventh month) 
appear to show that this form of year was the 
earliest known to our race. Sir Isaac Newton states, 
that “all nations, before the just length of the solar 
year was known, reckoned months by the course of 
the moon, and years by the return of winter and 
summer, spring and autumn; and in making calen- 
dars for their festivals, they reckoned thirty days to 
a lunar month, and twelve lunar months to a year, 
taking the nearest round numbers, whence came the 
division of the ecliptic into 360 degrees.” And in 
adopting this statement, Sir G. C. Lewis avers that 
“all credible testimony and all antecedent probability 
lead to the result that a solar year containing twelve 
lunar months, determined within certain limits of error, 
has been generally recognised by the nations adjoin- 
ing the Mediterranean, from a remote antiquity.” f 
But considerations of this kind go no further than 


* Encyc. Brit. (6th ed.), title “ Chronology.” See also Smith’s 
Lib. Dict., title “ Chronology,” p. 314. 

t+ Astronomy of the Ancients, chap. i. § 7. Are not the 
hundred and eighty days of the great feast of Xerxes intended 
to be equivalent to six months? (Esther i. 4.) 


THE PROPHETIC YEAR. 69 


to prove how legitimate and important is the question 
here proposed. The inquiry remains whether any 
grounds exist for reversing the presumption which 
obtains in favour of the common civil year. Now 
the prophetic era is clearly seven times the seventy 
years of the “desolations” which were before the 
mind of Daniel when the prophecy was given. Is 
it possible then to ascertain the character of the 
years of this lesser era ? 

One of the characteristic ordinances of the Jewish 
law was, that every seventh year the land was to lie 
fallow, and it was in relation to the neglect of this 
ordinance that the era of the desolations was decreed. 
It was to last “until the land had enjoyed her Sab- 
baths ; for so long as she lay desolate, she kept 
Sabbath, to fulfil threescore and ten years.”* The 
essential element in the judgment was, not a ruined 
city, but a land laid desolate by the terrible scourge 
of a hostile invasion,f the effects of which were 
perpetuated by famine and pestilence, the continuing 
proofs of the Divine displeasure. It is obvious there- 
fore, that the true epoch of the judgment is not, as 
has been generally assumed, the capture of Jerusalem, 
but the invasion of Judea. From the time the 
Babylonian armies entered the land, all agricultural 


* 2 Chron. xxxvi. 21; of. Lev. xxvi. 34, 35. 
+ Compare Jer. xxvii. 13; and Hag. ii. 17. 


70 THE COMING PRINCE. 


pursuits were suspended, and therefore the desola- 
tions may be reckoned from the day the capital was 
invested, namely, the tenth day of the tenth month 
in the ninth year of Zedekiah. This was the epoch 
as revealed to Ezekiel the prophet in his exile on 
the banks of the Euphrates,* and for twenty-four 
centuries the day has been observed as a fast by 
the Jews in every land. 

The close of the era is indicated in Scripture with 
equal definiteness, as “the four-and-twentieth day 
of the ninth month in the second year of Darius.{ 
“Consider now” (the prophetic word declared) 
“from this day and upward—from the four-and- 
twentieth day of the ninth month, even from the 
day that the foundation of the Lord’s temple was 
laid—consider it: from this day I will bless you.” 
Now from the tenth day of Tebeth B.c. 580, to the 
twenty-fourth day of Chisleu B.C. 520,§ was a period 
of 25,202 days ; and seventy years of 360 days contain 
exactly 25,200 days. We may conclude, therefore, that 
the era of the “desolations” was a period of seventy 
years of 360 days, beginning the day after the Baby- 


it EWES Seas Ih, Oe 

+ Hag. ii. 10, 15-19. The books of Haggai and Zechariah 
give in full the prophetic utterances which the narrative of Ezra 
{iv 245 v. I-5) mentions as the sanction and incentive under 
which the Jews returned to the work of setting up their temple. 

f The ninth year of Zedekiah. See App. I. post, 

§ The second year of Darius Hystaspes, 


TEER PROPEL DUG VISA 71 


lonian army invested Jerusalem, and ending the day 
before the foundation of the second temple was laid.* 

But this inquiry may be pressed still further. As 
the era of the “desolations” was fixed at seventy 
years, because of the neglect of the Sabbatic years,f 
we might expect to find that a period of seven times 
seventy years measured back from the close of the 
seventy years of “indignation against Judah,” would 
bring us to the time when Israel entered into their 
full national privileges, and thus incurred their full 
responsibilities. And such in fact will be found upon 
inquiry to be the case. From the year succeeding 
the dedication of Solomon’s temple, to the year before 
the foundation of the second temple was laid, was a 
period of 490 years of 360 days.t 


* The date of the Paschal new moon, by which the Jewish 
year is regulated, was the evening of the 14th March in B.C. 589, 
and about noon on Ist April B.c. 520. According to the phasis 
the rst Nisan in the former year was probably the 15th or 16th 
March, and in the latter the Ist or 2nd April. 

vp PAC ey, Seek Bit 9 ILS ohh GLE Sc 

{ The temple was dedicated in the eleventh year of Solomon, 
and the second temple was foundedin B.C. 520. The intervening 
period reckoned exclusively was 483 years = 490 lunisolar years 
of 360 days. It is noteworthy that the interval between the 
dedication of Solomon’s temple and the dedication.of the second 
temple (B.C. 515) was 490 years. A like period had elapsed 
between the entrance into Canaan and the foundation of the 
kingdom under Saul. These cycles of 70, and multiples of 70, 
in Hebrew history are striking and interesting. See App. I. 


Ve: THE COMING PRINCE. 


It must be admitted, however, that no argument 
based on calculations of this kind is final.* The only 
data which would warrant our deciding unreservedly 
that the prophetic year consists of 360 days, would 
be to find some portion of the era subdivided into the 
days of which it is composed. No other proof can be 
wholly satisfactory, but if this be forthcoming, it must 
be absolute and conclusive. And this is precisely 
what the book of the Revelation gives us. 

As already noticed, the prophetic era is divided 
into two pericds, the one of 7 +62 heptades, the other 
of a single heptade.t Connected with these eras, 
two “princes” are prominently mentioned; first, the 
Messiah, and secondly, a prince of that people by 
whom Jerusalem was to be destroyed,—a personage 
of such pre-eminence, that on his advent his identity 
is to be as certain as that of Christ Himself. The 
first era closes with the “cutting off” of Messiah ; the 
beginning of the second era dates from the signature 
of a “covenant,” or treaty, by this second “ prince,” 


* Though it is signally confirmed by the undoubted fact 
that the Jewish Sabbatical year was conterminous, not with the 
solar, but with the ecclesiastical year. 

+ The division of the 69 weeks into 7+ 62 is accounted for 
by the fact that the first 49 years, during which the restoration 
of Jerusalem was completed, ended with a great crisis in Jewish 
history, the close of the prophetic testimony. Forty-nine years 
from B.C. 445 brings us to the date of Malachi’s prophecy. 


tHE PROPHETACGC YVEAR. 73 


with or perhaps in favour of “the many,’* that is the 
Jewish nation, as distinguished probably from a sec- 
tion of pious persons among them who will stand 
aloof. In the middle of the heptade the treaty is to 
be violated by the suppression of the Jews’ religion, 
and a time of persecution is to follow. 

Daniel’s vision of the four beasts affords a striking 
commentary upon this. The identity of the fourth 
beast with the Roman empire is not doubtful, and we 
read that a “king” is to arise, territorially connected 
with that empire, but historically belonging to a later 
time ; he will be a persecutor of “the saints of the 
Most High,” and his fall isto be immediately followed 
by the fulfilment of Divine blessings upon the 
favoured people—the precise event which marks the 
close of the “seventy weeks.” The duration of that 
persecution, moreover, is stated to be “a time and 
times, and the dividing of time,’-—a mystical ex- 
pression, of which the meaning might be doubtful, 
were it not that it is used again in Scripture as 
synonymous with three and a half years, or half a 
prophetic week.f Now there can be no reasonable 
doubt of the identity of the king of Daniel vii. 25 
with the first “beast” of the thirteenth chapter of 
Revelation. In the Revelation he is likened to a 


* “The multitude."—TREGELLES, Danzel, p. 97. 
+ Rev. xii. 6, 14. 


74 THE COMING PRINCE. 


leopard, a bear, and a lion,—the figures used for 
Daniel’s three first beasts. In Daniel there are ten 
kingdoms, represented by ten horns. So also in 
Revelation. According to Daniel, “he shall speak 
great words against the Most High, and wear out the 
saints of the Most High:” according to Revelation, 
“he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God,” 
“and it was given unto him to make war with 
the saints and to overcome them.” According to 
Daniel, “they shall be given into his hand until a 
time and times and the dividing of time,” or three 
and a half years: according to Revelation, “power 
was given unto him to continue forty and two 
months.” 

It is not impossible, of course, that prophecy may 
foretell the career of two different men, answering 
the same description, who will pursue a precisely 
similar course in similar circumstances for a similar 
period of three and a half years; but the more 
natural and obvious supposition is that the two are 
identical. Owing to the very nature of the subject, 
their identity cannot be logically demonstrated, but 
it rests upon precisely the same kind of proof upon 
which juries convict men of crimes, and convicted 
prisoners are punished. 

Now this seventieth week is admittedly a period 
of seven years, and half of this period is three times 
described as “a time, times, and half a time,” or “the 


LHE PROPHETIC VEAR. 75 


dividing of a time ;”* twice as forty-two months; + 
and twice as 1,260 days.t But 1,260days are exactly 
equal to forty-two months of thirty days, or three and 
a half years of 360 days, whereas three and a half 
Julian years contain 1,278 days. It follows therefore 
that the prophetic year is not the Julian year, but 
the ancient year of 360 days.§ 


ran, Vile 25/5) X17 sekeve kil. D4. 

1) IRGieg S306 a8. Sohne Is 

in [RNA Se iP Soh atce 

§ It is noteworthy that the prophecy was given at Babylon, 
and the Babylonian year consisted of twelve months of thirty 
days. That the prophetic year is not the ordinary year is no 
new discovery. It was noticed sixteen centuries ago by Julius 
Africanus in his Chronography, wherein he explains the seventy 
weeks to be weeks of Few7sh (lunar) years, beginning with the 
twentieth of Artaxerxes, the fourth year of the 83rd Olympiad, 
and ending in the second year of the 202nd Olympiad ; 475 
Julian years being equal to 490 lunar years, 


GHAPTER Vil. 
THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 


“THE conclusions arrived at in the preceding 

chapter suggest a striking parallel between 
Daniel’s earlier visions and the prophecy of the 
seventy weeks. History contains no record of events 
to satisfy the predicted course of the seventieth week. 
The Apocalypse was not even written when that 
period ought chronologically to have closed, and 
though eighteen centuries have since elapsed, the 
restoration of the Jews seems still but a chimera of 
sanguine fanatics. And be it remembered that the 
purpose of the prophecy was not to amuse or interest 
the curious. Of necessity some mysticism must 
characterize prophetic utterances, otherwise they 
might be “ fulfilled to order” by designing men; but 
once the prophecy comes side by side with the events 
of which it speaks, it fails of one of its chief purposes 
if its relation to them be doubtful. If any one will 
learn the connection between prophecy and its fulfil- 
ment, let him read the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah, 
and compare it with the story of the Passion: so 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 77 


vague and figurative that no one could have acted 
out the drama it foretold; but yet so definite and 
clear that, once fulfilled, the simplest child can recog- 
nize its scope and meaning. If then the event which 
constitutes the epoch of the seventieth week must be 
as pronounced and certain as Nehemiah’s commission 
and Messiah’s death, it is of necessity still future. 

And this is precisely what the study of the seventh 
chapter of Daniel will have led us to expect. All 
Christian interpreters are agreed that between the rise 
of the fourth beast and the growth of the ten horns 
there is a gap or parenthesis in the vision; and, as 
already shown, that gap includes the entire period 
between the time of Christ and the division of the 
Roman earth into the ten kingdoms out of which 
the great persecutor of the future is to arise. This 
period, moreover, is admittedly unnoticed also in the 
other visions of the book. There is therefore a strong 
@ priort probability that it would be overlooked in 
the vision of the ninth chapter. 

More than this, there is not only the same reason 
for this mystic foreshortening in the vision of the : 
seventy weeks, as in the other visions,* but that 
reason applies here with special force. The seventy 
weeks were meted out as the period during which 
Judah’s blessings were deferred. In common with 


* See pp. 44—47, ante. 


78 THE COMING PRINCE. 


ae 


all prophecy, the meaning of this prophecy will be 
unmistakable when its ultimate fulfilment takes 
place, but it was necessarily conveyed in a mystical 
form in order to shut up the Jews to the respon- 
sibility of accepting their Messiah, St. Peter’s 
inspired proclamation to the nation at Jerusalem, 
recorded in the third chapter of Acts, was in accord- 
ance with this. The Jews looked merely for a return 
of their national supremacy, but God’s first purpose 
was redemption through the death of the great Sin- 
bearer. Now, the sacrifice had been accomplished, 
and St. Peter pointed to Calvary as the fulfilment of 
that “which God before had showed by the mouth 
of all His prophets;” and he added this testimony, 
“Repent ye therefore, and turn again, that your sins 
may be blotted out, that so there may come seasons 
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord; and that 
He may send the Christ, who hath been appointed for 
you, even Jesus.” * The realization of these blessings 
would have been the fulfilment of Daniel’s prophecy, 
and the seventieth week might have run its course 
without a break. But Judah proved impenitent and 
obdurate, and the promised blessings were once again 
postponed till the close of this strange era of the 
Gentile dispensation. 

But it may be asked, Was not the Cross of Christ 


* Acts ili, 19, 20, Revised Version, 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 79 


the fulfilment of these blessings? A careful study of 
the Angel’s words* will show that not so much as 
one of them has been thus accomplished. The sixty- 
ninth week was to end with Messiah’s death; the 
close of the seventieth week was to bring to Judah 
the full enjoyment of the blessings resulting from 
that death. Judah’s transgression has yet to be re- 
strained, and his sins to be sealed up. The day is 
yet future when a fountain shall be opened for the 
iniquity of Daniel’s people,f and righteousness shall 
be ushered in for them. In what sense were vision 
and prophet sealed up at the death of Christ, con- 
sidering that the greatest of all visions was yet to be 
given,{ and the days were still to come when the 
words of the prophets were to be fulfilled?§ And 
whatever meaning is to be put upon “anointing the 
most holy,” it is clear that Calvary was not the 
accomplishment of it. | 


* Dan. ix. 24. + Zech. xiii. 1. 
{ The Revelation. § Luke xxi. 22. 
|| See p. 51, azée. All these words point to practical benefits to 
be conferred in a practical way upon the people, at the second 
advent of Christ. Isaiah i. 26 is a commentary on “ bringing in 
righteousness.” To take it as synonymous with declaring God’s 
righteousness (Rom. iii. 25) is doctrinally a blunder and an 
anachronism. To any whose views of “reconciliation” are not 
based on the use of the word in Scripture, “making reconcilia- 
tion for iniquity” will seem an exception. The Hebrew verb 
caphar (to make atonement or reconciliation) means literally “to 


80 THE COMING PRINCE. 


But is it consistent with fair argument or common- 
sense to urge that an era thus chronologically defined 
should be indefinitely interrupted in its course? The 


cover over” sin (see its use in Gen. vi. 14), to do away with a 
charge against a person by means of bloodshedding, or otherwise 
(ex. gr. by intercession, Exod. xxxii. 30), so as to secure his re- 
ception into Divine favour. The following is a list of the passages 
where the word is used in the first three books of the Bible: 
Gen. vi. 14 (fitch) ; xxxii. 20 (appease) ; Exod. xxix. 33, 36, 37 ; 
5SOS MO) Jy, MOG Ssosil Gon ibe 1b AUG he, Dey, AS. Bit, BSS Ws Oy ito 
Hy UH MKS Wald), SOR WAL 7/8 Wail, WS GubB The 778 de. 1978 Sab, Fo 8 
GHG. ONS UC, Adve Bin Woy, ily GAR soy UG, GOR ito @) Uy Lit, 
Gs, 7, 1s, Ao I, Pees Be BVI Sait IIB SNe BAIR SONI Bey. 

It will be seen that cafhar is never used of the expiation or 
bloodshedding considered objectively, but of the results accruing 
from it to the sinner, sometimes immediately on the victim’s 
death, sometimes conditional upon the action of the priest who 
was charged with the function of applying the blood. The 
sacrifice was not the atonement, but the means by which atone- 
ment was made. Therefore “the preposition which marks 
substitution is never used in connection with the word caphar” 
(Girdlestone’s Synonyms O. T., p. 214). 

Making reconciliation, or atonement, therefore, according to 
the Scriptural use of the word, implies the removal of the prac- 
tical estrangement between the sinner and God, the obtaining 
forgiveness for the sin ; and the words in Daniel ix. 24 point to 
the time when this benefit will be secured to Judah. “Jy chat 
day there shall be a fountain opened to the inhabitants of Jeru- 
salem for sin and uncleanness” (Zech. xiii. 1); that is, the 
blessings of Calvary will be theirs; reconciliation will be accom- 
plished for the people. In keeping with this, transgression will 
be restrained (see use of the word in Gen. viii. 2; Exod. xxxvi. 
6); z.e., they will cease to transgress; sins will be sealed up,—the 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 81 


ready answer might be given, that if common-sense 
and fairness—if human judgment, is to decide the 
question, the only doubt must be whether the final 
period of the cycle, and the blessings promised at its 
close, be not for ever abrogated and lost by reason of 
the appalling guilt of that people who “killed the 
Prince of life.”* There exists surely no presumption 
against supposing that the stream of prophetic time 
is tided back during all this interval of the apostasy of 
Judah. The question remains, whether any precedent 
for this can be discovered in the mystical chronology 
of Israel’s history. 

According to the book of Kings, Solomon began 
to build the temple in the 480th year after the chil- 
dren of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt.t 
This statement, than which none could, seemingly, 
be more exact, has sorely puzzled chronologers. By 
some it has been condemned as a forgery, by others 
it has been dismissed as a blunder; but all have 
agreed in rejecting it. Moreover, Scripture itself 
appears to clash with it. In his sermon at Pisidian 
Antioch { St. Paul epitomizes thus the chronology of 


ordinary word for securing a letter (1 Kings xxi. 8), or a purse or 
bag of treasure (Job xiv. 17) ; z.é., sins will be done with and put 
away in a practical sense ; and vision and prophet will likewise 
be sealed up, z.¢., their functions will be at an end, for all will 
have been fulfilled. 

* Acts. iii. 15. t+ 1 Kings vi. 1. t Acts xiii, 18-21. 


6 


82 THE COMING PRINCE. 


this period of the history of his nation: forty years 
in the wilderness ; 450 years under the Judges, and 
forty years of the reign of Saul; making a total of 
530 years. To which must be added the forty years 
of David’s reign and the first three years of Solomon’s ; 
making 573 years for the very period which is described 
in Kings as 480 years. Can these conclusions, appa- 
rently so inconsistent, be reconciled ? * 

If we follow the history of Israel as detailed in the 


* According to Browne (Ordo Sec., §§ 254 and 268) the 
Exodus was on Friday the roth April, B.c. 1586; the passage of 
Jordan was the 14th April, B.c. 1546; the accession of Solomon 
was B.C. 1016, and the foundation of the Temple was the 20th 
April, B.c. 1013. He therefore accepts St. Paul’s statements 
unreservedly. Clinton conjectures that there was an interval 
of about twenty-seven years before the time of the Judges, and 
another of twelve years before the election of Saul, thus fixing 
on B.C. 1625 as the date of the Exode, extending the whole 
period to 612 years. Josephus reckons it 621 years, and 
this is adopted by Hales, who calls the statement in Kings 
“a forgery.” Other chronologers assign periods varying from 
the 741 years of Julius Africanus to the 480 years of Usher, 
whose date for the Exode—B.c. 1491—has been adopted in our 
Bible, though clearly wrong by ninety-three years at least. 
The subject is fully discussed by Clinton in Fastd Hell., vol. i., 
pp. 312-313, and by Browne, reviewing Clinton’s arguments, in 
Ordo Se@c., § 6, etc. Browne’s conclusions have much to com- 
mend them. But if others are right in inserting conjectural 
periods, my argument remains the same, for any such periods, 
if they existed, were obviously excluded from the 480 years on 
the same principle as were the eras of the servitudes. (This 
subject is discussed further in App. I.) 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 83 


book of Judges, we shall find that for five several 
periods their national existence as Jehovah’s people 
was in abeyance. In punishment for their idolatry, 
God gave them up again and again, and “sold them 
into the hands of their enemies.” They became 
slaves to the king of Mesopotamia for eight years, 
to the king of Moab for eighteen years, to the king 
of Canaan for twenty years, to the Midianites for 
seven years, and finally to the Philistines for forty 
years.* But the sum of 8 + 18 + 20 + 7 + 40 
years is 93 years, and if 93 years be deducted from 
573 years, the result is 480 years. It is obvious, 
therefore, that the 480 years of the book of Kings 
from the Exodus to the temple is a mystic era formed 
by eliminating every period during which the people 
were cast off by God.f If, then, this principle were 
intelligible to the Jew in regard to history, it was 


APjudgesan. 8. if; in 2,35 vi. 1; xij 1. Phe servitude of 
Judges x. 7, 9 affected only the tribes beyond Jordan, and did 
not suspend Israel’s zad¢zonal position. 

+ The Israelites were nationally God’s people as no other 
nation ever can be; therefore they were dealt with in some 
respects on principles similar to those which obtain in the case 
of individuals. A life without God is death. Righteousness 
must keep a strict account and sternly judge ; or grace may 
pardon. And if God forgives, He likewise forgets the sin (Heb. 
x. 17); which doubtless means that the record is wiped out, 
and the period it covers is treated as though it were a blank. 
The days of our servitude to evil are ignored in the Divine 
chronology. 


84 THE COMING PRINCE. 


both natural and legitimate to introduce it in respect 
of an essentially mystic era like that of the seventy 
weeks. 

But this conclusion does not depend upon argument 
however sound, or inference however just. It is in- 
disputably proved by the testimony of Christ Himself. 
“What shall be the sign of Thy coming, and of the 
end of the world?” the disciples inquired as they 
gathered round the Lord on one of the last days of 
His ministry on earth.* In reply he spoke of the 
tribulation foretold by Daniel,f and warned them 
that the signal of that fearful persecution was to be 
the precise event which marks the middle of the 
seventieth week, namely, the defilement of the holy 
place by the “abomination of desolation,’—some 
image of himself probably, which the false prince 
will set up in the temple in violation of his treaty 
obligations to respect and defend the religion of 
the Jewst That this prophecy was not fulfilled 


* Matt. xxiv. 3. 

+ Ours, Matt. xxiv. 21; Dan. xii. 1 (LXX). 

t kai éml 7d fepdv BdeAvypa Tav epnudcewy, Dan, ix. 27; 7d + 
Bdedvypa epnpogews, Dan. xii. 11 (LXX.); dray ody Wyre 7d BdeAvypa 
Tis epnuaoews Td pyGev dud Aavujd tod mpopyrov, Eatas év rdw dyle, 
Matt. xxiv. 15. Comp. 1 Maccabees i. 54, dxoddpunoay Bdehvyua 
€pnpaceas éxitd puovaotnpiov. This passage in Matthew affords 
an unanswerable proof that all systems of interpretation which 
make the seventy weeks end with the coming or death of Christ, 
and therefore before the destruction of Ferusalem by Titus, are 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 85 


by Titus is as certain as history can make it ;* 
but Scripture itself leaves no doubt whatever on 
the point. 

It appears from the passages already quoted, that 
the predicted tribulation is to last three and a half 
years, and to date from the violation of the treaty in 
the middle of the seventieth week. What is to follow 
is thus described by the Lord Himself in words of 
peculiar solemnity :—“Immediately after the tribu- 
lation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and 
the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall 
fall from heaven, and the powers of the heaven shall 
be shaken : and then shall appear the sign of the Son 
of man in heaven, and then shall all the tribes of the 
earth mourn, and they shall see the Son of man coming 
in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory.” f 
That it is to the closing scenes of the dispensation 
this prophecy relates is here assumed.{ And as these 
scenes are to follow zmmediately after a persecution, 


wholly wrong. And that that event was not in fact the terminus 
of the era is plain from Matt. xxiv. 21-29, and Dan. ix. 24. 

* Making all allowance for the contemptible time-serving of 
Josephus and his admiration for Titus, his testimony on this 
point is too full and explicit to admit of doubt (Wars, vi., 2, 
§ 4). 

+ Matt. xxiv. 29. 

{ I am aware of systems of interpretation which fritter away 
the meaning of all such scriptures, but it is idle to attempt to 
refute them in detail. (See chap xi. fost, and App. Note C.) 


86 THE COMING PRINCE. 


of which the era is within the seventieth week, the 
inference is incontestable that the events of that week 
belong to a time still future.* 

We may conclude, then, that when wicked hands 
set up the cross on Calvary, and God pronounced the 
dread “Zo-ammt” + upon His people, the course of 
the prophetic era ceased to run. Nor will it flow on 
again till the autonomy of Judah is restored; and, 
with obvious propriety, that is held to date from the 
moment their readmission into. the family of nations 
is recognised by treaty.t It will, therefore, be here 
assumed that the former portion of the prophetic era 


* Such was the belief of the early Church ; but the question 
has been argued at length out of deference to modern writers 
who have advocated a different interpretation of Dan. ix. 27. 
Hippolytus, bishop and martyr, who wrote at the beginning of 
the third century, is most definite on the point. Quoting the 
verse, he says : “ By one week he meant the last week, which zs 
to be at the end of the whole world; of which week the two 
prophets Enoch and Elias will take up the half; for they will 
preach 1,260 days, clothed in sackcloth” (Hip. on Christ and 
Antichrist). According to Browne (Ordo S@c., p. 386, noée), 
this was also the view of the father of Christian chronologers, 
Julius Africanus. That half of the last week has been fulfilled, 
but the remaining three and a half years are still future, is 
maintained by Canon Browne himself (§ 339), who notices, 
what so many modern writers have missed, that the events 
belonging to this period are connected with the times of 
Antichrist. 

ROM aIXe2 5 2OMNC/milOSalO LO: 

t ze., the covenant mentioned in Dan. ix. 27. 


THE MYSTIC ERA OF THE WEEKS. 87 


_—_— 


has run its course, but that the events of the last 
seven years have still to be accomplished. The last 
point, therefore, necessary to complete the chain 
of proof is to ascertain the date of “Messiah the 


Prince,” 


CHAPTER-VIII. 
CMESSIAH LHE PRINCE. 


UST as we find that in certain circles people 
J who are reputed pious are apt to be regarded 
with suspicion, so it would seem that any writings 
which claim Divine authority or sanction inevitably 
awaken distrust. But if the evangelists could gain 
the same fair hearing which profane historians 
command; if their statements were tested upon 
the same principles on which records of the past 
are judged by scholars, and evidence is weighed in 
our courts of justice, it would be accepted as a 
well-established jfact of history that our Saviour was 
born in Bethlehem, at a time when Cyrenius was 
Governor of Syria, and Herod was king in Jerusalem. 
The narrative of the first two chapters of St. Luke 
is not like an ordinary page of history which carries 
with it no pledge of accuracy save that which the 
general credit of the writer may afford. The evan- 
gelist is treating of facts of which he had “ perfect 
understanding from the very first ;” * in which, more- 


* Luke i. 3. 


“ MESSTAH THE PRINCE» 89 


over, his personal interest was intense, and in respect 
of which a single glaring error would have prejudiced 
not only the value of his book, but the success of 
that cause to which his life was devoted, and with 
which his hopes of eternal happiness were identified. 

The matter has been treated as though this 
reference to Cyrenius were but an incidental allusion, 
in respect of which an error would be of no import- 
ance ; whereas, in fact, it would be absolutely vital. 
That the true Messiah must be born in Bethlehem 
was asserted by the Jew and conceded by the 
Christian: that the Nazarene was born in Bethlehem 
the Jew persistently denied. If even to-day he could 
disprove that fact, he would justify his unbelief; for 
if the Christ we worship was not by right of birth 
the heir to David’s throne, He is not the Christ 
of prophecy. Christians soon forgot this when they 
had no longer to maintain their faith against the 
unbroken front of Judaism, but only to commend it 
to a heathen world. But it was not forgotten by 
the immediate successors of the apostles. There- 
fore it was that in writing to the Jews, Justin Martyr 
asserted with such emphasis that Christ was born 
during the taxing of Cyrenius, appealing to the lists 
of that census as to documents then extant and 
available for reference, to prove that though Joseph 
and Mary lived at Nazareth, they went up to 
Bethlehem to be enrolled, and that thus it came to 


go THE COMING PRINCE. 


pass the Child was born in the royal city, and not 
in the despised Galilean village.* 

And these facts of the pedigree and birth of the 
Nazarene afforded almost the only ground upon 
which issue could be joined, where one side main- 
tained, and the other side denied, that His Divine 
character and mission were established by transcend- 
ental proofs. None could question that His acts 
were more than human, but blindness and hate could 
ascribe them to Satanic power; and the sublime 
utterances which in every succeeding age have com- 
manded the admiration of millions, even of those who 
have refused to them the deeper homage of their 
faith, had no charm for men thus prejudiced. But 
these statements about the taxing which brought the 
Virgin Mother up to Bethlehem, dealt with plain 
facts which required no moral fitness to appreciate 
them. That in sucha matter a writer like St. Luke 
could be in error is utterly improbable, but that 


- Bethlehem, “in which Jesus Christ was born, as you may 
also learn from the lists of the taxing which was made in the 
time of Cyrenius, the first Governor of yours in Judea.”— 
Apol.,i., § 34. 

“We assert Christ to have been born a hundred and fifty 
years ago, under Cyrenius.”—Jéd., § 46. 

“But when there was an enrolment in Judea, which was then 
made first under Cyrenius, he went up from Nazareth, where he 
lived, to Bethlehem, of which place he was, to be enrolled,” 
etc.—Dial. Trypho, § 78. 


“MESSTAH THE PRINCE.” 9g! 


the error would remain unchallenged is absolutely 
incredible ; and we find Justin Martyr, writing nearly 
a hundred years after the evangelist, appealing to 
the fact as one which was unquestionable. It may, 
therefore, be accepted as one of the most certain of 
the really certain things of history, that the first 
taxing of Cyrenius was made before the death of 
Herod, and that while it was proceeding Christ was 
born in Bethlehem. 

Not many years ago this statement would have 
been received either with ridicule or indignation. 
The evangelist’s mention of Cyrenius appeared to 
be a hopeless anachronism; as, according to un- 
doubted history, the period of his governorship and 
the date of his “taxing” were nine or ten years later 
than the nativity. Gloated over by Strauss and 
others of his tribe, and dismissed by writers unnum- 
bered either as an enigma or an error, the passage 
has in recent years been vindicated and explained 
by the labours of Dr. Zumpt of Berlin. 

By a strange chance there is a break in the history 
of this period, for the seven or eight years beginning 
B.c. 4.* The list of the governors of Syria, therefore, 
fails us, and for the same interval P. Sulpicius Quirinus, 
the Cyrenius of the Greeks, disappears from history. 


* Josephus here leaves a gap in his narrative; and through 
the loss of MSS., the history of Dion Cassius, the other authority 
for this period, is not available to supply the omission. 


92 THE COMING PRINCE. 


But by a series of separate investigations and argu- 
ments, all of them independent of Scripture, Dr. 
Zumpt has established that Quirinus was ¢zwzce 
governor of the province, and that his first term of 
office dated from the latter part of B.c. 4, when he 
succeeded Quinctilius Varus. The unanimity with 
which this conclusion has been accepted renders it 
unnecessary to discuss the matter here. But one 
remark respecting it may not be out of place. The 
grounds of Dr. Zumpt’s conclusions may be aptly 
described as a chain of circumstantial evidence, and 
his critics are agreed that the result is reasonably 
certain.* To make that certainty absolute, nothing 


* Dr. Zumpt’s labours in this matter were first made public in 
a Latin treatise which appeared in 1854. More recently he has 
published them in his Das Geburtsjahr Christ (Leipzig, 1869). 
The English reader will find a summary of his arguments in 
Dean Alford’s Greek Test. (Note on Luke ii. 1), and in his article 
on Cyrentus in Smith’s Bible Dict.; he describes them as “very 
striking and satisfactory.” Dr. Farrar remarks, “Zumpt has, 
with incredible industry and research, all but established in this 
matter the accuracy of St. Luke, by proving the extreme fvoba- 
bility that Quirinus was ¢w7ce governor of Syria” (Life of Christ, 
vol. i, p. 7, zo¢e). See also an article in the Quarterly Review 
for April 1871, which describes Zumpt’s conclusions as “very 
nearly certain,” “all but certain.” The question is discussed 
also in Wieseler’s Chron. Syn, (Venables’s trans.) 

In his Roman history, Mr. Merivale adopts these results unre- 
servedly. He says (vol. iv., p. 457), “A remarkable light has 
been thrown upon the point by the demonstration, as it seems to 
Le, of Augustus Zumpt in his second yolume of Commentationes 


“MESSIAH THE PRINCE.” 93 


is wanting but the positive testimony of some his- 
torian of repute. If, for example, one of the lost 
fragments of the history of Dion Cassius were brought 
to light, containing the mention of Quirinus as 
governing the province during the last months of 
Herod’s reign, the fact would be deemed as certain 
as that Augustus was emperor of Rome. A Christian 
writer may be pardoned if he attaches equal weight 
to the testimony of St. Luke. It will, therefore, be 
here assumed as absolutely certain that the birth of 
Christ took place at some date not earlier than the 
autumn of B.C. 4.* 

The dictum of our English chronologer, than whom 
none more eminent or trustworthy can be appealed 
to, is a sufficient guarantee that this conclusion is 
consistent with everything that erudition can bring 
to bear upon the point. Fynes Clinton sums up his 


Epigraphice, that Quirinus (the Cyrenius of St. Luke ii.) was 
first governor of Syria from the close of A.U. 750 (B.C. 4), to 
ASU 7531 (BiGy Wee 

* The birth of our Lord is placed in B.O 1, by Pearson and 

_ Hug; B.C. 2, by Scaliger; B.c. 3, by Baronius, Calvisius, Siiskind, 
and Paulus; B.c. 4, by Lamy, Bengel, Anger, Wieseler, and 
Greswell ; B.c. 5, by Usher and Petavius; B.c. 7, by Ideler and 
Sanclementi (Smith’s Bzble Dicé., “Jesus Christ,” p. 1075). 

It should be added that Zumpt’s date for the nativity is fixed 
on independent grounds in B.c. 7. Following Ideler, he con- 
cludes that the conjunction of the planets Jupiter and Saturn, 
which occurred in that year, was the “ Star” which led the Magi 
to Palestine. 


94 THE COMING PRINCE. 


discussion of the matter thus: “The nativity was 
not more than about eighteen months before the 
death of Herod, nor less than five or six. The death 
of Herod was either in the spring of B.C. 4, or the 
spring of B.C. 3. The earliest possible date then for 
the nativity is the autumn of Bc. 6 (U.C. 748), 
eighteen months before the death of Herod in B.C. 4. 
The latest will be the autumn of BC. 4 (UC. 750), 
about six months before his death, assumed to be in 
spring B.C. 3.”* This opinion has weight, not only 
because of the writer's eminence as a chronologist, 
but also because his own view as to the actual date 
of the birth of Christ would have led him to narrow 
still more the limits within which it must have 
occurred, if his sense of fairness had permitted him 
to do so. Moreover, Clinton wrote in ignorance of 
what Zumpt has since brought to light respecting 
the census of Quirinus, The introduction of this new 
element into the consideration of the question, enables 
us with absolute confidence, adopting Clinton’s 
dictum, to assign the death of Herod to the month 
Adar of B.C. 3, and the nativity to the autumn of 
BC, a 

That the least uncertainty should prevail respect- 
ing the time of an event of such transcendent interest 
to mankind is a fact of strange significance. But 
whatever doubt there may be as to the birth-date of 


* Fasti Romant, A.D. 29. 


“SMESSTAH THE PRINCE.” 95 


the Son of God, it is due to no omission in the sacred 
page if equal doubt be felt as to the epoch of His 
ministry on earth. There is not in the whole of 
Scripture a more definite chronological statement 
than that contained in the opening verses of the third 
chapter of St. Luke. “In the fifteenth year of the 
reign of Tiberius Czesar, Pontius Pilate being go- 
vernor of Judza, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, 
and his brother Philip tetrarch of Iturzea and of the 
region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of 
Abilene, Annas and Caiaphas being the high priests, 
the word of God came unto John the son of Zacharias 
in the wilderness.” 

Now the date of Tiberius Czsar’s reign is known 
with absolute accuracy ; and his fifteenth year, 
reckoned from his accession, began on the 19th 
August, A.D. 28. And further, it is also known that 
during that year, so reckoned, each of the personages 
named in the passage, actually held the position 
there assigned to him. Here then, it might be sup- 
posed, no difficulty or question could arise. But the 
evangelist goes on to speak of the beginning of the 
ministry of the Lord Himself, and he mentions that 
“He was about thirty years of age when He began.’”* 
This statement, taken in connection with the date 


* Luke iii. 23. Such is the right rendering of the verse. 
The Revised Version renders it :—“ And Jesus Himself, when 
He began ¢o teach, was about thirty years of age.” 


96 THE COMING PRINCE. 


commonly assigned to the nativity, has been supposed 
to require that “the fifteenth year of Tiberius” shall 
be understood as referring, not to the epoch of his 
reign, but to an earlier date, when history testifies 
that certain powers were conferred on him during the 
two last years of Augustus. All such hypotheses, 
however, “are open to one overwhelming objection, 
viz., that the reign of Tiberius, as beginning from 
19th August, A.D. 14, was as well known a date in the 
time of Luke, as the reign of Queen Victoria is in 
our own day; and no single case has ever been, 
or can be, produced, in which the years of Tiberius 


were reckoned in any other manner.’* 


* Lewin, Fastd Sacrt, p. liii. Diss., chap. vi. The joint-princi- 
pate theory of the reign of Tiberius, elaborately argued for by 
Greswell, is essential with writers like him, who assign the cruci- 
fixion to A.D. 29 or 30. Sanclementi, indeed, finding “that 
nowhere in histories, or on monuments, or coins, is a vestige 
to be found of any such mode of reckoning the years of this 
emperor,” disposes of the difficulty by taking the date in Luke 
iil. 1 to refer, not to John the Baptist’s ministry, but to Christ’s 
death. Browne adopts this in a modified form, recognizing that 
the hypothesis above referred to “falls under fatal objections.” 
He remarks that “it is improbable to the last degree” that 
Luke, who wrote specially for a Roman officer, and generally 
for Gentiles, would have so expressed himself as to be certainly 
misunderstood by them. Therefore, though the statemcit of 
the evangelist clashes with his conclusion as to the date of the 
Passion, he owns his obligation to accept it. See Ordo Se@c., 
§§ 71 and 95. 


“MESSIAH THE PRINCE” 97 


Nor is there any inconsistency whatever between 
these statements of St. Luke and the date of the 
nativity (as fixed by the evangelist himself), under 
Cyrenius, in the autumn of Bc. 4; for the Lord’s 
ministry, dating from the autumn of A.D. 28, may in 
fact have begun before His thirty-first year expired, 
and cannot have been later than a few months 
beyond it. The expression “ about thirty years” 
implies some such margin.* As therefore it is wholly 
unnecessary, it becomes wholly unjustifiable, to put a 
forced and special meaning on the evangelist’s words; 
and by the fifteenth year of Tiberius Cesar he must 
have intended what all the world would assume he 
meant, namely, the year beginning 19th August, A.D. 
28. And thus, passing out of the region of argument 
and controversy, we reach at last a well-ascertained 
date of vital importance in this inquiry. 

The first Passover of the Lord’s public ministry 
on earth is thus definitely fixed by the Gospel narra- 
tive itself, as in Nisan A.D. 29. And we are thus 
enabled to fix 32 A.D. as the year of the crucifixion. 


* As Dean Alford puts it (G~ Zest., zx loco): “This acet 
rpidxovra admits of considerable latitude, but only in one direc- 
tion, viz., over thirty years.” 

+ “It seems to me absolutely certain that our Lord’s ministry 
lasted for some period above three years ” (Pusey, Danzel, p. 176, 
and see p. 177, note"). This opinion is now held so universally, 
that it is no longer necessary to set forth in detail the grounds 
on which it rests; indeed, recent writers generally assume 


7 


98 THE COMING PRINCE. 


This is opposed, no doubt, to the traditions em- 
bodied in the spurious Acta Pilati so often quoted in 
this controversy, and in the writings of certain of the 
fathers, by whom the fifteenth year of Tiberius was 
held to be itself the date of the death of Christ ; 
“by some, because they confounded the date of the 
baptism with the date of the Passion; by others, 
because they supposed both to have happened in one 
year; by others, because they transcribed from their 
predecessors without examination.”* 

An imposing array of names can be cited in support 
of any year from A.D. 29 to A.D. 33; but such testi- 
mony is of force only so long as no better can be 
found. Just as a seemingly perfect chain of circum- 


without proof that the ministry included four Passovers. The 
most satisfactory discussion of the question which I know of 
is in Hengstenberg’s Christology (Arnold’s trans., §§ 755-765). 
St. John mentions expressly three Passovers at which the Lord 
was present; and if the feast of John v. 1 be a Passover, the 
question is at an end. It is now generally admitted that that 
feast was either Puszm or Passover, and Hengstenberg’s proofs 
in favour of the latter are overwhelming. The feast of Purim 
had no Divine sanction. It was instituted by the decree of 
Esther, Queen of Persia, in the 13th year of Xerxes (B.C. 473), and 
it was rather a social and political than a religious feast, the 
service in the synagogue being quite secondary to the excessive 
eating and drinking which marked the day. It is doubtful 
whether our Lord would have observed such a feast at all; but 
that, contrary to the usual practice, He would have specially 
gone up to Jerusalem to celebrate it, is altogether incredible. 
* Clinton’s Fast Rom., A.D. 29. 


“MESSTAH THE PRINCE.” 99 


stantial evidence crumbles before the testimony of a 
single witness of undoubted veracity and worth, and 
the united voice of half a county will not support a 
prescriptive right, if it be opposed to a single sheet 
of parchment, so the cumulative traditions of the 
Church, even if they were as definite and clear as in 
fact they are contradictory and vague, would not out- 
weigh the proofs to which appeal has here been made. 

One point more, however, claims attention. Nu- 
merous writers, some of them eminent, have discussed 
this question as though nothing more were needed 
in fixing the date of the Passion than to find a year, 
within certain limits, in which the paschal moon was 
full upon a Friday. But this betrays strange for- 
getfulness of the intricacies of the problem. True it 
is that if the system by which to-day the Jewish 
year is settled had been in force eighteen centuries 
ago, the whole controversy might turn upon the 
week date of the Passover in a given year; but on 
account of our ignorance of the embolismal system 
then in use, no weight whatever can be attached to 
it.* While the Jewish year was the old lunisolar 


* “The month began at the phasis of the moon . . . and this 
happens, according to Newton, when the moon is eighteen hours 
old. Therefore the fourteenth Nisan might commence when the 
moon was 13d. 18h. old, and wanted 1d. oh. 22m. to the full. 
[The age of the moon at the full will be 14d. 18h. 22m.] But 
sometimes the Jiasés was delayed till the moon was 1d. 17h, 


100 THE COMING PRINCE. 


year of 360 days, it is not improbable they adjusted 
it, as for centuries they had probably been accustomed 
to do in Egypt, by adding annually the “ complimen- 
tary days” of which Herodotus speaks.* But it is 
not to be supposed that when they adopted the present 
form of year, they continued to correct the calendar 
in so primitive a manner. Their use of the metonic 
cycle for this purpose is comparatively modern.t And 


old; and then if the first Nisan were deferred till the phaszs, 
the fourteenth would begin only rh. 22m. before the full. This 
precision, however, in adjusting the month to the moon did not 
exist in practice. The Jews, like other nations who adopted a 
lunar year, and supplied the defect by an intercalary month, 
failed in obtaining complete accuracy. We know not what 
their method of calculation was at the time of the Christian era” 
(Fasti Rom., vol. ii., p. 240) ; A.D. 30 is the only year between 28 
and 33 in which the phasis of the full moon was on a Friday. 
In A.D. 29 the full moon was on Saturday, and the phasis 
on Monday. (See Wurm’s Table, in Wiesler’s Chron. Syn., 
Venables’s trans., p. 407). 

* Herod. ii. 4. 

+ It was about A.D. 360 that the Jews adopted the metonic 
cycle of nineteen years for the adjustment of their calendar. 
Before that time they used a cycle of eighty-four years, which 
was evidently the calippic period of seventy-six years with a 
Greek octaéteris added. This is said by certain writers to have 
been in use at the time of our Lord, but the statement is very 
doubtful. It appears to rest on the testimony of the later 
Rabbins. Julius Africanus, on the other hand, :states in his 
Chronography that “the Jews insert three intercalary months 
every eight years.” For a description of the modern Jewish 
calendar see Encye, Frit. (gth ed., vol. v., p. 714). 


“MESSIAH .THE PRINCE.” Iol 


it is probable that with the lunar year they obtained 
also under the Seleucide the old eight years’ cycle 
for its adjustment. The fact that this cycle was in 
use among the early Christians for their paschal 
calculations,* raises a presumption that it was bor- 
rowed from the Jews ; but we have no certain know- 
ledge upon the subject. 

Indeed, the only thing reasonably certain upon the 
matter is that the Passover did zo¢ fall upon the days 
assigned to it by writers whose calculations respect- 
ing it are made with strict astronomical accuracy, f 
for the JZzshna affords the clearest proof that the 
beginning of the month was not determined by the 
true new moon, but by the first appearance of her 
disc; and though in a climate like that of Palestine 
this would seldom be delayed by causes which would 
operate in murkier latitudes, it doubtless sometimes 


* Browne, Ordo S@c., § 424. 

t+ See ex. gr. Browne Ordo Sac., § 64. He avers that “if in 
a given year the paschal moon was at the full at any instant 
between sunset of a Thursday and sunset of a Friday, the day 
included between the two sunsets was the 15th Nisan ;” and on 
this ground he maintains that A.D. 29 is the only possible date 
of the crucifixion. As his own table shows, however, no 
possible year (ze, no year between 28 and 33) satisfies this 
requirement; for the paschal full moon in A.D. 29 was on 
Saturday the 16th April, not on Friday the 18th March. This 
view is maintained also by Ferguson and others. It may be 
accounted for, perhaps, by the fact that till recent years the 
Mishna was not translated into English 


102 THE COMING PRINCE. 


happened “that neither sun nor ‘stars for many days 
appeared.”* These considerations justify the state- 
ment that in any year whatever the 15th Nisan may 
have fallen on a Friday.t 

For example, in A.D. 32, the date of the true new 
moon, by which the Passover was regulated, was 
the night (10% 57™) of the 29th March. The 
ostensible date of the 1st Nisan, therefore, according 
to the phasis, was the 31st March.{ It may have 


* Acts xxvii. 20. Treatise Rosh Hashanah of the Mishna 
deals with the mode in which, in the days of the “second 
temple,” the feast of the new moon was regulated. The 
evidence of two competent witnesses was required by the 
Sanhedrim to the fact that they had seez the moon, and the 
numerous rules laid down for the journey and examination of 
these witnesses prove that not unfrequently they came from a 
distance. Indeed, the case of their being “a day and a night 
on the road” is provided for (ch. i. § 9). The proclamation by 
the Sanhedrim, therefore, may have been sometimes delayed 
till a day or even two after the phasis, and sometimes the 
phasis was delayed till the moon was 1d. 17h. old [Clinton, 
Fastt Rom., vol. ii., p. 240]; so that the rst Nisan may have 
fallen several days later than the true new moon. Possibly, 
moreover, it may have been still further delayed by the operation 
of rules such as those of the modern Jewish calendar for pre- 
venting certain festivals from falling on incompatible days. It 
appears from the Mzshna (“‘ Pesachim”) that the present rules 
for this purpose were not in force ; but yet there may have been 
similar rules in operation. 

t See Fasti Rom., vol. ii., p. 240, as to the impossibility of 
determining in what years the Passover fell on Friday. 

£ See p. 99, ante (note.) 


“MESSIAH THE PRINCE.” 103 


been delayed, however, till the 1st April; and in 
that case the 15th Nisan should apparently have 
fallen on Tuesday the 15th April. But the calendar 
may have been further disturbed by intercalation. 
According to the scheme of the eight years’ cycle, 
the embolismal month was inserted in the third, 
sixth, and eighth years, and an examination of the 
calendars from A.D. 22 to AD. 45 will show that A.D. 
32 was the third year of such acycle. As, therefore, 
the difference between the solar year and the lunar 
is 11} days, it would amount in three years to 333 
days, and the intercalation of a thirteenth month 
(Ve-adar) of thirty days would leave an epact still 
remaining of 3? days; and the “ecclesiastical moon” 
being that much before the real moon, the feast day 
would have fallen on the Friday (11th April), 
exactly as the narrative of the Gospels requires.* 


* The following is the scheme of the octaéteris :— 

“The solar year has a length of 3654 days; 12 lunar months 
make 354 days. The difference, which is called the epact or 
epagomené, is 11} days. This is the epact of the first year. 
Hence the epact of the second year = 224 days; of the third, 
333. These 33? days make one lunar month of 30 days, which 
is added to the third lunar year as an intercalary or thirteenth 
month (é€uBortwcpds), and a remainder or epact of 32 days. 
Hence the epact of the fourth year = 11 + 3 =15 days; 
that of the fifth year = 26}; of the sixth, 375, which gives a 
second embolism of 30 days with an epact of 7$. The epact, 
therefore, of the seventh year is 18, and of the eighth = 183 


104 THE COMING PRINCE. 


This, moreover, would explain what, notwithstand- 
ing all the poetry indulged in about the groves and 
grottoes of Gethsemane, remains still a difficulty. 
Judas needed neither torch nor lantern to enable him 
to track his Master through the darkest shades and 
recesses of the garden, nor was it, seemingly, until 
he had fulfilled his base and guilty mission that the 
crowd pressed in to seize their victim. And no 
traitor need have been suborned by the Sanhedrim 
to betray to them at midnight the object of their 
hate, were it not that they dared not take Him save 
by stealth.* Every torch and lamp increased the 
risk of rousing the sleeping millions around them, 
for that night all Judah was gathered to the capital 


+ 11¢ = just 30, which is the third embolism with no epact 
remaining.”—-BROWNE, Ordo Se@c., § 424. 

The days of the Paschal full moon in the years A.D. 22-37 
were as follows; the embolismal years, according to the 
octaéteris, being marked E :— 


A,D. A.D. 

My © * C 5th April | 30, . 6 . 6th April 
22 ee ; a Asin Mienen |) Si, 5 5 . 27th March 
yk, -p : 5 liptan AMoyeil || aya. . 14th April 
255 ee . ‘ ge Aayeil || aye ae : : 3rd April 
20s : o ise Milena || syle : . 23rd March 
ee ; : oth April | 35%, . ‘ . i1th April 
2 Ose A . 29th March | 36, ‘ « 30th March 
20m : 5 Tefal || aye, ; » 18th April 


* Luke xxii. 2-6. 


“ MESSIAH THE PRINCE.” 10§ 


to keep the Paschal feast.* If, then, the full moon 
were high above Jerusalem, no other light were 
needed to speed them on their guilty errand; but 
if, on the other hand, the Paschal moon were only 
ten or eleven days old upon that Thursday night, 
she would certainly have been low on the horizon, 
if she had not actually set, before they ventured 
forth, These suggestions are not made to confirm 
the proof already offered of the year date of the 
death of Christ, but merely to show how easy it is 
to answer objections which at first sight might seem 
fatal. 


* Josephus testifies that an “‘innumerable multitude” came 
together for the feast (Avz., xvii., 9, § 3); and he computes 
that at a Passover before the siege of Jerusalem upwards of 
2,700,200 persons actually partook of the Paschal Supper, 
besides the foreigners present in the city (Wars, vi., 9, § 3). 


CHAP TERGLXY 
THE PASCHAL SUPPER. 


HE trustworthiness of witnesses is tested, not 

by the amount of truth their evidence contains, 
but by the absence of mistakes. A single glaring 
error may serve to discredit testimony which seemed 
of the highest worth. This principle applies with 
peculiar force in estimating the credibility of the 
Gospel narratives, and it lends an importance that 
can scarcely be exaggerated to the question which 
arises in this controversy, Was the betrayal in fact 
upon the night of the Paschal Supper? If, as is so 
commonly maintained, one or all of the Evangelists 
were in error in a matter of fact so definite and plain, 
it is idle to pretend that their writings are in any 
sense whatever God-breathed.* 


* Gcomvevoros, 2 Tim. iii. 16. See Browne’s Ordo Sac., §§ 65-70, 
for an exhaustive discussion of this question, in proof that ‘“ the 
three first Gospels are at variance on this point with the fourth.” 
The matter is treated of in books without number. I here 
deal only with the salient points in the controversy. Arguments 
based upon the Sabbatical observance of the 15th Nisan being 
inconsistent with the events of the morning of the crucifixion are 
worthless. ‘To strain at a gnat and swallow a came!” was 


THE PASCHAL SUPPER. 107 


The testimony of the first three Gospels is united, 
that the Last Supper was eaten at the Jewish Pass- 
over. The attempt to prove that it was an anticipa- 
tory celebration, without the paschal sacrifice, though 
made with the best of motives, is utterly futile. “Now 
on the first day of unleavened bread” (St. Matthew 
declares),* “the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where 
wilt thou that we make ready for Thee to eat the 
Passover?” It was the proposal not of the Lord, but 
of the disciples, who, with the knowledge of the day 
and of the rites pertaining to it, turned to the Master 
for instructions. With yet greater definiteness St. 
Mark narrates that this took place on the first day 
of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover.t 


characteristic of the men who were the actors in these scenes. 
If any one have doubts of it, let him read the M7shna. And 
points such as that the Jews were forbidden to leave their houses 
on the night of the Supper, depend upon confounding the com- 
mands given for the night of the Exodus with the law relative 
to its annual celebration. As well might it be urged that the 
Lord sanctioned and took part in a violation of the law because 
He reclined at supper, instead of standing girded and shod as 
enjoined in Exod. xii. 

* Matt. xxvi. 17 (Revised Version). Inthe Authorized Version 
out translators have perverted the verse. It was not the first 
day of the feast, but th mparn trav dCiper, or, as St. Luke calls it, 
7) hepa Tay akvpor, viz., the day on which leaven was banished 
from their houses, the 14th Nisan, on the evening of which 
the Passover was eaten. 

+ Mark xiv. 12. 


108 THE COMING PRINCE. 


And the language of St. Luke ‘is, if possible, more 
unequivocal still: “Then came the day of unleavened 
bread, when the Passover must be killed.” * 

But it is confidently asserted that the testimony of 
St. John is just as clear and unambiguous that the 
crucifixion took place upon the very day and, it is 
sometimes urged, at the very hour of the paschal 
sacrifice. Many an eminent writer may be cited to 
support this view, and the controversy waged in its 
defence is endless. But no plea for deference to great 
names can be tolerated for a moment when the point 
at issue is the integrity of Holy Writ ; and despite the 
erudition that has been exhausted to prove that the 
Gospels are here at hopeless variance, none who have 
learned to prize them as a Divine revelation will be 
surprised to find that the main difficulty depends 
entirely on prevailing ignorance respecting Jewish 
ordinances and the law of Moses. 

These writers one and all confound the Paschal 
Supper with the festival which followed it, and to 
which it lent its name. The supper was a memorial 
of the redemption of the firstborn of Israel on the 
night before the Exodus; the feast was the anni- 
versary of their actual deliverance from the house 
of bondage. The supper was not a part of the 
feast ; it was morally the basis on which the feast 


* Luke xxii. 7. 


TE PASCHAL SUPPER. 109 


was founded, just as the Feast of Tabernacles was 
based on the great sin-offering of the day of expia- 
tion which preceded it. But in the same way that 
the Feast of Weeks came to be commonly desig- 
nated Pentecost, the feast of Unleavened Bread was 
popularly called the Passover.* That title was com- 
mon to the supper and the feast, and included both; 
but the intelligent Jew would never confound the 
two ; and if he spoke emphatically of the feast of the 
Passover, he would thereby mark the festival to the 
exclusion of the supper.f 

No words can possibly express more clearly this 
distinction than those afforded by the Pentateuch in 
the final promulgation of the Law :—“In the four- 
teenth day of the first month is the Passover of the 
Lord ; and in the fifteenth day of this month is the 
feast.’ { 

Opening the thirteenth chapter of St. John in the 
light of this simple explanation, every difficulty 
vanishes, The scene is laid at the Paschal Supper, 


* See Luke xxii. 1., and compare Josephus, Avz., xiv. 2, I, 
and xvii. 9, 3: “The feast of unleavened bread, which we call 
the Passover.” 

+ Or if the emphasis rested on the last word, the distinction 
would be between Passover and Pentecost or Tabernacles. 

t+ Numb. xxviii. 16, 17. Compare Exod. xii. 14-17, and 
Lev. xxiii. 5, 6, and mark that in the enumeration of the /zasts 
in the twenty-third chapter of Exodus, the Passover (z.¢., 
the Paschal Supper) is omitted altogether, 


110 THE COMING PRINCE. 


on the eve of the festival, “ before the feast of the 
Passover ;” * and after the narration of the washing 


of the disciples’ feet, the evangelist goes on to tell 
of the hurried departure of Judas, explaining that, to 
some, the Lord’s injunction to the traitor was under- 
stood to mean, “ Buy what we have need of against 
the feast.’ + The feast day was a Sabbath, when 
trading was unlawful, and it would seem that the 
needed supply for the festival was still procurable 
far on in the preceding night; for another of the 
errors with which this controversy abounds is the 
assumption that the Jewish day was invariably 
reckoned a vux@nuepov, beginning in the evening.} 


* John xiii. 1. The reader must carefully distinguish 
between verses such as this and those verses where in our 
English version the word “feast” is in italics, denoting that 
it is not in the original. 

+ John xiii. 29. 

{ Such, for instance, was the day of atonement (Lev. xxiii. 
32) and also the weekly Sabbath. But though the Passover 
was eaten between six o’clock and midnight, this period was 
designated in the law, not the beginning of the 15th Nisan, 
but the evening or night of the 14th (compare Exod. xii. 6-8, 
and Lev. xxiii. 5). The 15th, or feast day, was reckoned, 
doubtless, from six o’clock the following morning, for, accord- 
ing to the Mishna (Treatise Berachoth), the day began at six 
o'clock am. These writers would have us believe that the 
disciples supposed that they were there and then eating the 
Passover, and yet that they imagined Judas was despatched 
to buy what was needed for the Passover! 


THESPASCHAL SUPPER, Ill 


_ Such, doubtless, was the common rule, and notably 
in respect of the law of ceremonial cleansing. This 
very fact, indeed, enables us without a doubt to 
conclude that the Passover on account of which 
the Jews refused to defile themselves by entering 
the judgment hall, was not the Paschal Swpper, for 
that supper was not eaten till after the hour at 
which such defilement would have lapsed. In the 
language of the Jaw, “When the sun is down he 
shall be clean, and shall afterwards eat of the holy 
things.”* Not so was it with the holy offerings 
of the feast day, which they must needs eat before 
the hour at which their uncleanness would have 
ceased.t The only question, therefore, is whether 
partaking of the peace offerings of the festival could 
properly be designated as “eating the Passover.” 
The law of Moses itself supplies the answer: “Thou 
shalt sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord thy God 
of the flock and the herd... seven days shalt thou 
eat unleavened bread ¢herewzth.” t 

If then the words of St. John are intelligible only 
when thus interpreted, and if when thus interpreted 


* Wev.-xxiie 7. 

+ Because the day ended at six o’clock. Moreover, we know 
from Jewish writers that these offerings (called in the Zal/mud 
the Chagigah) were eaten between three and six o’clock, and 
ceremeonial uncleanness continued until six o’clock. 

t Deut. xvi. 2, 3, and compare 2 Chron. xxxv. 7, 8. 


112 THE COMING PRINCE. 


they are consistent with the testimony of the three 
first Evangelists, no element is lacking to give cer- 
tainty that the events of the eighteenth chapter 
occurred upon the feast-day. Or if confirmation still 
be needed, the closing verses of this very chapter 
give it, for according to the custom cited, it was at 
the feast that the governor released a prisoner to 
the people.* Fearing because of the populace to 
seize the Lord upon the /cast-day,t the Pharisees 
were eager to procure His betrayal on the night of 
the Paschal Supper. And so it came to pass that 
the arraignment before Pilate took place upon the 
Jestival, as all the Evangelists declare. 

But does not St. John expressly state that it was 
“the preparation of the Passover,” and must not 
this necessarily mean the fourteenth of Nisan? The 
plain answer is, that not a single passage has been 
cited from writings either sacred or profane in which 
that day is so described ; whereas among the Jews 
“the preparation” was the common name for the 
day before the Sabbath, and it is so used by all 
the Evangelists. And bearing this in mind, let the 
reader compare the fourteenth verse of the nine- 
teenth chapter of St. John with the thirty-first and 
forty-second verses of the same chapter, and he 


* John xviii. 39. Compare Matt. xxvii. 15; Mark xv. 6; 
and Luke xxiii. 17. 
t+ Matt. xxvi. 5 ; Mark xiv. 1, 2. 


THE PASCHAL SUPPER. 113 


will have no difficulty in rendering the words in 
question, “it was Passover Friday.”* 

But yet another statement of St. John is quoted 
in this controversy. “That Sabbath day was an 
high day,” he declares, and therefore, it is urged, it 
must have been the 15th of Nisan. The force of 
this “therefore” partly depends upon overlooking 
the fact that all the great sacrifices to which the 
15th of Nisan largely owed its distinctive solemnity, 
were repeated daily throughout the festival.f On 
this account alone that Sabbath was “an high day.” 
But besides, it was specially distinguished as the day 
on which the firstfruits of the harvest were offered 
in the temple; for in respect of this ordinance, 
as in most other points of difference between the 
Karaite Jews, who held to the Scriptures as their 


* jv d€ mapackev) Tod macxa, compare vers. 31 and 42, and 
also Matt. xxvii. 62 ; Mark xv. 42; Luke xxiii. 54. Josephus 
(Ant., xvi., 6, 2) cites an imperial edict relieving the Jews from 
appearing before the tribunals either on the Sabbath or after 
the ninth hour of the preparation day. It is unjustifiable to 
assert that the absence of the article in John xix. 14 precludes 
our giving this meaning to the word mapackevy in that passage. 
In three of the other five verses cited the word is anarthrous, 
for in fact it had come to be the common name for the day, 
and the expression “ Passover Friday” was as natural to a 
Jew as is “Easter Monday” to ourselves. (See Alford’s note 
on Mark xv. 42. Still more valuable is his explanation of 
Matt. xxvii- 62.) 

+ Numb. xxviii. 19-24. Compare Josephus, Aviz., iii, 10, §, 


t14 THE COMING PRINCE. 


only guide, and the Rabbinical Jews, who followed 
the traditions of the elders, the latter were entirely 
in the wrong. 

The law enjoined that the sheaf of the firstfruits 
should be waved before the Lord “on the morrow 
after the (paschal) Sabbath,’* and from that day 
the seven weeks were reckoned which ended with 
the feast of Pentecost. But as the book of 
Deuteronomy expressly ordains that the weeks 
should be counted from the first day of the harvest, 
it is evident that the morrow after the Sabbath 
should not be itself a Sabbath, but a working day. 
The true day for the ordinance, therefore, was the 
day of the resurrection, “the first day of the week” 
following the Passover,t when, according to the in- 


* Lev. xxiii. 10, TI. 

+ Deut. xvi. 9, and comp. Lev. xxiii. 15, 16. 

= The present Jewish calendar is so adjusted that the 14th 
of Nisan shall never fall upon their Sabbath (see Encyc. Brit., 
gth ed., title, Hebrew Calendar); and this, doubtless, was so 
intended, for the duties of the day were inconsistent with the 
due observance of the fourth commandment. Therefore “the 
morrow after the Sabbath” following would invariably be a 
working day, so that the law is perfectly consistent in providing 
that the sheaf should be waved on the first day of the harvest. 
It is only, therefore, ina cycle of years that the true day for 
offering the firstfruits falls on the third day from the Passover ; 
but in the year of the crucifixion, the great antitype, the re- 
surrection of Christ from the dead (1 Cor. xv. 20, 23), occurred 
upon the very day Divinely appointed for the rite. It follows 


THE PASCHAL SUPPER. 418 


tention of the law, the barley harvest should begin, 
and the first sheaf gathered should be carried to the 
Holy Place and solemnly waved before Jehovah. 
But with the Jews all this was lost in the empty rite 
of offering in the temple a measure of meal prepared 
from corn which, in violation of the law, had been 
garnered days before. This rite was invariably 
celebrated on the 16th of Nisan ; and thus synchron- 
izing with the solemnities both of the Paschal festival 
and of the Sabbath, that day could not fail to be 
indeed “an high day.’* 

The argument in proof that the death of Christ 
was on the very day the paschal lamb was killed, 
has gained a fictitious interest and value from the 
seeming fitness of the synchronism this involves. 
But a closer investigation of the subject, combined 
with a broader view of the Mosaic types, will 
dissipate the force of this conclusion. The distinctive 


that the true day of Pentecost must always be on the first day 
of the week (see Lev. xxili. 15, 16), and therefore in that same 
year the true Pentecost was, not the Sabbath day on which the 
Jews observed the feast, but the day which followed it, a fact 
which confirms the presumption that the designedly ambiguous 
word used in Acts ii. 1, means “accomplished,” in the sense of 
passed, and that it was when assembled on “the first day of the 
week” that the Church received the gift of the Holy Ghost. 

* In truth it could not but have been the greatest Sabbath 
of the year, and it is idle to pretend that this is not sufficient 
to account for the mention made of it. 


116 THE COMING PRINCE. 


teaching of Calvinism is based on giving an exclusive 
place to the great sin-offering of Leviticus, in which 
substitution, in its most definite and narrowest sense, 
is essential. The Passover, on the other hand, has 
ever been the most popular of types. But though 
the other typical sacrifices are almost entirely ignored 
in the systems of our leading schools of theology, 
they have no little prominence in Scripture. The 
offerings which are placed first in the book of Levi- 
ticus have a large share in the theology of the 
Epistle to the Hebrews,—the new Testament “ Levi- 
ticus,” whereas the Passover is not even once referred 
to.* Now these Leviticus offeringst marked the 
feast-day,t on which, according to the Gospels, “the 
Messiah was cut off.” 

And other synchronisms are not wanting, still 
more striking and significant. During all His 
ministry on earth, albeit it was spent in humiliation 
and reproach, no hand was ever laid upon the Blessed 
One, save in importunate supplication or in devout 
and loving service. But when at times His enemies 


would fain have seized Him, a mysterious hour to 


* The historical mention of the Passover in Heb. xi. 28 is of 
course no exception. It has no place in the doctrine of the 
Epistle. 

t The burnt-offering, with its meat-offering, the peace-offering 


(the chagigah of the Talmud), and the sin-offering (Lev. i.-iv.). 
t Num. xxviii. 17-24. 


THE PASCHAL SUPPER. - 117 


come was spoken of, in which their hate should be 
unhindered, “This is your hour, and the power 
of darkness,” He exclaimed, as Judas and the 
impious companions in his guilt drew round Him 
in the garden.* Ais hour, He called it, when He 
thought of His mission upon earth: ¢heir hour, when 
in the fulfilment of that mission He found Himself 
within their grasp. 

The agonies inflicted on Him by men have taken 
hold on the mind of Christendom; but beyond and 
above all these the mystery of the Passion is that 
He was forsaken and accursed of God.t In some 
sense, indeed, His sufferings from men were but a 
consequence of this; therefore His reply to Pilate, 
“Thou couldst have no power at all against Me, 
except it were given thee from above.” If men 
seized and slew Him, it was because God had 
delivered Him up. When that destined hour had 
struck, the mighty Hand drew back which till then 
had shielded Him from outrage. His death was not 
the beginning, but the close of His sufferings; in 
truth, it was the hour of His triumph. 


* Luke xxii. 53. 

t+ No reverent mind will seek to analyse the meaning of such 
words, save in so far as they testify to the great fact that His 
sufferings and death were in expiation of our sins. But the 
believer will not tolerate a doubt 4% to the reality and depth of 
their meaning. 


118 THE COMING PRINCE. 


The midnight agony in Gethsemane was thus 
the great antitype of that midnight scene in Egypt 
when the destroying angel flashed through the land. 
And as His death was the fulfilment of His people’s 
deliverance, so it took place upon the anniversary 
of “that selfsame day that the Lord did bring the 
children of Israel out of the land of Egpyt by their 


armies.” * 


* Exod. xii. 51. The Passover of the yearly celebration was 
but a memorial of the Passover in Egypt, which was the true 
type. It was killed, moreover, not at the hour of the Lord’s 
death, but after that hour, between the ninth and the eleventh 
hour (Josephus, Wars, vi., 9, 3). “The elucidation of the 
doctrine of types, now entirely neglected, is an important 
problem for future theologians.” This dictum of Hengstenberg’s 
[Christology (Arnold’s Ed.), § 765] may still be recorded as 
a deserved reproach upon theology, and much that has been 
written in this controversy might be quoted to prove its truth. 

The day of the crucifixion was the anniversary not only 
of the Exodus, but also of the promise to Abraham (comp. 
Exod. xii. 41). 

The day of the resurrection was the anniversary of the cross- 
ing of the Red Sea, and again of the resting of the Ark on 
Ararat (Gen. viii. 4). Nisan, which had been the seventh month, 
became the first month at the Exodus. (See Exod. xii. 2; cf 
Ordo. S@c., § 299.) On the 17th Nisan the renewed earth emerged 
from the waters of the flood; the redeemed people emerged from 
the waters of the sea ; and the Lord Jesus rose from the dead. 


CHAPTER X, 
THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY. 


= HE secret things belong unto the Lord our 
God; but those things which are revealed 


0% 


belong unto us and to our children. And among 
the “things which are revealed” fulfilled prophecy 
has a foremost place. In presence of the events in 
which it has been accomplished, its meaning lies 
upon the surface. Let the facts of the Passion be 
admitted, and their relation to the twenty-second 
Psalm is indisputable. There are profound depths of 
spiritual significance in the Psalmist’s words, because 
of the nature of the facts which have fulfilled them ; 
but the testimony which the prophecy affords is 
addressed to all, and he who runs may read it. Is 
it possible then, it may be asked, that the true 
interpretation of this prophecy of the Seventy Weeks 
involves so much inquiry and discussion ? 

Such an objection is perfectly legitimate; but the 
answer to it will be found in distinguishing between 
the difficulties which appear in the prophecy itself, 
and those which depend entirely on the controversy 


*% Deut. xxix: 29; 


120 THE COMING PRINCE. 


to which it has given rise. The writings of Daniel 
have been more the object of hostile criticism than 
any other portion of the Scripture, and the closing 
verses of the ninth chapter have always been a 
principal point of attack. And necessarily so, for 
if that single passage can be proved to be a prophecy, 
it establishes the character of the book as a Divine 
revelation. Daniel’s visions admittedly describe his- 
torical events between the days of Nebuchadnezzar 
and of Antiochus Epiphanes ; therefore scepticism 
assumes that the writer lived: in Maccabean times. 
But this assumption, put forward without even a 
decent pretence of proof, is utterly refuted by 
pointing to a portion of the prophecy fulfilled at a 
later date; and accordingly it is of vital moment to 
the sceptic to discredit the prediction of the Seventy 
Weeks. 

The prophecy has suffered nothing from the attacks 
of its assailants, but much at the hands of its friends. 
No elaborate argument would be necessary to 
elucidate its meaning, were it not for the difficulties 
raised by Christian expositors. If everything that 
Christian writers have written on the subject could 
be wiped out and forgotten, the fulfilment of the 
vision, so far as it has been in fact fulfilled, would be 
clear upon the open page of history. Out of deference 
to these writers, and also in the hope of removing 
prejudices which are fatal to the right understanding 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY. 12% 


of the subject, these difficulties have here been dis- 
cussed. It now remains only to recapitulate the 
conclusions which have been recorded in the pre- 
ceding pages. 

The sceptre of earthly power which was entrusted 
to the house of David, was transferred to the Gentiles 
in the person of Nebuchadnezzar, to remain in Gentile 
hands “ until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.” 

The blessings promised to Judah and Jerusalem 
were postponed till after a period described as 
“seventy weeks”; and at the close of the sixty-ninth 
week of this era the Messiah should be “ cut off.” 

These seventy weeks represent seventy times seven 
prophetic years of 360 days, to be reckoned from the 
issuing of an edict for the rebuilding of the city— 
“the street and rampart,” of Jerusalem. 

The edict in question was the decree issued by 
Artaxerxes Longimanus in the twentieth year of 
his reign, authorising Nehemiah to rebuild the 
fortifications of Jerusalem. 

The date of Artaxerxes’s reign can be definitely 
ascertained —not from elaborate disquisitions by 
biblical commentators and prophetic writers, but by 
the united voice of secular historians and chronologers. 

The statement of St. Luke is explicit and un- 
equivocal, that our Lord’s public ministry began in 
the fifteenth year of Tiberius Cesar. It is equally 
clear that it began shortly before the Passover, The 


122 THE COMING PRINCE. 


date of it can thus be fixed as between August A.D. 28 
and April A.D. 29. The Passover of the crucifixion 
therefore was in A.D. 32, when Christ was betrayed 
on the night of the Paschal Supper, and put to 
death on the day of the Paschal Feast. 

If then the foregoing conclusions be well founded, 
we should expect to find that the period intervening 
between the edict of Artaxerxes and the Passion was 
483 prophetic years. And accuracy as absolute as 
the nature of the case permits is no more than men 
are here entitled to demand. There can be no loose 
reckoning in a Divine chronology; and if God has 
deigned to mark on human calendars the fulfilment 
of His purposes as foretold in prophecy, the strictest 
scrutiny shall fail to detect miscalculation or mistake. 

The Persian edict which restored the autonomy of 
Judah was issued in the Jewish month of Nisan. It 
may in fact have been dated the Ist of Nisan, but 
no other day being named, the prophetic period 
must be reckoned, according to a practice common 
with the Jews, from the Jewish New Year’s Day.* 
The seventy weeks are therefore to be computed 
from the Ist of Nisan B.c. 445.T 


* “On the Ist of Nisan is a new year for the computation of 
the reign of kings, and for festivals.”—/zshna, treatise “ Rosh 
fTash.” (See p. 102, ante, note). 

+ The wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the 
month Elul, in fifty and two days” (Neh. vi. 15). Now fifty- 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY. 123 


Now the great characteristic of the Jewish sacred 
year has remained unchanged ever since the memo- 
rable night when the equinoctial moon beamed down 
upon the huts of Israel in Egypt, bloodstained by 
the Paschal sacrifice; and there is neither doubt 
nor difficulty in fixing within narrow limits the 
Julian date of the 1st of Nisan in any year what- 
ever. In B.C. 445 the new moon by which the 
Passover was regulated was on the 13th of March 
at 7h. 9m. AM.* And accordingly the 1st Nisan 
may be assigned to the 14th March. 


two days, measured back from the 25th Elul, brings us to the 
3rd Ab. Therefore Nehemiah must have arrived not later than 
Ist Ab, and apparently some days earlier (Neh. ii. 11). Com- 
pare this with Ezra’s journey thirteen years before. “ For upon 
the first day of the first month began he to go up from Babylon, 
and on the first day of the fifth month (Ab) came he to Jeru- 
salem, according to the good hand of his God upon him” 
(Ezra vii. 9). I infer therefore that Nehemiah also set out early 
in the first month. 

The chronological parallelisms between the respective 
journeys of Ezra and Nehemiah have suggested the ingenious 
theory that both went up to Jerusalem together, Ezra vii. and 
Neh. ii. relating to the same event. This is based upon the 
supposition that the regnal years of Artaxerxes, according to 
Persian computation, were reckoned from his birth, a sup- 
position, however, which is fanciful and arbitrary, though 
described by its author as “by no means unlikely” (Zvans. 
SOCMEDLUIEAT CH elle TO ceva DH. Haigh, Athy Heb; 


1873). 
* For this calculation I am indebted to the courtesy of the 


124 THE COMING PRINCE. 


But the language of the prophecy is clear: “From 
the going forth of the commandment to restore and 
to build Jerusalem wzto Messiah the Prince shall be 
seven weeks and threescore and two weeks.” An 
era therefore of sixty-nine “ weeks,” or 483 prophetic 
years reckoned from the 14th March, B.c. 445, should 
close with some event to satisfy the words, “unto 
the Messiah the Prince.” 

The date of the nativity could not possibly have 
been the termination of the period, for then the 
sixty-nine weeks must have énded thirty-three years 
before Messiah’s death, 

If the beginning of His public ministry be fixed 


Astronomer Royal, whose reply to my inquiry on the subject 
is appended : 


“ ROYAL OBSERVATORY, GREENWICH. 
“Sune 26th, 1877. 


“S1R,—I have had the moon’s place calculated from 
Largeteau’s Tables in Additions to the Conmatsance des Tems 
1846, by one of my assistants, and have no doubt of its correct- 
ness. The place being calculated for —444, March 12d. 2oh., 
French reckoning, or March I2d. 8h. P.M., it appears that the 
said time was short of New Moon by about 8h. 47m., and 
therefore the New Moon occurred at 4h. 47m. A.M., March 13th, 
Paris time. 

“Tam, etc., 
(Signed,) G. RB. Arry.” 


The new moon, therefore, occurred at Jerusalem on the 
13th March, B.C. 445 (444 Astronomical) at 7h. 9m. A.M. 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY. 125 


upon, difficulties of another kind present themselves. 
When the Lord began to preach, the kingdom was 
not presented as a fact accomplished in His advent, 
but as a hope the realization of which, though at the 
very door, was still to be fulfilled. He took up the 
Baptist’s testimony, “The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand.” His ministry was a preparation for the 
kingdom, leading up to the time when in fulfilment 
of the prophetic Scriptures He should publicly 
declare Himself as the Son of David, the King of 
Israel, and claim the homage of the nation. It was 
the nation’s guilt that the cross and not the throne 
was the climax of His life on earth. 

No student of the Gospel narrative can fail to see 
that the Lord’s last visit to Jerusalem was not only 
in fact, but in the purpose of it, the crisis of His 
ministry, the goal towards which it had been directed. 
After the first tokens had been given that the nation 
would reject His Messianic claims, He had shunned 
all public recognition of them. But now the twofold 
testimony of His words and His works had been 
fully rendered, and His entry into the Holy City 
was to proclaim His Messiahship and to receive 
His doom. Again and again His apostles even 
had been charged that they should not make 
Him known. But now He accepted the acclama- 
tions of “the whole multitude of the disciples,” 
and silenced the remonstrance of the Pharisees 


126 THE COMING PRINCE. 


with the indignant rebuke, “I tell you if these 
should hold their peace, the stones would immedi- 
ately cry out.” * 

The full significance of the words which follow in 
the Gospel of St. Luke is concealed by a slight 
interpolation in the text. As the shouts broke forth 
from His disciples, “ Hosanna to the Son of David! 
blessed is the king of Israel that cometh in the 
name of the Lord!” He looked off toward the 
Holy City and exclaimed, “If ¢how also hadst 
known, even on this day, the things which belong 
to thy peace; but now they are hid from thine 


{” 


eyes!”+ The time of Jerusalem’s visitation had 
come, and she knew it not. Long ere then the 
nation had rejected Him, but this was the pre- 
destined day when their choice must be irrevocable, 
—the day so distinctly signalised in Scripture as 
the fulfilment of Zechariah’s prophecy, “Rejoice 
greatly, O daughter of Zion! shout, O daughter of 
Jerusalem! behold thy King cometh unto thee!” t 


Of all the days of the ministry of Christ on earth, 


* Luke xix. 39, 40. 

tT ef €yvos kat od Kal ye €v TH Hepa TavTy Ta Tpos Eipnyny Gov’ K.T.A. 
(Luke xix. 42). The received text inserts ov after juépa, but the 
best MSS. (Alex. Vat. Sin., etc.) agree in omitting it. kal od, 
“thou also, as well as these my disciples.” kai ye et quidem— 
“even” (Alford, Gr. Test. 7 loco). The Revised Version reads, 
“Tf thou hadst known zm this day,” etc. 

peZeChenixe os 


THE FULFILMENT OF THE PROPHECY. 123 


no other will satisfy so well the angel’s words, “ unto 
Messiah the Prince.” 

And the date of it can be ascertained. In accord- 
ance with the Jewish custom, the Lord went up to 
Jerusalem upon the 8th Nisan, “six days before the 
Passover.” * But as the 14th, on which the Paschal 
Supper was eaten, fell that year upon a Thursday, 
the 8th was the preceding Friday. He must have 
spent the Sabbath, therefore, at Bethany; and on 
the evening of the oth, after the Sabbath had ended, 
the Supper took place in Martha’s house. Upon the 
following day, the roth Nisan, He entered Jerusalem 
as recorded in the Gospels.f 

The Julian date of that 10th Nisan was Sunday 
the 6th April, A.D. 32. What then was the length 
of the period intervening between the issuing of the 
decree to rebuild Jerusalem and the public advent 
of “Messiah the Prince,”—between the 14th March, 
B.C. 445, and the 6th April, AD. 32? THE INTERVAL 
CONTAINED EXACTLY AND TO THE VERY DAY 


* “When the people were come in great crowds to the feast 
of unleavened bread on the ezghth day of the month Xanthicus,’ 
2.¢., Nisan (Josephus, Wars, vi. 5, 3). “And the Jews’ Pass- 
over was nigh at hand, and many went out of the country up 
to Jerusalem, before the Passover, to purify themselves... . 
Then Jesus, six days before the Passover, came to Bethany” 
(John xi. 55; xii. 1). 

+ Lewin, Fasti Sacriz, p. 230. 


128 THE COMING PRINCE. 


— 


173,880 DAYS, OR SEVEN TIMES SIXTY-NINE PRO- 
PHETIC YEARS OF 360 DAYS, the first sixty-nine 
weeks of Gabriel’s prophecy.* 

Much there is in Holy Writ which unbelief may 
value and revere, while utterly refusing to accept it 


* The 1st Nisan in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes (the edict 
to rebuild Jerusalem) was 14th March, B.c. 445. 

The 1oth Nisan in Passion Week (Christ’s entry into Jeru- 
salem) was 6th April, A.D. 32. 

The intervening period was 476 years and 24 days (the days 
being reckoned inclusively, as required by the language of the 
prophecy, and in accordance with the Jewish practice). 


But 476 x 365 = . : 173,740 days. 

Add (14 March to 6th April, both ister ZA, 

Add for leap years. : ; : WO 4 
173,880 


And 69 weeks of prophetic years of 360 days (or 69 x 7 X 360) 
= 173,880 days. 

It may be well to offer here two explanatory remarks. First: 
in reckoning years from B.C. to A.D., oze year must always be 
omitted ; for it is obvious, ex. gv., that from B.C. I to A.D. I was 
not ¢wo years, but one year. B.C. 1 ought to be described as 
B.C. 0, and it is so reckoned by astronomers, who would describe 
the historical date B.C. 445, as 444 (see note, p. 124, azde). And 
secondly, the Julian year is 11m. 10°46s., or about the 129th 
part of a day, longer than the mean solar year. The Julian 
calendar, therefore, contains three leap years too many in four 
centuries, an error which had amounted to eleven days in 
A.D. 1752, when our English calendar was corrected by declaring 
the 3rd September to be the 14th September, and by intro- 
ducing the Gregorian reform which reckons three secular years 


LSE SRI AIL YERNIE IVA SIGE. LACOVIIMHONG, 4%; 


as Divine; but prophecy admits of no _half-faith. 
The prediction of the “seventy weeks” was either 
a gross and impious imposture, or else it was in the 
fullest and strictest sense God-breathed* It may be 
that in days to come, when Judah’s great home- 
bringing shall restore to Jerusalem the rightful 
owners of its soil, the Jews themselves shall yet 
rake up from deep beneath its ruins the records of 
the great king’s decree and of the Nazarene’s rejec- 
tion, and they for whom the prophecy was given 
will thus be confronted with proofs of its fulfilment. 
Meanwhile what judgment shall be passed on it by 
fair and thoughtful men? To believe that the facts 
and figures here detailed amount to nothing more 
than happy coincidences involves a greater exercise 
of faith than that of the Christian who accepts the 
book of Daniel as Divine. There is a point beyond 
which unbelief is impossible, and the mind in refusing 
truth must needs take refuge in a misbelief which is 


sheer credulity. 


out of four as common years; éx. gv., 1700, 1800 and 1900 are 
common years, and 2000 is a leap year. “ Old Christmas day ” 
is still marked in our calendars, and observed in some localities, 
on the 6th January; and to this day the calendar remains 
uncorrected in Russia. 

* Oeénvevotos (2 Tim. iii. 16). 


NS) 


CHAPTER a. 
PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 


« HIS is a work which I find deficient; but it 

is to be done with wisdom, sobriety, and 
reverence, or not at all.” Thus wrote Lord Bacon 
in treating of what he describes as “history of 
prophecy.” 

“The nature of such a work,” he explains, “ought 
to be that every prophecy of the Scripture be sorted 
with the event fulfilling the same, throughout the 
ages of the world, both for the better confirmation of 
faith and for the better illumination of the Church 
touching those parts of prophecies which are yet un- 
fulfilled : allowing, nevertheless, that latitude which 
is agreeable and familiar unto Divine prophecies; 
being of the nature of their Author with whom a 
thousand years are but as one day, and therefore 
are not fulfilled punctually at once, but have spring- 
ing and germinant accomplishment throughout many 
ages, though the height or fulness of them may refer 
to some one age.” 

If the many writers who have since contributed to 
supply the want Lord Bacon noticed, had given due 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 131 


heed to these wise and weighty words, prophetic 
study might possibly have escaped the reproach 
which comes of its followers being divided into 
hostile camps. With the Christian the fulfilment 
of prophecy does not belong to the region of opinion, 
nor even of fact, merely; it is a matter of /azth. 
We have a right, therefore, to expect that it shall 
be definite and clear. But though the principles 
and maxims of interpretation gained by the study 
of that part of prophecy which was accomplished 
within the era of Holy Writ are by no means to 
be thrown aside when we pass out into post-apostolic 
times, surely there is no presumption against our 
finding hidden in the history of these eighteen 
centuries a primary and partial fulfilment even 
of prophecies which will unquestionably receive a 
final and complete accomplishment in days to 
come. 

Only let us not forget the “wisdom, sobriety, and 
reverence” which such an inquiry demands. In our 
day prophetic students have turned prophets, and 
with mingled folly and daring have sought to fix 
the very year of Christ’s return to earth,—predic- 
tions which possibly our children’s children will 
recall when another century shall have been added 
to the history of Christendom. If such vagaries 
brought discredit only on their authors, it were well. 
But though broached in direct opposition to Scrip- 


132 THE COMING PRINCE. 


ture, they have brought reproach on Scripture 
itself, and have given a stimulus to the jaunty 
scepticism of the day. We might have hoped that 
whatever else might be forgotten, the last words 
which the Lord Jesus spoke on earth would not 
be thus thrust aside: “/¢ zs not for you to know the 
times or thé seasons which the Father hath put in His 
own power.”* But what was denied to inspired 
apostles in days of pristine faith and power, the 
prophecy-mongers of these last: days have dared to 
claim; and the result has been that the solemn 
and blessed hope of the Lord’s return has been 
degraded to the level of the predictions of astro- 
logers, to the confusion and grief of faithful hearts, 
and the amusement of the world. 

Any man who, avoiding extravagant or fanciful 
views, both of history and of Scripture, points to 
events in the present or the past as the correlatives 
of a prophecy, deserves a calm and unprejudiced 
hearing from thoughtful men. But let him not 
forget that though the Scriptures he appeals to 
may thus receive “germinant accomplishment,” “ the 
height or fulness of them may refer” to an age still 
future. What is true of all Scripture is specially 
true of prophecy. It is ours to assign to it a mean- 
ing ; but he who really believes it to be Divine, will 


* Acts i. 7. 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 133 


hesitate to limit its meaning to the measure of his 
own apprehension of it. 

The prophecies of Antichrist afford a signal and 
most apt illustration of this. Were it not for the 
prejudice created by extreme statements, prophetic 
students would probably agree that the great apos- 
tasy of Christendom displays in outline many of 
the main lineaments of the Man of Sin. There is, 
indeed, in our day a spurious liberality that would 
teach us to forego the indictment which history 
affords against the Church of Rome; but while no 
generous mind will refuse to own the moral worth 
of those who, in England at least, now guide the 
counsels of that Church, the real question at issue 
relates to the character, not of individuals, but of a 
system. 

It is the part, therefore, not of intolerant bigotry, 
but of true wisdom, to search the records of the past 
—terrible records, truly—for the means of judging 
of that system. The inquiry which concerns us is 
not whether good men are found within the pale of 
Rome—as though all the moral excellence of earth 
could avail to cover the annals of her hideous guilt! 
Our true inquiry is whether she has suffered any 
real change in these enlightened days. Is the 
Church of Rome reformed? With what vehemence 
the answer would be shrieked from every altar 
within her pale! And if not, let but dark days 


134 THE COMING PRINCE. 


come again, and some of the ‘foulest scenes and 
blackest crimes in the history of Christendom may 
be re-enacted in Europe. “The true test of a man 
is not what he does, but what, with the principles he 
holds, he would do;” and if this be true of indi- 
viduals, it is still more intensely true of communities. 
They do good service, therefore, who keep before 
the public mind the real character of Rome as the 
present day development of the apostasy. 

But when these writers go on to assert that the 
predictions of the Antichrist have their full and final 
realization in the Papacy, their position becomes a 
positive danger tu the truth. It is maintained at the 
cost of rejecting some of the most definite of the 
prophecies, and of putting a lax or fanciful interpre- 
tation upon those very Scriptures to which they 
appeal. 

Indeed, the chief practical evil of this system of 
interpretation is that it creates and fosters a habit 
of reading the Scriptures in a loose and superficial 
manner. General impressions, derived from a 
cursory perusal of the prophecies, are seized upon 
and systematized, and upon this foundation a pre- 
tentious superstructure is built up. As already 
noticed, the Church of Rome displays the chief 
moral lineaments of the Man of Sin. Therefore it 
is an axiom of interpretation with this school that 
the ten-horned beast is the Papacy. But of the 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 135 


beast it is written that “power was given to him 
over all kindreds and tongues and nations, and all 
that dwell upon the earth shall worship him, whose 
names are not written in the book of life.”* Are 
these commentators aware that one-half of Christen- 
dom is outside the pale of Rome, and in antagonism 
to the claims of the Papacy? Or do they suppose 
that all who belong to the Greek and Protestant 
Churches are enrolled in the book of life? By no 
means. But they would tell us the verse does not 
mean exactly what it says.t+ 

Again, the ten-horned beast is the Papacy; the 
second beast, the false prophet, is the Papal clergy ; 
Babylon is Papal Rome. And yet when we turn 
to the vision of the judgment of Babylon, we find 
that it is by the agency of the beast that her doom 
is accomplished! ‘And the ten horns which thou 
sawest, and the beast, these shall hate the whore 
(Babylon), and shall make her desolate, and naked, 
and shall eat her flesh and burn her with fire; for 
God hath put in their hearts to fulfil His will, and 
to agree, and give their kingdom unto the beast, 
until the words of God shall be fulfilled.” ‘“ These 


FORE VEXIL 5c: 

+ According to these interpreters, such a statement must be 
taken cum grano salis, as we term it; and the like remark 
applies to their rendering of every verse of the thirteenth 
chapter of Revelation. 


136 THE COMING PRINCE. 


have one mind, and shall give their power and 
strength unto the beast.’* The governments of 
Christendom, therefore, are to lend their power to 
the Roman Pontiff and priesthood in order to the 
destruction of Papal Rome!+ Can absurdity be 
more transparent and complete ? 

The question here at issue must not be prejudiced 
by misrepresentations, or shirked by turning away 
to collateral points of secondary moment. It is 
not whether great crises in the history of Christen- 
dom, such as the fall of Paganism, the rise of the 
Papacy and of the Moslem power, and the Protestant 
reformation of the sixteenth century, be within the 
scope of the visions of St. John. This may readily 
be conceded. Neither is it whether the fact that 
the chronology of some of these events is marked 
by cycles of years composed of the precise multiples 
of seventy specified in the book of Daniel and the 
Apocalypse, be not a further proof that all forms 
part of one great plan. Every fresh discovery of 


* Rev. xvii. 16, 17, 13. In ver. 16 the best reading, as 
given in the Revised Version, is “awd the beast,” instead 
of “‘ ufo the beast.” 

+ Mr. Elliott’s romance on this subject is disposed of by the 
events of recent years, which have made Rome the peaceful 
capital of Italy. Of the beast and false prophet it is written, 
“These both were cast alive into a lake of fire” (Rev. xix. 20). 
It may be pleasing to Protestant zeal to suppose the Roman 
hierarchy and priesthood are “reserved” for such a fate. 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 137 


the kind ought to be welcomed by all lovers of the 
truth. Instead of weakening confidence in the 
accuracy and definiteness of the prophecies, it 
ought to strengthen the faith which looks for their 
absolute and literal fulfilment. The question is not 
whether the history of Christendom was within the 
view of the Divine Author of the prophecies, but 
whether those prophecies have been fulfilled; not 
whether those Scriptures have the scope and meaning 
which historical interpreters assign to them, but 
whether their scope and meaning be exhausted and 
satisfied by the events to which they appeal as the 
fulfilment of them. It is unnecessary, therefore, to 
enter here upon an elaborate review of the historical 
system of interpretation, for if it fails when tested 
at some one vital point, it breaks down altogether. 

Does the Apocalypse, then, belong to the sphere 
of prophecy accomplished? Or, to reduce the 
controversy to a still narrower issue, have the visions 
of the seals and trumpets and vials been fulfilled ? 
No one will dispute the fairness of this mode of 
stating the question, and the fairest possible method 
of dealing with it will be to set forth some one of 
the leading visions, and then quote fully and 
verbatim what the historical interpreters put forward 
_as the meaning of it. 

The opening of the sixth seal is thus recorded 
by St. John: “And I beheld when he had opened 


138 THE COMING PRINCE. 


the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake ; 
and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and 
the moon became as blood; and the stars of heaven 
fell unto the earth, even as a fig-tree casteth her 
untimely figs, when she is shaken of a mighty 
wind. And the heaven departed as a scroll when 
it is rolled together; and every mountain and island 
were moved out of their places. And the kings 
of the earth, and the great men, and the rich men, 
and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and 
every bondman, and every freeman, hid themselves 
in the dens and in the rocks of the mountains; 
and said to the mountains and the rocks, Fall on 
us, and hide us from the face of Him that sitteth 
on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; 
for the great day of His wrath is come, and who 
shall be able to stand?”* 

The following is Mr. Elliott's commentary upon 
the vision :— 

“When we consider,” he declares, “the terrors 
of these Christ-blaspheming kings of the Roman 
earth, thus routed with their partisans before the 
Christian host, and miserably flying and perishing, 
there was surely that in the event which, according 
to the usual construction of such Scripture figures, 


might well be deemed to answer to the symbols 


* Rey. vi. 12-17. 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 139 


of the prefigurative vision before us: in which 
vision kings and generals, freemen and _ slaves, 
appeared flying to and seeking the caves of the 
rocks to hide them: to hide them from the face 
of Him that sat on the throne of power, even from 
the wrath of the Lamb. 

“Thus under the first shocks of this great earth- 
quake had the Roman earth been agitated, and the 
enemies of the Christians destroyed or driven into 
flight and consternation. Thus, in the political 
heavens, had the sun of pagan supremacy been 
darkened, the moon become eclipsed and _ blood- 
red, and of the stars not a few been shaken violently 
to the ground. But the prophecy had not as yet 
received its entire fulfilment. The stars of the pagan 
heaven had not all fallen, nor had the heaven itself 
been altogether rolled up like a scroll and vanished 
away. On Constantine’s first triumph, and after the 
first terrors of the opposing emperors and their 
hosts, though their imperial edict gave to Christianity 
its full rights and freedom, yet it allowed to the 
heathen worship a free toleration also. But very 
soon there followed measures of marked preference 
in the imperial appointments to the Christians and 
their faith. And at length, as Constantine advanced 
in life, in spite of the indignation and resentment of 
the pagans, he issued edicts for the suppression of 
their sacrifices, the destruction of their temples, and 


140 THE COMING PRINCE. 


the toleration of no other form of public worship but 
the Christian. His successors on the throne followed 
up the same object by attaching penalties of the 
severest character to the public profession of pagan- 
ism. And the result was that, before the century 
had ended, its stars had all fallen to the ground, its 
very heaven, or political and religious system, van- 
ished, and on the earth the old pagan institutions, 
laws, rites, and worship been all but annihilated.” * 

“A more notable instance of inadequate interpre- 
tation cannot be imagined.” | What wonder if men 


* Hore Apocs, Vol. i., pp. 219, 220. 

+ “ Another such landmark is found, I believe, in the interpre- 
tation of the szxth seal: if it be not indeed already laid down in 
what has just been said. We all know what that imagery means 
in the rest of Scripture. Any system which requires it to belong 
to another period than the close approach of the great day of 
the Lord, stands thereby self-condemned. I may illustrate this 
by reference to Mr. Elliott’s continuous historical system, which 
requires that it should mean the downfall of paganism under 
Constantine. A more notable instance of inadequate interpre- 
tation cannot be imagined. 

“Closely connected with this last is another fixed point in 
interpretation. As the seven seals, so the seven trumpets and 
the seven vials run on to the time close upon the end. At the 
termination of each series, the note is unmistakably given that 
such is the case. Of the seals we have already spoken. As to 
the trumpets, it may suffice to refer to ch. x. 7; xi. 18; as to the 
vials, to their very designation ras ¢cydras, and to the yéyovey 
of ch. xvi. 17. Any system which does not recognise this 
common ending of the three, seems to me to stand thereby 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 141 


scoff at the awful warnings of coming wrath, when 
they are told that THE GREAT DAY OF HIS WRATH * 
is past, and that it amounted to nothing more than 
the rout of the pagan armies before the hosts of 
Constantine,—an event which has been paralleled a 
thousand times inthe history of the world ? ¢ 

For, let the point at issue be clearly kept in 
view. If the reign of Constantine or some other 
era in the history of Christendom were appealed 
to as affording an intermediate fulfilment of the 
vision, it might pass as a feeble but harmless 
exposition ; but these expositors daringly assert that 
the prophecy has no other scope or meaning.{ They 
are bound to prove that the vision of the sixth seal 
has been fulfilled; else it is obvious that all which 
follows it claims fulfilment likewise. If, therefore, 


their system failed at this point alone, its failure 


convicte of error.,—ALFORD, Gy. Test., 1V., Part II., ch. viil., 
Siig Bil Bee 

* 4) Hepa 7) peyddn THs dpyns avrod (Rey. vi. 17). 

+ If such statements were put forward in wantonness, and 
not in folly, they would suggest a reference to the solemn words, 
“Tf any man shall ¢ake away from the words of the book of 
this prophecy——” (Rev. xxii. 19). 

{ When the historical interpreters approach the Second 
Advent, they lose the courage of their opinions, and earnestly 
contend for literalness, though if their scheme be genuine, the 
predicted return of Christ may surely have its fulfilment in 
the present revival of religion and the concurrent spread of 
Christianity. 


142 THE COMING PRINCE. 


would be absolute and complete; but in fact the 
instance quoted is no more than a fair example of 
the manner in which they fritter away the meaning 
of the words they profess to explain. 

We are now, they tell us, in the era of the Vials. 
At this very hour the wrath of God is being poured 
out upon the earth.* Surely inen may well exclaim, 
—comparing the present with the past, and judging 
this age to be more favoured, more desirable to live 
in than any age which has preceded it,—Is this all 
the wrath of God amounts to! The vials are the 
seven last plagues, “for in them zs filled up the wrath 
of God,’ and we are told that the sixth is even at 
this moment being fulfilled in the disruption of the 
Turkish Empire! Can any man be so lost in the 
dreamland of his own lucubrations as to imagine that 
the collapse of the Turkish power is a Divine judg- 
ment on an unrepentant world!f Such it may 


* “ And I saw another sign in heaven, great and marvellous, 
seven angels having the seven last plagues, for in them is filled 
up the wrath of God. .., And the seven angels came out of 
the temple, having the seven plagues. . . . And one of the four 
beasts gave unto the seven angels seven golden vials, full of the 
wrath of God, who liveth for ever and ever... . And I hearda 
great voice out of the temple saying to the seven angels, Go 
your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon 
the/ earth” (Rev. xv- 156,°7 5) xvi. 1): 

+ The Austrian Pester Lloyd of 21st Nov., 1879, in comment- 
ing on the British line of policy with regard to Turkish affairs, 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 143 


appear to be to the clique of Pachas, who, ghoul-like, 
fatten on the misery around them; but untold 
millions would hail it as a blessing to suffering 
humanity, and ask with wonder, If this be a crowning 
token of the wrath of God, how are simple souls to 
distinguish between the proofs of His favour and of 
His direst anger! 

If the event were cited as a primary fulfilment, 
within this day of grace, of a prophecy which strictly 
belongs to the coming day of wrath, it would merit 
respectful attention ; but to appeal to the dismember- 
ment of Turkey as the full realization of the vision, 
is the merest trifling with the solemn language of 
Scripture, and an outrage on common sense. 

But there are principles involved in this system 
of interpretation far deeper and more momentous 
than any which appear upon the surface. It is in 
direct antagonism with the great foundation truth of 
Christianity. 

St. Luke narrates* how, after the temptation, the 
Lord “returned in the power of the Spirit into 
Galilee,” and entering the synagogue of Nazareth on 


charged Lord Beaconsfield’s government with “confounding 
Mohammedanism with the Turks, the latter having been always 
regarded as the scum of Mohammedanism by all Mohammedan 
nations who were conscious of their own strength.” Prophetic 
students appear to be thoroughly possessed by this error, 

* Luke iv. 19, 20. 


144 THE COMING PRINCE. 


the Sabbath day, as His custom was, He stood up to 
read. There was handed Him the book of Isaiah’s 
prophecy, and all eyes being fastened on Him, He 
opened it and read these words, “The Spirit of the 
Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to 
preach the gospel to the poor; He hath sent me to 
heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the 
captives, and the recovering of sight to the blind, to 
set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the 
acceptable year of the Lord.” 

“And the day of vengeance of our God” are the 
words which followed, without a break, upon the open 
page before Him; but, the record adds, “He closed 
the book, and He gave it again to the minister, and 
sat down.” In an age to come, when the prophecy 
shall have its ultimate fulfilment, the day of ven- 
geance shall mingle with blessing to His people. * 
But the burden of His ministry on earth was only 
peace.f And it is the burden of the gospel still. 
God’s attitude toward men is grace. ‘GRACE 
REIGNS.” It is not that there is grace for the peni- 
tent or the elect, but that grace is the principle on 
which Christ now sits upon the throne of God. 
“Upon His head are many crowns, but His pierced 
hand now holds the only sceptre,” for the Father has 


* Compare Isa. Ixiii. 4: “For the day of vengeance is in 
mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is come.” 
+ “ He came and preached peace” (Eph. ii. 17). 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 145 


given Him the kingdom; all power is His in heaven 
and on earth. “The Father judgeth no man, but 
hath committed all judgment to the Son;”* but His 
mission to earth was not to judge, but only to save. 
And Ile who is thus the only Judge is now exalted 
to be a Saviour, and the throne on which He sits 
is a throne of grace. Grace is reigning, through 
righteousness, unto eternal life.f “The light of this 
glorious gospel now shines unhindered upon earth. 
Blind eyes may shut it out, but they cannot quench 
or lessen it. Impenitent hearts may heap up wrath 
against the day of wrath, but they cannot darken 
this day of mercy or mar the glory of the reign of 
grace.” t 

It will be in “the day of wrath” that the “seven 
last plagues,” wherein is “ filled up the wrath of God,” 
shall run their course; and it is merely trifling with 
solemn and awful truths to talk of their being now 


* John v. 22. Comp iii. 17, and xil. 47. 

+ Rom. v. 21. 2 

t The Gospel and its Ministry, p. 136. True it is that the 
great principles of God’s moral government of the world remain 
unchanged, and sin is thus ever working out its own punish- 
ment. But this must not be confounded with immediate Divine 
action in judgment. “The Lord knoweth how to reserve the 
unjust Zo the day of gudgment, to be punished” (2 Peter ii. 9). 
Or, according to Rom. ii. 5, ‘‘ After thy hardness and impeni- 
tent heart treasurest up unto thyself wrath against the day of 


wrath.” 
10 


146 THE COMING PRINCE. 


fulfilled. Whatever intermediate fulfilment the vision 
may be now receiving, the full and final realization 
of it belongs to a future time. 

And these pages are not designed to deal with the 
primary and historical fulfilment of the prophecies, 
or, as Lord Bacon terms it, their “springing and 
germinant accomplishment throughout many ages.” 
My subject is exclusively the absolute and final fulfil- 
ment of the visions in that “one age” to which, in 
their “height and fulness,” they belong. 

The Scripture itself affords many striking instances 
of such intermediate or primary fulfilment; and in 
these the main outlines of the prophecy are realized, 
but not the details. The prediction of Elijah’s advent 
is an instance.* In the plainest terms the Lord de- 
clared the Baptist’s ministry to be within the scope of 
that prophecy. In terms as clear He announced that 
it would be fulfilled in days to come, by the reappear- 
ance upon earth of the greatest of the prophets.t 
St. Peter’s words at Pentecost afford another illus- 
tration. Joel's prophecy shall yet be realized to the 
letter, but yet the baptism of the Holy Ghost was 
referred to it by the inspired Apostle.t 

To speak of the fulf/ment of these prophecies as 


* “Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet, before the 
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord” (Mal. iv. 5). 

+ Matt. xi. 14, and xvii. 11, 12. 

{ Joel ii. 28-32 ; Acts ii. 16-21. 


PRINCIPLES OF INTERPRETATION. 147 


already past, is to use language at once unscriptural 
and false. Far more unwarrantable still is the asser- 
tion of finality, so confidently made, of the prophecies 
relating to the apostasy. There is not a single 
prophecy, of which the /w/flment is recorded in 
Scripture, that was not realized with absolute 
accuracy, and in every detail; and it is wholly un- 
justifiable to assume that a new system of fulfilment 
was inaugurated after the sacred canon closed. 

Two thousand years ago who would have ventured 
to believe that the -prophecies of Messiah would 
receive a literal accomplishment! “ Behold, a virgin 
shall conceive, and bear a son.”* “Behold, thy King 
cometh unto thee: He is just, and having salvation ; 
lowly, and.riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the 
foal of an ass.”t “ They weighed for my price thirty 
pieces of silver;” “And I took the thirty pieces 
of silver and cast them to the potter in the house of 
the Lord.”t “They part my garments among them, 
and cast lots upon my vesture.”§ “ They pierced 
my hands and my feet.” || “They gave me vinegar 
to drink.’ “ He was cut off out of the land of the 
living ; for the transgression of my people was He 


stricken.”** 


* Isa. vii. 14. techy ixa 0} 

i Zech. xI-12,-13.. Comp, Matt. xxvii. 5,7. 

§ Psalm xxii. 18. Comp. John xix. 23, 24. 

|| Psalm xxii. 16. “Psalm Ixix. 21. **# Tsa. lui. 8. 


145 THE COMING PRINCE. 


To the prophets themselves, even, the meaning of 
such words was a mystery.* For the most part 
doubtless, men regarded them as no more than poetry 
or legend. And yet these prophecies of the advent 
and death of Christ received their fulfilment in every 
jot and tittle of them. Literalness of fulfilment may 
therefore be accepted as an axiom to guide us in the 


study of prophecy. 


* 1 Peter i. 10-12. 


CHAPTER XIT: 
THE FULNESS OF THE GENTILES. 


HE main stream of prophecy runs in the channel 
of Hebrew history. This indeed is true of all 
revelation. Eleven chapters of the Bible suffice to 
cover the two thousand years before the call of 
Abraham, and the rest of the old Testament relates 
to the Abrahamic race. If for a while the light of 
revelation rested on Babylon or Susa, it was because 
Jerusalem was desolate, and Judah was in exile. 
For a time the Gentile has now gained the foremost 
place in blessing upon earth; but this is entirely 
anomalous, and the normal order of God’s dealings 
with men is again to be restored. ‘Blindness in 
part is happened to Israel uzzz/ the fulness of the 
Gentiles be come in. And so all Israel shall be 
saved, as it is written.”* 
The Scriptures teem with promises and prophecies 


* Rom. xi. 25, 26. The coming in of the fulness of the 
Gentiles must not be confounded with the fulfilment of the times 
of the Gentiles (Luke xxi. 24). The one refers to spiritual 
blessing, the other to earthly power. Jerusalem is not to be 
the capital of a free nation, independent of Gentile power, until 
the true Son of David comes to claim the sceptre. 


150 THE COMING PRINCE. 


in favour of that nation, not a tithe of which have 
yet been realized. And while the impassioned 
poetry in which so many of the old prophecies are 
couched is made a pretext for treating them as hyper- 
bolical descriptions of the blessings of the Gospel, 
no such plea can be urged respecting the Epistle to 
the Romans. Writing to Gentiles, the Apostle of 
the Gentiles there reasons the matter out in presence 
of the facts of the Gentile dispensation. The natural 
branches of the race of Israel have been broken off 
from the olive tree of earthly privilege and blessing, 
and, “contrary to nature,” the wild olive branches, 
of Gentile blood have been substituted for them. 
But in spite of the warning of the Apostle, we Gen- 
tiles have become “wise in our own conceits,” for- 
getting that the olive tree whose “root and fatness ” 
we partake of, is essentially Hebrew, for “the gifts 
and calling of God are without repentance.” 

The minds of most men are in bondage to the 
commonplace facts of their experience. The pro- 
phecies of a restored Israel seem to many as 
incredible as predictions of the present triumphs 
of electricity and steam would have appeared to our 
ancestors a century ago. While affecting independ- 
ence in judging thus, the mind is only giving proof 
of its own impotence or ignorance. Moreover, the 
position which the Jews have held for eighteen 


centuries is a phenomenon which itself disposes 


THE FULNESS OF THE GENTILES. 151 


Mo 


of every seeming presumption against the fulfilment 
of these prophecies. 

It is not a question of how a false religion like 
that of Mahomet can maintain an unbroken front in 
presence of a true faith; the problem is very different. 
Not only in a former age, but in the early days of the 
present dispensation, the Jews enjoyed a preference 
in blessing, which practically amounted almost to a 
monopoly of Divine favour. In its infancy the Chris- 
tian Church was essentially Jewish. The Jews within 
its pale were reckoned by thousands, the Gentiles by 
tens. And yet that same people afterwards became, 
and for eighteen centuries have continued to be, more 

dead to the influence of the Gospel than any other 
class of people upon earth. How can “this mys- 
tery,” as the Apostle terms it, be accounted for, save 
as Scripture explains it, namely, that the era of 
special grace to Israel closed with the period histori- 
cally within the Acts of the Apostles, and that since 
that crisis of their history “blindness in part is 
happened” to them ? 

But this very word, the truth of which is so clearly 
proved by public facts, goes on to declare that 
this judicial hardening is to continue only “ udézl 
the fulness of the Gentiles be come in;” and the 
inspired Apostle adds, “And so all Israel shall 
be saved; as it is written, There shall come out 


of Sion the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungod- 


152 THE COMING PRINCE. 


liness from Jacob; for this is. My covenant unto 
Phemiiee 

But, it may with reason be demanded, does not 
this imply merely that Israel shall be brought within 
the blessings of the Gospel, not that the Jews shall be 
blessed on a principle which is entirely inconsistent 
with the Gospel? Christianity, as a system, assumes 
the fact that in a former age the Jews enjoyed a 
peculiar place in blessing: “Christ was a minister of 
the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the 
promises made unto the fathers, and that the Gentiles 
might glorify God for His mercy.”t But the Jews 
have lost their vantage-ground through sin, and 
they now stand upon the common level of ruined 
humanity. The Cross has broken down “the middle 
wall” which separated them from Gentiles. It has 
levelled all distinctions. As to guilt “there is no 


5] 


difference, for a// have sinned ;” as to mercy “ there 
is no difference, for the same Lord over all is rich 
unto a// that call on Him.” How then, if there be 
no difference, can God give blessing on a principle 
which implies that there zs a difference? Ina word, 
the fulfilment of the promises to Judah is absolutely 
inconsistent with the distinctive truths of the present 


dispensation. 


* Rom. xi. 25, 26. Not every Israelite, but Israel as a nation 
(Alford, Gr. Test., an loco). 
+ Rom. xv. 8, 9. 


THE FULLNESS OF THE GENTILES. 153 


This question is one of immense importance, and 
claims the most earnest consideration. Nor is it 
enough to urge that the eleventh chapter of Romans 
itself supposes that in this age the Gentile has an 
advantage, though not a priority, and, therefore, 
Israel may enjoy the like privilege hereafter. It is 
part of the same revelation, that although grace 
stoops to the Gentile just where he is, it does not 
confirm him in his position as a Gentile, but lifts 
him out of it and denationalizes him; for in the 
Church of this dispensation “there is neither Jew 
nor Gentile.”* Judah’s promises, on the contrary, 
imply that blessing will reach the Jew as a Jew, not 
only recognizing his national position, but confirming 
him therein. 

The conclusion, therefore, is inevitable, that before 
God can act thus, the special proclamation of grace 
in the present dispensation must have ceased, and 
a new principle of dealing with mankind must have 
been inaugurated. 

But here the difficulties only seem to multiply 
and grow. For, it may be asked, does not the 
dispensation run its course until the return of Christ 
to earth? How then can Jews be found at His 
coming in a place of blessing zationally, akin to that 


* Gal. iii. 28. Contrast these with the Lord’s words in John 
iv. 22, “Salvation is of the Jews.” 


154 THE COMING PRINCE. 


which they held in a bygone age? All will admit 
that Scripture seems to teach that such will be the 
case.* The question still remains whether this be 
really intended. Does Scripture speak of any crisis 
in relation to the earth, to intervene before “the day 
when the Son of man shall be revealed”? 

No one who diligently secks the answer to this 
inquiry can fail to be impressed by the fact that 
at first sight some confusion seems to mark the 
statements of Scripture with respect to it. Certain 
passages testify that Christ will return to earth, and 
stand once more on that same Olivet on which His 
feet last rested ere He ascended to His Father ;f and 
others tell us as plainly that He will come, not to 
earth, but to the air above us, and call His people 
up to meet Him and be with Him.{ These Scrip- 
tures again most clearly prove that it is His believing 
people who shall be “caught up,’§ leaving the world 
to run its course to its destined doom ; while other 
Scriptures as unequivocally teach that it is not His 
people but the wicked who are to be weeded out, 


leaving the righteous “to shine forth in the kingdom 


* In proof of this, appeal may be made to these very pro- 
phecies of Daniel ; and later prophecies testify to it still more 
plainly, notably the book of Zechariah. 

i eZechuexivaemeA Cts iam lamos 

Pp Uebhesssivertoser7s 

S Lid. {0 Corwen 52: 


THE FUGNESS OF LHE GENTILES. 155 


of their Father.”* And the confusion apparently 
increases when we notice that Holy Writ seems 
sometimes to represent the righteous who are to be 
thus blessed as Jews, sometimes as Christians of a 
dispensation in which the Jew is cast off by God. 

These difficulties admit of only one solution, a 
solution as satisfactory as it is simple; namely, that 
what we term the second advent of Christ is not a 
single event, but includes several distinct manifesta- 
tions. At the first of these He will call up to Him- 
self the righteous dead, together with His own 
people then living upon earth. With this event this 
special “day of grace” will cease, and God will 
again revert to “the covenants” and “the promises,” 
and that people to whom the covenants and promises 
belong ¢ will once more become the centre of Divine 
action toward mankind. 

Everything that God has promised is within the 
range of the believer’s hope;{ but this is its near 
horizon. All things wait on its accomplishment. 
Before the return of Christ to earth, many a page 
of prophecy has yet to be fulfilled, but not a line of 
Scripture bars the realization of this the Church’s 


* Matt. xiii. 40-43. + Rom. ix. 4. 

t “We, according to His promise, look for new heavens and 
a new earth” (2 Peter iii. 13). Long ages of time and events 
innumerable must intervene before the realization of this hope, 
and yet the kelicver is looking for it, 


156 THE COMING PRINCE. 


special hope of His coming ta take His people to 
Himself. Here, then, is the great crisis which will 
put aterm to the reign of grace, and usher in the 
destined woes of earth’s fiercest trial—“the days of 
vengeance, that all things which are written may be 
fulfilled.” * 

To object that a truth of this magnitude would 
have been stated with more dogmatic clearness is 
to forget the distinction between doctrinal teaching 
and prophetic utterance. The truth of the second 
advent belongs to prophecy, and the statements of 
Scripture respecting it are marked by precisely the 
same characteristics as marked the Old Testament 
prophecies of Messiah.f 

“The sufferings of Christ and the glories which 
should follow” were foretold in such a way that a 
superficial reader of the old Scriptures would have 
failed to discover that there were to be two advents 
of Messiah. And even the careful student, if un- 
versed in the general scheme of prophecy, might 
have supposed that the two advents, though morally 
distinct, should be intimately connected in time. 
So is it with the future. Some regard the second 
advent as a single event; by others its true cha- 
racter is recognised, but they fail to mark the 


AM ukerxxi22 
+ For an admirable treatise on these characteristics of pro- 
phecy, see Hengstenberg’s Christology (Arnold’s tran.), § 222 


THE FULNESS OF THE GENTILES. 157 


interval which must separate its first from its final 
stage. An intelligent apprehension of the truth 
respecting it is essential to the right understanding 
of unfulfilled prophecy. 

But having thus clearly fixed these principal land- 
marks to guide us in the study, we cannot too 
strongly deprecate the attempt to fill up the in- 
terval with greater precision than Scripture warrants. 
There are definite events to be fulfilled, but no one 
may dogmatize respecting the time or manner of 
their fulfilment. No Christian who estimates aright 
the appalling weight of suffering and sin which each 
day that passes adds to the awful sum of this world’s 
sorrow and guilt, can fail to long that the end may 
indeed be near; but let him not forget the great 
principle that “the longsuffering of our Lord is 


29 


salvation,” * nor yet the language of the Psalm, “A 
thousand years in Thy sight are but as yesterday 
when it is past, and as a watch in the night.” f 
There is much in Scripture which seems to justify 
the hope that the consummation will not be long 
delayed; but, on the other hand, there is not 
a little to suggest the thought that before these 
final scenes shall be enacted, civilization will 
have returned to its old home in the east, and, 


perchance, a restored Babylon shall have become 


= 2 Peter iii. 15. + Psalm xc. 4. 


158 THE COMING PRINCE. 


the centre of human progress and of apostate 
religion.” 

To maintain that long ages have yet to run their 
course would be as unwarrantable as are the pre- 
dictions so confidently made that all things shall 
be fulfilled within the current century. It is only 
in so far as prophecy is within the seventy weeks 
of Daniel that it comes within the range of chron- 
ology at all, and Daniel’s vision primarily relates 
to Judah and Jerusalem.t 


* Isa. xill. appears to connect the final fall of Babylon with 
the great day that is coming (comp. vers. I, 9, 10, 19); and in 
Jer. 1. the same event is connected with the future restoration 
and union of the two houses of Israel (ver. 20). I make the 
suggestion, however, merely as a caveat against the idea that 
we have certainly reached the last days of the dispensation. 
If the history of Christendom should run on for another thou- 
sand years, the delay would not discredit the truth of a single 
statement in Holy Writ. 

+ No one of Daniel’s visions, indeed, has a wider scope. 
Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel treat of Israel (or the ten tribes) ; 
but Daniel deals only with Judah. 


CHAPTER X1in 
THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 


HE connecting link between the past and the 

future, between the fulfilled and the unfulfilled 
in prophecy, will be found in the Gospel of St. 
Matthew. 

The chief Messianic promises are grouped in 
two great classes, connected respectively with the 
names of David and of Abraham, and the New 
Testament opens with the record of the birth and 
ministry of Messiah as “the Son of David, the son 
of Abraham ;”* for in one aspect of His work He 
was “a minister of the circumcision for the truth 
of God, to confirm the promises made unto the 
fathers.” | The question of the Magi, “ Where is 
He that is born king of the Jews?” aroused a 
hope which was part of the national politics of 
Judah; and even the base Idumean who then 
usurped the throne was sensible of its significance : 
‘‘ Herod was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.t 


* Matt. 1.1. + Rom. xv. 8. 
+ Matt. ii. 3. It must not be imagined that it was any 
religious emotion which disturbed the king. The announce- 


160 THE COMING PRINCE. 


And when the proclamation afterwards was made, 
first by John the Baptist, and finally by the Lord 
and His apostles, “The kingdom of heaven is at 
hand,” the Jews knew well its import. It was not 
“the Gospel,” as we understand it now, but the 
announcement of the near fulfilment of Daniel’s 
prophecy.* And the testimony had a _ twofold 
accompaniment. “The Sermon on the Mount” is 
recorded as embodying the great truths and prin- 
ciples which were associated with the Kingdom 
Gospel; and the attendant miracles gave proof that 
all was Divine. And in the earlier stages of the 
ministry of Christ, His miracles were not reserved 
for those whose faith responded to His words; the 
only qualification for the benefit was that the re- 
cipient should belong to the favoured race. ‘“‘Go 
not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city 
of the Samaritans enter ye not: but go rather to 
the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And as ye 


go, preach, saying, The kingdom of heaven is at 


ment of the Magi was-to him what the news of the birth of 
an heir is to an heir-presumptive. The Magi asked, “‘ Where 
is He that is born King of the Fews?” Herod’s inquiry, 
therefore, to the Sanhedrim was, “Where should JZessiah 
be born?” and on being referred to the prophecy which so 
plainly designated Bethlehem, he determined to destroy every 
infant child in that city and district. Herod and the Sanhe- 
drim had not learned to spiritualize the prophecies. 
* Cf Pusey, Daniel, p. 84. 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 161 


hand. Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the 
dead, cast out devils: freely ye have received, 
”* Such was the commission under 
which the twelve went forth through that little 


land, to every corner of which their Master’s fame 


freely give. 


had gone before them.t 

But the verdict of the nation, through its ac- 
credited and responsible leaders, was a rejection of 
His Messianic claims.~| The acts and words of 
Christ recorded in the twelfth chapter of Matthew 
were an open and deliberate condemnation and 
defiance of the Pharisees, and their answer was to 


meet in solemn council and decree His death.§ 


* Matt. x. 5-8. The chapter is prophetic, in keeping with 
the character of the book, and reaches on to the testimony 
of the latter days (see ex. gr., ver. 23). 

+ Matt. iv. 24, 25. 

{ In our own time the Jews have had the temerity to publish 
a translation of the (/zshua, and the reader who will peruse 
its treatises can judge with what contempt and loathing the 
Lord must have regarded the religion of those miserable men. 
The treatise Sadéath will afford an invaluable commentary 
on the twelfth of Matthew. The AZzshua is a compilation of 
the oral traditions of the Rabbins, made in the second century, 
A.D., to prevent their being lost by the dispersion—the very 
traditions, many of them, which prevailed when the Lord was 
on earth, and which He so unsparingly condemned as under- 
mining the Scriptures, for then as now the Jews regarded 
them as possessing a Divine sanction. (Cf Lindo’s Fewish 
Cal., Introd. ; Milman’s Ast. Fews, Book XVIII.) 

§ Matt. xii. 1-14. 

I! 


162 THE COMING PRINCE. 


From that hour His ministry entered upon a new 
phase. The miracles continued, for He could not 
meet with suffering and refuse to relieve it; but 
those whom thus He blessed were charged “that 
they should not make Him known.”* The Gospel 
of the Kingdom ceased; His teaching became 
veiled in parables,t and the disciples were forbidden 
any longer to testify to His Messiahship.{ 

-The thirteenth chapter is prophetic of the state 
of things which was to intervene between the time 
of His rejection and His return in glory to claim 
the place which in His humiliation was denied Him. 
Instead of the proclamation of the Kingdom, He 
taught them “the mysteries of the Kingdom.’§ His 
mission changed its character, and instead of a 


King come to reign, He described Himself as a 


* Matt. xii. 16. 

+ bid. xiii. 3, 13. “From the expression 7#p£aro in Mark, 
compared with the question of the disciples in ver. 10,—and 
with ver. 34,—it appears that this was the frst beginning of 
our Lord’s teaching by parables, expressly so delivered, and 
properly so called. And the natural sequence of things here 
agrees with and confirms Matthew’s arrangement against those 
who would place (as Ebrard) all this chapter before the 
Sermon on the Mount. He there spoke without parables, 
or mainly so; and continued to do so till the rejection and 
misunderstanding of His teaching led to His judicially adopting 
the course here indicated, ywpis map. ovdév éeAdder adrois.”— 
ALFORD, Gr. Test., Matt. xiii. 3. 

t /bid. xvi. 20. § Lbid. xiii. 11. 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 163 


Sower sowing seed. Of the parables which follow, 
the first three, spoken to the multitude, described 
the outward results of the testimony in the world; 
the last three, addressed to the disciples,* speak 
of the hidden realities revealed to spiritual minds. 
But these very parables, while they taught the 
disciples in the plainest terms that everything was 
postponed which the prophets had led them to 
look for in connection with the Kingdom, taught 
them no less clearly that the day would surely 
come when all should be fulfilled ; when evil should 
be rooted out, and the Kingdom established in 
righteousness and peace.t They thus learned that 
there was to be an “age” of which prophecy took 
no account, and another “ Advent” at its close; 
and “the second Sermon on the Mount” was 
the Lord’s reply to the inquiry, “What shall be 
the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the 


age?” t 


* As were also the interpretations of the Parables of the 
Sower and of the Tares. 

+ Matt. xiii. 41-43. 

{ Matt. xxiv. 3. “As He sat upon the Mount of Olives, the 
disciples came unto Him.’ Compare Matt. v. 1: “He went 
up into a mountain, and when He was set, His disciples came 
unto Him.” The Sermon on the Mount unfolded the principles 
on which the Kingdom would be set up. The King having 
been rejected by the nation, the second Sermon on the Mount 
unfolded the events which must precede His return 


164 THE COMING PRINCE. 


The twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew has been 
well described as “the anchor of apocalyptic inter- 
pretation,” and “the touchstone of apocalyptic sys- 


tems,”’* 


The fifteenth verse specifies an event and 
fixes an epoch, by which we are enabled to connect 
the words of the Lord with the visions of St. 
John, and both with the prophecies of Daniel. The 
entire passage is obviously prophetic, and its fulfil- 
ment clearly pertains to the time of the end. The 
fullest and most definite application of the words 
must therefore be to those. who are to witness 
their accomplishment. To them it is that the warn- 
ing is specially addressed, against being deceived 
through a false hope of the zmmediate return of 
Christ. t 

A series of terrible events are yet to come; but 
“these are the deginning of sorrows;” “the end 
is not yet.” How long these “sorrows” shall 
continue is not revealed. The first sure sign that 
the end is near will be the advent of the fiercest 
trial that the redeemed on earth have ever known. 


* Alford, Gr. Test., vol. iv., Pt. Il. Proleg. Rev. 

+ Matt. xxiv. 4,6. That is, the fal stage of the advent; 
not His coming as foretold in 1 Thess. iv. and elsewhere, which 
has no signs preceding. See p. 154, ante. 

To refer verse 5 to the times of Barcochab involves a glaring 
anachronism. The grimary reference in vers. 15-20, and, 
therefore, of the earlier portion of the prophecy, was to the 
period ending with the destruction of Jerusalem. 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 165 


The fulfilment of Daniel’s vision of the defilement 
of the Holy Place is to be the signal for immediate 
flight; “for then shall be ¢he great tribulation,” * 
unparalleled even in Judah’s history. But, as already 
noticed, this last great persecution belongs to the 
latter half of Daniel’s seventieth week,f and there- 
fore it affords a landmark by which we can deter- 
mine the character and fix the order of the chief 
events which mark the closing scenes foretold in 
prophecy. 

With the clew thus obtained from the Gospel of 
St. Matthew, we can turn with confidence to study 
the Apocalyptic visions of St. John. But first it 
must be clearly recognised that in the twenty-fourth 
of Matthew, as in the book of Daniel, Jerusalem 
is the centre of the scene to which the prophecy 
relates ; and this of necessity implies that the Jews 
shall have been restored to Palestine before the 
time of its fulfilment. t 

Objections based on the supposed improbability of 
such an event are sufficiently answered by marking 
the connection between prophecy and miracle. The 
history of the Abrahamic race, to which prophecy 
is so closely related, is little else than a record of 


* Vers. 15-21. Comp. Dan. xii. 1. Seep. 84, ante. 

t+ See p. 84, ante. 

+ The question of their restoration to a place of blessing 
spiritually has already been discussed. See pp. 149-152, ante. 


166 THE COMING PRINCE. 


miraculous interpositions. “Their passage out of 
Egypt was miraculous. Their entrance into the 
promised land was miraculous. Their prosperous 
and their adverse fortunes in that land, their servi- 
tudes and their deliverances, their conquests and 
their captivities, were all miraculous. The entire 
history from the call of Abraham to the building 
of the sacred temple was a series of miracles. It 
is so much the object of the sacred historians to 
describe these that little else is recorded.... 
There are no historians in the sacred volume of 
the period in which miraculous intervention was 
‘ withdrawn. After the declaration by the mouth 
of Malachi that a messenger should be sent to 
prepare the way, the next event recorded by any 
inspired writer is the birth of that messenger. But 
of the interval of 400 years between the promise 
and the completion no account is given.” * 

The seventy years from Messiah’s birth to the 
dispersion of the nation were fruitful in miracle and 
prophetic fulfilment. But the national existence of 
Israel is as it were the stage on which alone the 
drama of prophecy can, in its fulness, be displayed ; 
and from the Apostolic age to the present hour, 
not a single public event can be appealed to as 
affording indisputable proof of zmmediate Divine 


* Clinton, Fasti H., vol. i., p. 243. 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 167 


intervention upon earth.* A silent heaven is a 
leading characteristic of the dispensation in which 
our lot is cast. But Israel’s history has yet to be 
completed ; and when that nation comes again upon 
the scene, the element of miraculous interpositions 
will mark once more the course of events on earth. 

On the other hand, the analogy of the past would 
lead us to expect a merging of the one dispensation 
in the other, rather than an abrupt transition; and 
the question is one of peculiar interest on general 
grounds, whether passing events are not tending 
towards this very consummation, the restoration of 
the Jews to Palestine. 

The decline of the Moslem power is one of the 
most patent of public facts; and if the dismember- 
ment of the Turkish Empire be still delayed, it is due 
entirely to the jealousies of European nations, whose 
rival interests seem to render an amicable distribution 
of its territories impossible. But the crisis cannot be 
deferred indefinitely ; and when it arrives, the question 
of greatest moment, next to the fate of Constanti- 
nople, will be, What is to become of Palestine? Its 
annexation by any one European state is in the 
highest degree improbable. The interests of several 


* There is, doubtless, what may be called the private miracle 
of individual conversion, and the believer has transcendental 
proof not only of the existence of God, but of His presence 
and power with men (see pp. 10-14, ante). 


168 THE COMING PRINCE. 


of the first-rate Powers forbid it.. The way will thus 
be kept open to the Jews, whenever their inclinations 
or their destinies lead them back to the land of their 
fathers, 

Not only would no hostile influence hinder their 
return, but the probabilities of the case (and it is 
with probabilities that we are here concerned) are in 
favour of the colonization of Palestine by that people 
to whom historically it belongs. There is some 
reason to believe that a movement of this kind has 
already begua; and if, whether by the Levant be- 
coming a highway to India, or from some other 
cause, any measure of prosperity should return to 
those shores that were once the commercial centre 
of the world, the Jews would migrate thither in 
thousands from every land. 

True it is that to colonize a country is one thing, 
while to create a nation is another. But the testi- 
mony of Scripture is explicit that Judah’s national 
independence is not to be regained by diplomacy or 
the sword. Jerusalem is to remain under Gentile 
supremacy until the day when Daniel’s visions shall 
be realized. In the language of Scripture, “Jeru- 
salem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles until 
the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.’ * But long ere 


* Luke xxi. 24. That is, till the end of the period during 
which earthly sovereignty, entrusted to Nebuchadnezzar twenty- 
five centuries ago, is to remain with the Gentiles (see p. 32, azzée) 


THE SECOND SERMON ON THE MOUNT. 169 


then the Cross must supplant the Crescent in Judea, 
else it is incredible that the Mosque of Omar should 
give place to the Jewish Temple on the Hill of Zion. 

If the operation of causes such as those above 
indicated, conjointly with the decay of the Moslem 
power, should lead to the formation of a protected 
Jewish state in Palestine, possibly with a military 
occupation of Jerusalem by or on behalf of some 
European Power or Powers, nothing more need be 
supposed than a religious revival among the Jews, to 
prepare the way for the fulfilment of the prophecies. * 


’ 


“God has not cast away His people;” and when 


the present dispensation closes, and the great purpose 
has been satisfied for which it was ordained, the 
dropped threads of prophecy and promise will again 
be taken up, and the dispensation historically broken 
off in the Acts of the Apostles, when Jerusalem was 
the appointed centre for God’s people on earth, f will 


* The following extract from the Fewish Chronicle of 9th 
Nov., 1849, is quoted in Mr. Newton’s Tex Kingdoms (2nd Ed., 
p. 401) :—“ The European Powers will not need to put them- 
selves to the trouble of restoring the Jews individually or 
collectively. Let them but confer upon Palestine a constitution 
like that of the United States ... and the Jews will restore 
themselves. They would then go cheerfully and willingly, and 
would there piously bide their time for a heaven-inspired Messiah, 
who is to restore Mosaism to its original splendour.” 

+ Gentiles were then admitted within the pale, not on an 
equality, but in some sense as proselytes had been received 


170 THE COMING PRINCE. 


be resumed, Judah shall again become a nation, 
Jerusalem shall be restored, and that temple shall be 
built in which the “abomination of desolation” is to ~ 


stand. * 
within the nation. The Church was essentially Jewish, The 
temple was their place of resort (Acts ii. 46; iii. 1, v. 42). Their 
testimony was in the line of the old prophecies to the nation 
(zbid. iii. 19-26, see p. 78, ate), and even when scattered by 
persecution, the apostles remained in the metropolis, and those 
who were driven abroad evangelized only among the Jews (zdzd. 
viii. 1,4, and xi. 19). Peter refused to go among Gentiles save 


after a special revelation to him (zézd¢. x.), and he was put on 
his defence before the Church for going at all (zd¢d. xi. 2-18. 
Comp. chap. xv.) 

* Scattered among the people will be a “remnant,” who will 
“keep the commandments of God, and have the testimony of 
Jesus Christ” (Rev. xii. 17); Jews, and yet Christians ; Jews, 
but believers in the Messiah, whom the zation will continue to 
reject until the time of His appearing. It must be obvious to 
the thoughtful mind that such prophecies as the twenty-fourth 
of Matthew imply that there will be a believing people to be 
comforted and guided by them at the time and in the scene of 
their fulfilment. 


CHAPTER. XIV, 
THE PATMOS VISIONS. 


TARROWNESS of interpretation is the bane of 
apocalyptic study. “The words of this pro- 
phecy,” “Things which must shortly come to pass :” 
such is the Divine description of the Book of the 
Revelation and of its contents. No one, therefore, 
is justified in denying to any portion of it a future 
application. The Book in its entirety is prophetic, 
Even the seven epistles, though they were un- 
doubtedly addressed to Churches then existing, and 
though their intermediate reference to the history of 
Christendom is also clear, may well have a special 
voice in days to come for those who are to enter the 
fierce trials that shall precede the end.* 


* The Bible is not intended for the present dispensation only, 
but for the people of God in every age; and it is incredible 
that they who are to be so severely tried shall fail to find in 
it words specially fitted and intended to counsel and comfort 
them in view of what they are to endure. “ This prophecy” is 
the Divine description of the Apocalypse as a whole (Rev. i. 3). 
Compare the “ must shortly come to pass ” of Rev. i. 1 with the 
“must shortly be done” of xxii. 6. The salutation (i. 4, 5) 
seems to fix the dispensational place of the Book as future. 
It is not the Father, but Jehovah ; not the Lord Jesus Christ, 


172 THE COMING PRINCE. 


In the fourth chapter the throne is set in heaven. 
Judgment now waits on grace ; but when the day 
of grace is past, judgment must intervene ere the 
promises and covenants, with all their rich store of 
blessings, can be fulfilled. But who can unfold that 
scroll that lies on the open hand of Him who sits 


upon the throne?* No creature in the universe f 


but “ Jesus Christ the faithful witness, the Prince of the kings 
of the earth;” and the Book speaks from a time when the 
Holy Spirit, as a person, will again be in heaven, to join in 
the salutation, which He never does in the Epistles of the New 
Testament. 

Rey. i. 19 is frequently quoted to prove that the Book is 
divided, and that the latter part only is prophetic. In refuta- 
tion of this, I appeal to the most candid of apocalyptic com- 
mentators, Dean Alford, who thus translates the verse : “ Write 
therefore the things which thou sawest, and what things they 
signify, and the things which are about to happen after these.” 
He explains “the things which thou sawest” to be “the vision 
which was but now vouchsafed thee,” and the closing words as 
“the things which shall succeed these, ze, a future vision” 
(Greek Test., tn loco). 

In ch. iv. 1, Alford inclines to give to the second pera ratra 
the general meaning of “hereafter.” But the presumption is 
that the words are used at the end of the verse in the same 
sense as at the beginning, z.e., “‘ after these things.” The words 
imply that the fulfilment of the subsequent visions should be 
future, relatively to the fulfilment of the preceding vision, and 
not relatively merely to the time when the vision was given, 
which was a matter of course. 

* Rev. v. 2. 

+ Jord. 3. It is not, as in English Version, “no maz,” but 
ovdeits. The Revised Version properly reads “no one.” 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 173 


may dare to look on’ it, and God Himself will not 
break a single seal of it, for the Father has ceded 
the prerogative of judgment. The ministry of grace 
may be shared by all whom grace has blessed, but 
the Son of man is the only Being in the universe 
who can take the initiative in judgment ; * and amid 
the anthems of the heavenly beings round the throne, 
and the swelling chorus of myriads of myriads of 
angels, echoed back by the whole creation of God, 
the Crucified of Calvary, “a Lamb, as it had been 
slain,” takes up the book and prepares to break the 
seals. 

It is at the fifth seal that the vision crosses the 
lines of the chronology of prophecy.{ Of the earlier 
seals, therefore, it is unnecessary to speak in detail. 
They are evidently descriptive of the events to which 
the Lord referred in the twenty-fourth chapter of 
Matthew, as preceding the great final persecution ; 
—wars and unceasing threats of war, kingdoms in 
arms rushing on one another to destruction; and 
then famine, to be followed again by pestilence, 
hunger and the sword still claiming their victims, 


* John v. 22-27. + Rev. v. 5-14. 

t Because the fifth seal relates to the great persecution of 
the future, which, as already noticed, is within the seventieth 
week. The first four seals relate to the events preceding in 
time the fulfilment of the fifteenth verse of the twenty-fourth of 
Matthew. Compare the sixth and seventh verses of that 
chapter with Rev. vi. 1-8. 


174 THE CUMING PRINCE. 


and others being seized by strange and nameless 
deaths in the ever-gathering horrors of these cumu- 
lative woes.* 

According to the twenty-fourth chapter of Matthew, 
the tribulation is to be followed immediately by the 
signs and portents which the old prophets have 
declared will heraid “the great and terrible day of 
the Lord.” So in the Apocalypse the martyrs of the 
tribulation are seen in the fifth seal,f and in the 
sixth, the advent of the great day of wrath is pro- 
claimed, the precise events being named which the 
Lord had spoken of on the Mount of Olives, and 
Joel and Isaiah had foretold long centuries before.t 


* Rev. vi. 2-8. + bid. 9. 

t “The day of the Lord cometh. ... The sun shall be turned 
into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and 
the terrible day of the Lord come” (Joel ii. 1-31). ‘The day 
of the Lord cometh. ...The sun shall be darkened in his going 
forth, and the moon shall not cause her light to shine” (Isa. 
xiii. 9, 10). “Immediately after the tribulation of those days 
shall the sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her 
light, and the stars shall fall from heaven” (Matt. xxiv. 29). 
“There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the 
stars” (Luke xxi. 25). “The sun became black as sackcloth of 
hair, and the moon became as blood” (compare Joel ii. 31), 
“and the stars of heaven fell unto the earth” (Rev. vi. 12, 13). 

I entirely agree with the following note of Dean Alford’s 
(Greek Test., Matt. xxiv. 29):—“ Such prophecies are to be 
understood /terally, and indeed, without such understanding 
would lose their truth and significance. The physical signs 
shall happen as accompaniments and intensifications of the 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 175 


Like the dull, oppressive calm which precedes the 
fiercest storms, there is silence in heaven when the 
last seal is broken,* for the day of vengeance has 
dawned. The events of the earlier seals were Divine 
judgments, doubtless, but of a providential character, 
and such as men can account for by secondary causes. 
But God has at length declared Himself, and as it 
has been in the past, so now, the occasion is an out- 
rage committed on His people. The cry of martyrs 
is come up in remembrance before God,f and it is the 
signal for the trumpet blasts which herald the out- 
pouring of the long-pent-up wrath.+ 

To write a commentary on the Apocalypse within 
the limits of a chapter would be impossible, and the 
attempt would involve a departure from the special 
purpose and subject of these pages. But it is essen- 
tial to notice and keep in view the character and 
method of the Apocalyptic visions. . The seer, be it 
remembered, was not privileged to read a single line 
of what was written “within and on the back side” 
of the sealed scroll of the fifth chapter; but as each 
seal was broken, some prominent characteristic of a ~ 
portion of its contents was communicated to him in 


awful state of things which the description typifies.” Not of 

course that the moon will really become blood, any more than 

that the stars will fall. The words describe Ahenomena which 

men will witness, and which will strike terror into their hearts. 
* Rev. vill. I. t Lbid. 3 t loid. 6. 


176 THE COMING PRINCE. 


a vision. The main series of the visions, therefore, 
represent events in their chronological sequence. 
But their course is occasionally interrupted by paren- 
thetical or episodical visions ; sometimes, as between 
the sixth and seventh seals, reaching on to the time 
of the end, and more frequently, as between the sixth 
and seventh trumpets, representing details chrono- 
logically within the earlier visions. The first and 
most important step, therefore, towards a right under- 
standing of the Apocalypse is to distinguish between 
the serial and the episodical visions of the Book, and 
the following analysis is offered to promote and assist 
inquiry upon the subject.*-— 

Chap. vi—The visions of the first six seals ; repre- 
senting events in their chronological order. 

[Chap. vii—Parenthetical ; the first vision relating 
either to the faithful remnant of the fifth seal, or 
to an election in view of the judgments of the seventh 
seal; the second, reaching on to the final deliver- 
ance. | 

Chaps. viii, ix—The opening of the seventh seal. 
The visions of the first six trumpets; consecutive 
judgments, in their chronological order. 

[Chaps. x.-xi. 13.—Parenthetical, containing the 
hidden mystery of the seven thunders (x. 3, 4) and 


* The passages containing the parenthetical visions are 
marked in square brackets. 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 177 


the testimony of the witnesses (the latter being 
probably within the era of the fifth seal.)] 

Chap. xi. 15-19.—The seventh trumpet; the third 
and last woe (comp. viii. 13; ix. 12; xi. 14), preced- 
ing the establishment of the kingdom (comp. x. 7; 
xieT5): 

[Chaps. xii.-xviii—Parenthetical.] 

Chap. xiiii—The rise and career of the two great 
blasphemers and persecutors of the last days, 

Chap. xiv—The remnant of chap. vil, seen in 
blessedness. 

The everlasting Gospel (vers. 6, 7). 

The fall of Babylon (ver. 8). 

The doom of the worshippers of the Beast (vers. 
Q-II). 

The revelation of Christ, and final judgments, 
(vers. 14-20). 

Chap. xv.—A vision of events chronologically with- 
in chapter vili., the opening the seventh seal. (This 
appears from the fact that the faithful of the fifth 
seal are here represented as praising God in view 
of the judgments impending,—see vers. 2-4; which 
judgments are within the seventh seal.) 

Chap. xvii—The seven vials; a second series of 
visions of the events of the seven trumpets, This 
appears— 

First, because the seventh trumpet and the seventh 


vial both relate to the final catastrophe. Under the 
I2 


178 THE COMING PRINCE. 


seventh trumpet, the mystery of God is finished (x. 7), 
and the temple of God is opened, and there are 
lightnings, voices, thunders, and an earthquake (xi. 19). 
Under the seventh vial, “It is done!” is heard from 
the temple, and there are voices, thunders, lightnings, 
and an earthquake (xvi. 17, 18). 

Second, because the sphere of the judgments is 
the same in the correlative visions of both series :— 
Tr, Lhevearth, 2, The: sea.-3 The fivers: 4 ahie 
sun’, 5, The pit,thé seat: ofthe beast. 6,7iu- 
phrates. 7, Heaven, the air. | 

[Chaps. xvii., xviii—Detailed visions of the de- 
velopment and doom of Babylon, “the harlot,” 
whose fall has been within the seventh trumpet 
and seventh vial; the last series of judgments of 
the seventh seal (xi. 18; xvi. 19).] 

Chap. xix.—The doom of the harlot being accom- 
plished (ver. 2), the glory of the bride follows (ver. 7) ; 
the glorious revelation of Christ, and the destruction 
consequent thereon of the beast and false prophet 
(ver. 20). 

Chap. xx.—Satan is bound. The millennial reign 
of the saints (vers. I-4). 

After the millennial reign, Satan is loosed, and once 
more deceives the nations. Satan is cast into the lake 
of fire. The judgment of the Great White Throne. 

Chaps, xxi., xxii. I-5.—The new heaven and new 


earth. 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 179 


Chap. xxii. 6-21.—Conclusion.* 
As the last trumpet and the last vial embrace 
the final judgments of the day of vengeance, which 


* I purposely pass over chap. xii., because of the exceptional 
difficulties which attend the interpretation of it. “ Anything 
within reasonable regard for the analogies and symbolism of the 
text seems better than the now too commonly received historical 
interpretation, with its wild fancies and arbitrary assignments of 
words and figures” (Alford, Greek. Test., Rev. xii. 15, 16). The 
only reasonable interpretation I have seen is that which regards 
the ‘“‘man-child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron,” 
and who “was caught up to Ged and His throne,” as being the 
Lord Jesus Christ, and the woman as representing that people 
“of whom, as concerning the flesh, Christ came” (Rom. ix. 5). 
But the objections to this are considerable. First, past historical 
facts are thus introduced into a vision relating to the future. I 
am. not aware of any other instance of this in Scripture 
Secondly, the main features of the vision after ver. 5 are not 
accounted for by the facts. 

The following remarks are offered merely to assist inquiry 
and not at all as expressing a formed opinion on the matter. 
The 1,260 days during which the woman is persecuted is pre- 
cisely the period of “the great tribulation.” Ver. 7 declares 
that during the woman’s flight, Michael the Archangel tought on 
her behalf. Dan. xii. 1, referring to the time of Antichrist’s 
power, states that “at that time shall Michael stand up, the 
great prince which standeth for the children of the people ; and 
there shall be a time of trouble,” etc., describing “the great 
tribulation” which is to continue 1,260 days. 

Again, the Old Scriptures clearly point to the career of a 
future David, a deliverer of the Jews, who will become their 
earthly leader at that time, and reign over them in Jerusalem 
afterwards See, ¢g., Ezek. xxxvii. 22-25, about David the 


180 THE COMING PRINCE, 


precede the advent of the glotious kingdom, they 
necessarily include the doom of the two great anti- 
christian powers of the last days,—the imperial 
represented by the ten-horned beast, and the eccle- 
siastical typified by the scarlet woman. The visions 
of the thirteenth and seventeenth chapters, therefore, 
are interposed, descriptive of the rise and de- 
velopment of these powers. These accordingly 
give us details which relate to events within the 
earlier seals, for the martyrs of the fifth seal are 
the victims of the great persecutor of the thirteenth 
chapter. 

If the foregoing scheme be correct in the main, 
the eras included in the Revelation may be divided 
thus :— 

1. The seven Churches; the transitional period 
following the close of the Christian dispensation.”* 

2. The seven seals; the period during which all 
that prophecy has foretold shall precede the kingdom 
will be fulfilled, 


Prince, who is certainly not Christ, seeing he is to have a palace 
in Jerusalem and a definite inheritance in the land, and who, 
moreover, is to offer burnt-offerings, etc. (Ezek. xlv. 17). I sup- 
pose this is the great military conqueror of Isa. Ixiii. 1-3. 

May not then Rev xii. refer to this personage, who is to be 
Christ’s vicegerent on earth, and who will, in fact, rule over all 
nations? 

* That is, assuming that this portion of the Book has a 
prophetical aspect. 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 181 


3. The kingdom; to be followed, after a final 
interval of apostasy, by— 

4. The eternal state; the new heaven and new 
earth. 

It is manifestly within the period of the seals that 
the prophecies of Daniel have their fulfilment, and 
the next inquiry should be directed to ascertain the 
points of contact between the visions of St. John 
and the earlier prophecies. 

As already noticed, it is only in so far as pro- 
phecy falls within the seventy weeks that it comes 
within the range of human chronology. And further, 
the seventieth week will be a definite period, of 
which the epoch, the middle, and the end are defi- 
nitely marked. The epoch of the first week, that is, 
of the prophetic period as a whole, was not the 
return of the Jews from Babylon, nor yet the 
rebuilding of their temple, but the signing of the 
Persian decree which restored their national position. 
So also the beginning of the last week will date, not 
from their restoration to Judea, nor yet from the 
future rebuilding of their shrine, but from the signing 
of the treaty by “the coming Prince,” which pro- 
bably will once more recognize them as a nation.* 

But it is obvious that this personage must have 
_ attained to power before the date of that event ; 


* See v. 86. arte. 


182 THE COMING PRINCE. 


and it is expressly stated * that his rise is to be after 
that of the ten kingdoms which are hereafter to 
divide the Roman earth. It follows, therefore, that 
the development of these kingdoms, and the rise of the 
great Kaiser who is to wield the imperial sceptre in 
the last days, must be prior to the beginning of the 
seventieth week.t 

And within certain limits, we can also fix the order 
of the subsequent events. The violation of the 
treaty by the defilement of the Holy Place is to 
occur “in the midst of the week.’{ That event, 
again, is to be the epoch of the great persecution by 
Antichrist,§ which is to last precisely three and a 
half years ; for his power to persecute the Jews is to 
be limited to that definite period.|| “Immediately 
after the tribulation of those days shall the sun be 
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light.” 
Such is the statement of the twenty-fourth of Mat- 


* Dan. vii. 24. 

+ I do not assert that he will have reached the zenith of his 
power before that date. On the contrary, it seems extremely 
probable that the treaty with the Jews will be one of the steps 
by which he will raise himself to the place he is destined to 
hold, and that as soon as he has attained his end, he will throw 
off the mask and declare himself a persecutor. So Irenzus 
teaches, and he possibly gives what was the tradition of the 
apostolic age. 

ak Dehay, ibe Oye § Matt. xxiv. 15-21. 

|| Dan. vii. 25 ; Rev. xiii. 5. G Matt. xxiv. 29. 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 183 


thew ; and the sixth of Revelation exactly coincides 
with it, for the vision of the fifth seal embraced the 
period of “the tribulation ” ; and when the sixth seal 
was opened, “the sun became black as sackcloth of 
hair, and the moon became as blood,” and the cry 
went forth, “The great day of His wrath is come.”* 
In keeping with this, again, is the prophecy of Joel: 
‘The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the 
moon into blood, before the great and the terrible 
day of the Lord come.’f The events of this day of 
vengeance are the burden of the vision of the seventh 
seal, including the judgment of Babylon, the scarlet 
woman—or the religious apostasy—by the agency 
of the imperial power {—the beast, whose fearful 
end is to bring the awful drama to a close.§ 

We have definite grounds, therefore, for assigning 
the following order to the events of the last 
days :— 

I, The development of the ten kingdoms, 

2. The appearance within the territorial limits of 
these kingdoms of an eleventh “king,” who will 
subdue three of the ten, and will ultimately be 
accepted as Suzerain by all. 

3. The making of a treaty by this king with, or 
in favour of, the Jews. The epoch of the seventieth 


week. 


Ae Reveavia 12> 17. + Joel ii. 31. 
tf Rev. xvii. 16, 17. S INGE seb, Ae) 


184 THE COMING PRINCE. 


4. The violation of the treaty by this king after 
three and a half years. 

5. “ The great tribulation” of Scripture, the awful 
persecution of the last days, which shall continue 
three and a half years. 

6. The deliverance of the Jews from their great 
enemy, to be followed by their final establishment in 
blessing. The close of the seventieth week. 

7. “The great and terrible day of the Lord,” the 
period of the seventh seal, beginning with a revela- 
tion of Christ to His people, in Jerusalem, accom- 
panied by appalling manifestations of Divine power 
and ending with His last glorious advent. 

That the seventieth week will be the last seven 
years of the dispensation, and the term of the reign 
of Antichrist, is a belief as old as the writings of the 
Ante-Nicene Fathers. But a careful examination 
of the statements of Scripture will lead to some 
modification of this view. The fulfilment to Judah 
of the blessings specified in Dan. ix. 24 is all that 
Scripture expressly states will mark the close of the 
seventieth week. Antichrist will then be driven out 
of Judea; but there is no reason whatever to suppose 
he will otherwise lose his power. As already shown, 
the seventieth week ends with the period of the fifth 
seal, whereas the fall of Babylon is within the era of 
the seventh seal. No one may assert that that era 
will be of long duration, and it will probably be 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 18 


brief; but the only certain indication of its length 
is that it will be within a single lifetime, for at its 
close the Antichrist is to be seized alive, and hurled 
to his awful doom.* 

The analogy of the past might lead us to expect 
that the events foretold to occur at the end of the 
seventieth week would follow immediately at its 
close. But the Book of Daniel expressly teaches 
that there will be an interval. Whatever view be 
taken of the earlier portion of the eleventh of Daniel, 
it is clear that “the king” of the thirty-sixth and 
following verses is the great enemy of the last days. 
His wars and conquests are predicted,f and the 
twelfth chapter opens with the mention of the pre- 
dicted time of trouble, “the great tribulation” of 
Matthew and Revelation. The seventh verse speci- 
fies the duration of the “time of trouble” as “a 
time, times, and a half,” which, as already shown,t 
is the half week, or 1,260 days. But the eleventh 
verse expressly declares that from the date of the 
event which is to divide the week, and which, ac- 
cording to Matthew xxiv., is to be the signal of perse- 
cution, there shall be 1,290 days; and the twelfth 


* Rey. xix. 20. 

+ He is neither king of the north nor of the south, for both 
these kings shall invade his territory (ver. 40), z.¢., the powers 
which shall then respectively possess Syria and Egypt. 

i Seep: 73; azze. 


186 THE COMING PRINCE. 


verse postpones the blessing to 1,335 days, or 
seventy-five days beyond the close of the prophetic 
weeks. 

If therefore “the day of the Lord” follows im- 
mediately upon the close of the seventieth week, it 
seems that Judah’s complete deliverance is not to 
take place until after that final period has begun. 
And this is expressly confirmed by the fourteenth 
chapter of Zechariah. It is a prophecy than which 
none is more definite, and the difficulties which beset 
the interpretation of it are in no degree overcome by 
refusing to read it literally. It seems to teach that 
at that time Jerusalem is to be taken by the allied 
armies of the nations, and that at the moment when 
a host of prisoners are being led away, God will 
intervene in some miraculous way, as when He 
destroyed the army of Pharaoh at the Exodus.* 


* “The day of battle” (Zech. xiv. 3). The prophet adds: 
“And His feet shall stand on that day upon the Mount of 
Olives.” I cannot conceive how any one can suppose this 
to be the great and final advent in glory as described in Matt. 
xxiv. 30 and other Scriptures. 

“The prophecy (Zech. xiv.) seems literal. If Antichrist be 
the leader of the nations, it seems inconsistent with the state- 
ment that he will at this time be sitting in the temple as God at 
Jerusalem ; thus Antichrist outside would be made to besiege 
Antichrist within the city. But difficulties do not set aside 
revelations; the event will clear up seeming difficulties ” 
(Fausset’s Commentary, tn loco). It is idle to speculate on such 
a matter, but I presume the city will have revolted against the 


THE PATMOS VISIONS. 187 


Comparison with the prophecy of the twenty-fourth 
chapter of St. Matthew is the surest and strictest 
test which can be applied to these conclusions. 
After fixing the epoch and describing the character 
of the great persecution of the last days, the Lord 
thus enumerates the events which are to follow at 
its close:*—First the great natural phenomena pre- 
dicted; then the appearance of the sign of the Son 
of man in heaven; then the mourning of the tribes 
of the land ;f and finally the glorious advent. 


great enemy during his absence at the head of the armies of the 
empire, and that thereupon he will turn back to reconquer it. 
History repeats itself. Moreover, there is no reason to believe 
that he will reside in Jerusalem, though presumably he will have 
a palace there, and as part of a blasphemous pageant, will sit 
enthroned in the temple. That Jerusalem should be captured 
by a hostile army at such a time will seem less strange if it be 
remembered first that the true people of God therein shall have 
warning to leave the city at the beginning of these troubles 
(Matt. xxiv. 15, 16), and secondly, that the deliverance of the 
capital is to be the last act in the deliverance of Judah (See 
Zech. xii. 7). 

* Immediately after the tribulation of those days shall “the 
sun be darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, and the 
stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall 
be shaken : and then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in 
heaven ; and then shall all the tribes of the earth mourn, and 
they shall see the Son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, 
with power and great glory ” (Matt. xxiv. 29, 30). 

+ Kdovra mara ai pudal ris ys. Comp. Zech. xii. 12 (LXX), 
Koerat 9 yn kara pudas pvdas. 


183 THE COMING PRINCE. 


That there will be zo interval between the perse- 
cution and the “great signs from heaven”* which 
are to follow it, is expressly stated ; they are to occur 
“immediately after the tribulation.” That an in- 
terval shall separate the other events of the series is 
equally clear. From the defilement of the Holy 
Place, to the day when the tribulation shall end, and 
the “fearful sights” and “great signs” from heaven 
shall strike terror into men’s hearts, shall be a definite 
period of 1,260 days ;f and yet when He goes on to 
speak of the Advent, the Lord declares that that day 
is known to the Father only: it should be His people’s 
part to watch and wait. He had already warned 
them against being deceived by expecting His Advent 
before the fulfilment of all that must come to pass.f 
Now He warns them against apostasy after the accom- 
plishment of all things, because of the delay which 
even then shall still mark His coming.§ 


SO IUKe OK EE Te 

+ Therefore if the Advent synchronized with these events, 
any one then living would be able to fix the date of it, once the 
epoch of the tribulation were known; whereas the chapter 
clearly shows that an interval will follow after all has been ful- 
filled, long enough to weed out mere professors, who, tired of 
waiting, will apostatize (Matt. xxiv. 48), and to lull even true 
disciples to a sleep from which their Lord’s return will rouse 
them (/é7d. xxv. 5). 

t Matt. xxiv. 4-28. 

§ Matt. xxiv. 42-51, and xxv. 1-13: “THEN shall the 
kingdom of heaven be likened unto ten virgins.” [rdre, ‘at the 


THE PATMOS VISIONS, 189 


The words of Christ are unequivocally true, and 
He never enjoins upon His people to live in expecta- 
tion of His coming, save at a time when nothing in- 
tervenes to bar the fulfilment of the hope. Fatalism 
is as popular among Christians as with the wor- 
shippers of Mahomet ; and it is forgotten that though 
the dispensation has run its course these eighteen 
centuries, it might have been brought to a close at 
any moment. Hence the Christian is taught to live, 
“looking for that blessed hope.’* It will be other- 
wise in days to come, when the present dispensation 
shall have closed with the first stage of the Advent. 
Then the word will be, not “ Watch, for ye know not 
what hour your Lord doth come,”t—that belongs to 
the time when all shall have been fulfilled—but 
“Take heed that no man deceive you, all these things 
must come to pass, but the end is not yet.’ 


period spoken of at the end of the last chapter, viz., the coming 
of the Lord to His personal reign” (Alford, Gr. Zes¢., 72 Loco.)] 
Though applicable to every age in which there is a waiting 
people on earth, the parable will have its full and special apyii- 
cation in the last days to those who shall be looking back on the 
complete page. of prophecy fulfilled. The entire passage from 
chap. xxiv. 31, to chap. xxv. 30, is parenthetical, relating 
especially to that time. 


Titus ii. 12, 13. + Matt. xxiv. 42. £ loid. 4, 6. 


CHAPTER XV. 
THE COMING PRINCE, 


- V HAT is it that all Europe is looking for? ”»— 

the words are quoted from a leading article 
in the Zzmes newspaper, on the recent finding of 
Agamemnon’s tomb.* “What is it that all Europe 
is looking for? It is the KING OF MEN, the great 
head of the Hellenic race, the man whom a thousand 
galleys and a hundred thousand men submitted to 
on a simple recognition of his personal qualities, 
and obeyed for ten long years... . The man who 
can challenge for his own the shield of Agamemnon, 
now waiting for the challenge, is the true Emperor 
of the East, and the easiest escape from our present 
difficulties.” 

The realization of this dream will be the fulfilment 
of prophecy. 

True it is that popular movernents characterize 
the age, rather than the power of individual minds. 
It is an age of mobs. Democracy, not despotism, 
is the goal towards which civilization is tending. 


But democracy in its full development is one of the 


* The Zzmes, Monday, 18th December, 1876. 


THE COMING PRINCE. I9I 


surest roads to despotism. First, the revolution ; 
then, the plebiscite; then, the despot. The Czsar 
often owes his sceptre to the mob. A man of 
transcendent greatness, moreover, never fails to leave 
his mark upon his times. And the true King of 
Men must have an extraordinary combination of 
great qualities. He must be “a scholar, a states- 
man, a man of unflinching courage and irrepressible 
enterprise, full of resources, and ready to look in 
the face a rival or a foe.”* The opportunity too 
must synchronize with his advent. But the voice 
of prophecy is clear, that the HOUR is coming, and 
the MAN. 

In connection with this dream or legend of the 
reappearance of Agamemnon, it is remarkable that 
the language of Daniel’s second vision has led some 
to fix on Greece as the very place in which the Man 
of prophecy shall have his rise; f and it leaves no 


* The Zimes, 18th December, 1876. 

+ That Antichrist is to arise from the eastern part of the 
Roman empire, and from that part of the east which fell under 
the rule of Alexander’s successors, is rendered unquestionable 
by this chapter. But, seesug that in the eleventh chapter he 
is mentioned as conflicting with the king of the north (z.¢., the 
king of Syria), and also with the king of the south (zz., the 
king of Egypt), it is plain that he does not arise either from 
Egypt or Syria. He must, therefore, arise either from Greece 
or from the districts immediately contiguous to Constantinople. 
Jt is true that if he arose from the latter, or indeed from either 


192 THE COMING PRINCE. 


doubt whatever that he will appear within the terri- 
torial limits of the old Grecian empire. 

Having predicted the formation of the four king- 
doms into which Alexanders conquests became 
divided at his death, the angel Gabriel—the divinely- 
appointed interpreter of the vision—proceeded thus 
to speak of events which must take place in days 
to come. “In the latter time of their kingdom, 
when the transgressors are come to the full, a king 
of fierce countenance, and understanding dark sen- 
tences, shall stand up. And his power shall be 
mighty, but not by his own power; and he shall 
destroy wonderfully, and shall prosper, and practise, 
and shall destroy the mighty and the holy people. 
And through his policy also, he shall cause craft to 
prosper in his hand; and he shall magnify himself 


of the four, he would be esteemed Greek in origin, because 
all the four were divisions of the Greek empire; but it seems 
far more probable that Greece proper will be the place of 
his rise. He is described as ‘waxing great towards the 
south and towards the east, and towards the pleasant land ;’ 
that is, toward Egypt, Syria, and Palestine—a description 
that would geographically suit the position of one who was 
supposed to be in Greece. 

“Moreover, a ‘little horn’ (an emblem not of that which 
he is as an individual, but of that which he is as a monarch) 
is a symbol that well suits one who should arise from one 
of those petty principalities which once abounded in Greece, 
and have even still their memorial in the throne of the sove- 
reigns of Montenegro."—NEWTON Ten Kingdoms, p. 193. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 193 


in his heart, and by peace shall destroy many. He 
shall also stand up against the Prince of princes ; 
but he shall be broken without hand.” * 

In the vision of the seventh chapter, the last great 
monarch of the Gentiles was represented only as 
a blasphemer and a persecutor: “He shall speak 
great words against the Most High, and shall wear 
out the saints of the Most High;” but here he is 
described as being also a general and a diplomatist. 
Having thus obtained a recognised place in pro- 
phecy, he is alluded to in the vision which follows 
as “the Prince who is coming,’ f—a_ well-known 
personage, whose advent had already been foretold ; 
and the mention of him in Daniel’s fourth and 
final vision is so explicit, that having regard to the 
vital importance of establishing the personality of 
this “ King,” the passage is here set forth at length. 

“ And the king shall do according to his will; and 
he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above 
every god, and shall speak marvellous things against 
the God of gods, and shall prosper till the indigna- 
tion be accomplished: for that that is determined 
shall be done. Neither shall he regard the God of 
his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any 
god : for he shall magnify himself above all. But in 


* Dan viii. 23-25. The entire passage is quoted at pp. 43-46, 
ante (note). 
+ Dan. ix. 26. 


13 


194. THE COMING PRINCE. 


— 


his estate he shall honour the God of forces; and a 
god whom his fathers knew not shall he honour with 
gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and plea- 
sant things. Thus shall he do in the most strong 
holds with a strange god, whom he shall acknowledge 
and increase with glory: and he shall cause them to 
rule over many, and shall divide the land for gain. 
And at the time of the end shall the king of 
the south push at him: and the king of the north 
shall come against him like a whirlwind, with 
chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships; 
and he shall enter into the countries, and shall over- 
flow and pass over. He shall enter also into the 
glorious land, and many countries shall be over- 
thrown; but these shall escape out of his hand, even 
Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of 
Ammon. He shall stretch forth his hand also upon 
the countries: and the land of Egypt shall not 
escape. But he shall have power over the treasures 
of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things 
of Egypt; and the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall 
be at his steps. But tidings out of the east and out 
of the north shall trouble him: therefore he shall go 
forth with great fury to destroy, and utterly to make 
away many. And he shall plant the tabernacles of 
his palace between the seas in the glorious holy 
mountain; yet he shall come to his end, and none 
shall help him, And at that time shall Michael 


TITE COMING PRINCE. 195 


stand up, the great prince which standeth for the 
children of thy people; and there shall be a time of 
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation 
even to that same time: and at that time thy people 
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found 
written in the book.”’* 


* Dan. xi. 36-45; xii. 1. Iam inclined to believe that the 
entire passage from ver. 5 of Dan. xi. will receive a future 
fulfilment, and I have no doubt of this as regards the passage 
beginning with ver. 21. See especially ver. 31. But the future 
application of the portion quoted in the text is unquestionable. 
Although the chapter in part refers to Antiochus Epiphanes, 
“there are traits which have nothing to correspond to them 
in Antiochus, which are even the exact contradictory of the 
character of Antiochus, but which do reappear in St. Paul’s 
account of the Antichrist to come.” I quote from Dr. Pusey. 
He adds (Daniel, p. 93): “The image of the Antichrist of the 
Old Testament melts into the lineaments of the Antichrist 
himself. . . . One trait only of the anti-religious character of 
Antichrist was true of Antiochus also; ‘he shall speak mar- 
vellous things against the God of gods.’ Blasphemy against 
God is an essential feature of any God-opposed power or 
individual. It belongs to Voltaire as much as to Antiochus. 
All besides has no place in him. ... The characteristics of 
this infidel king are (1) self-exaltation above every god; ‘he 
shall magnify himself above every god ;’ (2) contempt of all 
religion ; (3) blasphemy against the true God; (4) apostasy 
from the God of his fathers; (5) disregarding the desire of 
women ; (6) the honouring of a god whom his fathers knew 
not. Of all these six marks, one only, in the least, agrees 
with Antiochus.” The entire passage is valuable, and the 
arguinents conclusive. A remark at p. 96 suggests that Dr. 


196 THE COMING PRINCE. 


The burden of Daniel’s prophecies is Judah and 
Jerusalem, but the Apocalyptic visions of the beloved 
disciple have a wider scope. The same scenes are 
sometimes presented, but they are displayed upon a 
grander scale. The same actors appeat, but in rela- 
tion to larger interests and events of greater magni- 
tude. In Daniel, the Messiah is mentioned only in 
relation to the earthly people, and it is in the same 
connection also that the false Messiah comes upon 
the stage. In the Apocalypse the Lamb appears as 
the Saviour of an innumerable multitude “out of all 
nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues,” * 
and the Beast is seen as the persecutor of all who 
name the name of Christ on earth. The visions of 
St. John, moreover, include an opened heaven, while 
the glimpses Daniel was vouchsafed of “things to 
come” are limited to earth. 

The attempt to fix the meaning of every detail of 
these visions is to ignore the lessons to be derived 
from the Messianic prophecies fulfilled at the first 


Pusey identifies this king with the second ‘‘ Beast” of Rev. xiii., 
and this view is maintained by others on the ground that a 
“Beast” in prophecy typifies kingly power. This is true 
generaily, but the second beast of Rev. xiii. is expressly called 
“the false Prophet” (Rev. xix. 20); and the passage proves 
that he is immediately connected with the first beast, and 
claims no position independently of him. The difficulties in 
the way of supposing him to be a king in his own right are 
insuperable. * Rev. vii. 9. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 197 


advent.* The old Scriptures taught the pious Jew 
to look for a personal Christ—not a system or a 
dynasty, but a gerson. They enabled him, moreover, 
to anticipate the leading facts of His appearing. 
Herod’s question, for example, “ Where should Christ 
be born?” admitted of a definite and unhesitating 
answer, “In Bethlehem of Judea.” But to assign its 
place and meaning to every part of the mingled vision 
of suffering and glory was beyond the power even of 
the inspired prophets themselves.”{ So also is it 
with the prophecies of Antichrist. The case indeed 
is stronger still, for while they “who waited for re- 
demption in Israel” had to glean the Messianic 
prophecies from Scriptures which seemed to the 
careless reader to refer to the sufferings of the old 
Hebrew prophets or the glories of their kings, the 
predictions of Antichrist are as distinct and definite 
as though the statements were historical and not 
prophetic.§ 


pe 


* A similar remark applies to the refusal to recognise the 
main outlines of the character and history of Antichrist. Ful- 
filled prophecy is our only safe guide in studying the unfulfilled. 

+ Matt. ii. 4. Cf Micah v. 2. 

t I Peter i. 10-12. 

§ The religious sceptic may refuse to accept their literal 
, Meaning, and the profane sceptic, in rejecting the fanciful 
interpretations of the pious, may dismiss the prophecies them- 
selves as incredible; but this is only a further proof that their 
definiteness is too pronounced to admit of the half-faith accorded 
to other Scriptures. 


198 THE COMING PRINCE. 


And yet the task of the expositor is beset with 
real difficulties. If the book of Daniel might be 
read by itself no question whatever could arise. 
“The Coming Prince” is there presented as the 
head of the revived Roman empire of the future, and 
a persecutor of the saints. There is not a single 
statement respecting him that presents the smallest 
difficulty. But some of the statements of St. John 
seem inconsistent with the earlier prophecies. 
According to Daniel’s visions the sovereignty of 
Antichrist appears confined to the ten kingdoms, 
and his career seems limited to the duration of the 
seventieth week. How then can this be recon- 
ciled with the statement of St. John that “ power 
was given him over all kindreds and tongues and 
nations, and all that dwell upon the earth shall wor- 
ship him”?* Is it credible, moreover, that a man 
endowed with such vast supernatural powers, and 
filling so marvellous a place in prophecy, will be 
restrained within the narrow limits of the Roman 
earth ? 

If these points be urged as objections to the 
truth of Scripture it is enough to mark that the 
prophecies of Christ were beset with kindred diffi- 
culties. Such prophecies are like the disjointed 


* Rey. xiii. 7, 8. In the best reading of ver. 7, the same four 
words occur as in vii. 9—“ nations, kindreds, people, and 
tongues. ’ 


THE COMING PRINCE. 199 


pieces of an elaborate and intricate mosaic. To 
fit each into its place would baffle our utmost 
ingenuity. To discover the main design is all we 
can expect; or if more be demanded of us, it is 
enough to show that no part is inconsistent with 
the rest. And these results will reward the student 
of the Apocalyptic visions of Daniel and St. John, 
if only he approach them untrammeled by the crude 
views which prevail respecting the career of Antichrist. 

These visions are not a history, but adrama. In 
the twelfth chapter of Revelation we see the woman 
in her travail. In the twenty-first chapter she is 
manifested in her final glory. The intervening 
chapters afford brief glimpses of events which fill 
up the interval. It is with the thirteenth and seven- 
teenth chapters that we have specially to do in 
connection with the present subject, and it is clear 
that the later vision unfolds events which come first 
in the order of time. 

The false church and the true are typified under 
kindred emblems. Jerusalem, the Bride, has its 
counterpart in Babylon, the Harlot. In the same 
sense in which the New Jerusalem is the Jewish 
church, so likewise Babylon is the apostasy of Rome. 
The heavenly city is mother of the redeemed for 
ages past: * the earthly city is mother of the harlots 


*® Gal. iv. 26. 


200 THE COMING PRINCE. 


and abominations of the earth.* The victims who 
have perished in the persecutions of Antichristian 
Papal Rome are estimated at fifty millions of human 
beings ; but even this appalling record will not be 
the measure of her doom. The blood of “holy 
apostles and prophets,’—the martyred dead of ages 
before the Papacy arose, and even of pre-Messianic 
times, will be required of her when the day of 
vengeance comes. t 

As it is only in its Jewish aspect that the Church 
is expressly symbolized as the Bride,t so also it 
is at a time when this, their normal relationship, 
has been regained by the covenant people, that — 
the apostate church of Christendom, in the full 
development of its iniquity, appears as the Harlot.§ 


* Rev. xvii. 5. 

+ Rev. xviii. 20. So also in xvii. 6, the sazzts (the 
slaughtered dead of Old Testament times) are distinguished 
from the martyrs of Jesus. Luke xi. 50, 51 sets forth the 
principle of God’s judgments. 

t In Scripture the church of this dispensation is symbolized 
as the Body of Christ, never as the Bride. From the close 
of John Baptist’s ministry the Bride is never mentioned until 
she appears in the Apocalypse (John iii. 29; Rev. xxi. 2, 9). 
The force of the “nevertheless” in Eph. v. 33 depends on the 
fact that the Church is the Body, not the Bride. The earthly 
relationship is readjusted by a heavenly standard. Man and 
wife are zo¢ one body, but Christ and His church are one body, 
therefore a man is to love his wife ‘‘ even as himself.” 

§ This, I believe, is the element of truth in the view of 
Auberlen and others, that the woman of chap. xvii. is the 


THE COMING PRINCE. Sor 


The vision clearly indicates moreover a marked 
revival of her influence. She is seen enthroned 
upon the ten-horned Beast, herself arrayed in royal 
hues and decked with gold and costliest gems. The 
infamous greatness of Papal Rome in times gone 
by shall yet be surpassed by the splendour of her 
glories in dark days to come, when, having drawn 
within her pale it may be all that usurps the name 
of Christ on earth,* she will claim as her willing 
vassal the last great monarch of the Gentile world. 

As regards the duration of this period of Rome's 
final triumphs, Scripture is silent; but the crisis 
‘which brings it to a close is definitely marked: 
“ The ten horns and the Beast shall hate the whore, 
and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall 
eat her flesh and burn her with fire.” t 

One point in the angel’s description of the Beast 
in relation to the harlot claims special notice. The 
seven heads have a twofold symbolism. When 


woman of chap. xii, “the faithful city become an harlot” 
(isaais21): 

* “J incline to think that the judgment (chap. xviii. 2) and 
the spiritual fornication (chap. xviii. 3), though finding their 
culmination in Rome, are not restricted to it, but comprise the 
whole apostate church, Roman, Greek, and even Protestant, 
in so far as it has been seduced from its first love to Christ, 
and (has) given its affections to worldly pomps and idols,”—- 
Rey. A. R. FAUSSET’S Commentary. 

+ Rev. xvii. 16. See p. 136, anée (note). 


202 THE COMING PRINCE, 


viewed in connection with the harlot, they are 
“seven mountains on which: the woman sits;” but 
in their special relation to the Beast they have a 
different significance. The angel adds, “and they 


) 


are seven kings;” that is “kingdoms,” the word 
being used “according to its strict prophetic import, 
and to the analogy of that portion of the prophecy 
which is here especially in view.” * 

In the seventh chapter of Daniel the Beast is iden- 
tified with the Roman Empire. In the thirteenth 
of Revelation he is identified also with the lion, 
the bear, and the panther, the three first “kingdoms” 
of Daniel’s vision. But here he is seen as the heir 
and representative, not of these alone, but of all 
the great world-powers which have set themselves 
in opposition to God and to His people. The seven 
heads typify these powers. “Five are fallen, and 
one is.” Egypt, Nineveh, Babylon, Persia, Greece, 
had fallen; and Rome then held the sceptre of 
earthly sovereignty, the sixth in succession to the 
empires already named.t “And the other is not 


* ALFORD, Greek Test. in loco. Comp. Dan. vii. 17-23. 

+ Just as the mention of the ten horns upon the beast has 
set men trying to discover in the past a tenfold division of 
the Roman earth, so also these seven heads have suggested 
the idea of seven successive forms of government in the Roman 
empire. Neither of these conceptions would ever have heen 
heard of, but for the prophecy of which they are supposed to 
be the fulfilment. The second, though not so visionary as 


THE COMING PRINCE. 203 


yet come, and when he cometh he must continue 
a short space.” Here the prophecy is marked by 
the same strange “foreshortening” already noticed 
in each of Daniel’s visions. While Rome was the 
sixth kingdom, the seventh is the confederacy of 
the latter days, heading up in “the Coming Prince.” 
The Coming Prince himself, in the full and final 
development of his power, is called the eighth, 
though belonging to the seven.* The importance 
of these conclusions will appear in the sequel. 

The subject of the twelfth chapter is the dragon, 
the woman in her travail, the birth of the man-child 
and his rapture to heaven; the conflict. in heaven 
between the archangel and the dragon; f the dragon’s 
‘banishment to earth ; his persecution of the woman, 
and her flight to the wilderness, where she is sustained 


the first, is open to the special objection that the word zinta 
betokens a violent fall, such as the catastrophe of ancient 
Babylon, or of the Babylon of the Apocalypse (comp. Rev. 
xviii. 2). It is wholly unsuitable to express such changes as 
marked the government of ancient Rome. 

* Rev. xvii. 10 expressly states that the duration of the 
seventh will be brief. Dean Alford’s comment on this is not 
marked by his usual candour. The words in ver. II are &k 
tov éxrd, but this cannot mean merely that the Beast is “the 
successor and result of the seven” (Alford), for ver. 10 limits 
the entire succession to seven. Though because of his awful 
pre-eminence he is described as the eighth, yet he is really the 
supreme head of the seventh. 

+ Verse 7; comp. Dan. xii. 1. 


204 THE COMING PRINCE. 


for “a time, and times, and half a tite,” or 1,260 
days * (the second half of Daniel’s seventieth week). 
The chapter ends by the statement that, baffled in 
attempting to destroy the woman, the dragon “went 
to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep 
the commandments of God, and have the testimony 
of Jesus Christ.” The thirteenth chapter, crossing 
the lines of Daniel’s visions, represents the fulfilment 
of the dragon’s purpose through the agency of the 
man of prophecy, whom he energizes to this end. 
Whatever meaning be attached to the birth and 
rapture of the woman’s child, there can be no reason- 
able doubt that the obedient, faithful “remnant of 
her seed” is the Jewish Church of the latter days, 
the persecuted “saints of the Most High” of Daniel’s 
prophecy. 

The serpent, the woman, and the man, appear 
together on the earliest page of Scripture, and they 
reappear upon the latest. But how significant and 
terrible the change! No longer the subtle tempter, 
Satan is now displayed in all his awfulness as the 
great fiery dragon,t who seeks to destroy the woman’s 


* Verses 6,14. See p. 179, ante (note). 

+ Spdxoy muppds péyas, Rev. xii. 3. “ He is muppds perhaps, 
for the combined reasons of the wasting properties of fire, and 
the redness of blood” (Alford, Greek Test., zx loco). Compare 
ver. 9, “ The great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called 
the Devil and Satan.” The dragon both of Scripture and of 
heathen mythology is a serpent, and both refer to Satan. It is 


THE COMING PRINCE. 205 


promised seed. And instead of the humbled penitent 
of Eden, the man appears as a wild beast,* a monster, 
both in power and wickedness. The serpent’s victim 
has become his willing slave and ally. 

God has found a man to fulfil all His will, and to 
Him He has given up His throne, with all power in 
heaven and “on earth.” This will hereafter be 
travestied by Satan, and the coming man shall have 
the dragon’s “power, and his throne, and great 
authority.”f Both the Dragon and the Beast are 
seen crowned with royal diadems.{ Once, and only 
once, again in Scripture the diadem is mentioned, 
and then it is as worn by Him whose name is 
“King of kings and Lord of lords.”§ It must be as 
pretenders to His power that the Beast and the 
Dragon claim it. 

The personality of Satan and his interest in and 
close connection with our race throughout its history, 
are among the most certain though most mysterious 
facts of revelation. The popular classification of 
angels, men, and devils, as including intelligent 


described by Homer as of huge size, coiled like a snake, of 
blood-red or dark colour, and many-headed. ‘‘ He seems to 
use the words dpdxwy and éqis indifferently for a serpent” 
(Liddell and Scott). 

* The @npiov or wild-beast of Rev. xiii, etc., must not be 
confounded with the ¢woy or living-being of chap. iv., most 
unfortunately rendered dcast in E.V. 

+ Rev. xiii. 2. Ab IRR, 20h, Seaway Tie § Rev. xix. 12-16, 


206 THE COMING PRINCE. 


creation, is misleading. The auge/s* that fell are 
“reserved in everlasting chains, under darkness, unto 
the judgment of the Great Day.”+ Demons are fre- 
quently mentioned in the narrative of the Gospels, and 
they have also a place in the doctrine of the Epistles. 
But THE DEVIL is a being who, like the Archangel, 


seems, in his own domain, to have no peer. t 


* That is, the beings who before their fall were angels ot God 
The word angel in its secondary sense means no more than a 
messenger or attendant, and Satan has his angels (Rev. xii. 7). 
The word is used of John Baptist’s disciples in Luke vii. 24. 

+ Jude 6. 

+ Our transiators have used the word devi? as a generic term 
for fallen beings other than men, but the word from which it is 
derived has not this scope in Greek. A d:aBodos is a slanderer, 
and the word is so used in I Tim. iii. 11 ; 2 Tim. iii. 3 ; Titus ii. 3. 
But the d:aBodos is Satan, of whom alone the term is used else- 
where in the New Testament, save only in John vi. 70, where it 
is applied to Judas Iscariot. The word Saimdvov, which occurs 
fifty-two times in the Gospels, and seven times in the rest 
of the New Testament, is invariably rendered devz/, save in 
Acts xvii. 18 (gods). In classical Greek it means generally the 
Deity, especially an inferior god ; and in the New Testament, 
an evil spirit, a demon. 

The ultimate reference of Ezek. xxviii. appears to be to Satan, 
and in the passage beginning, “Thou hast been in Eden in the 
garden of God,” he is apostrophised as “the anointed cherub” 
(ver. 14). The cherubim appear to have some special relation 
to our race and world, hence their connection with the tabernacle. 
Can it be that our earth was at one time their domain, that 
Satan was of their number, and that he recognised in Adam a 
_ creature appointed to succeed him in the very scene of his glory 

and his fall ? 


THE COMING PRINCE. 207 


Another fact which claims notice here is the hold 
which serpent worship has had upon mankind. 
Among the nations of the ancient world there was 
scarcely one in whose religious system it had not a 
place. In heathen mythology there is scarcely a 
hero or a god whose history is not connected in 
some way with the sacred serpent. “Wherever the 
devil reigned the serpent was held in some peculiar 
veneration.” * 

The true significance of this depends on a just 
appreciation of the nature of idol worship. It may 
be questioned whether idolatry as popularly under- 
stood has ever prevailed except among the most 
debased and ignorant of races. It is not the emblem 
that is worshipped, but a power or being which the 
emblem represents. When the Apostle warned the 
Corinthian Church against participating in any- 
thing devoted to an idol, he was careful to explain 
that the idol in itself was nothing. “But” (he 
declared) “the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, 
they sacrifice to demons, not to God, and I would 
not that ye should have fellowship with demons.” f 


* Bp. Stillingfleet ; quoted in Zvcyc. Metro., article on “ Ser- 
pent Worship,” g.v. In Bryant’s Anccent Mythology will be 
found a chapter on Ophiolatry (vol. ii., p. 197, 3rd ed., and see 
also p. 458) which fully warrants the general statements of the 
‘text. ; 

+ 1 Cor. x. 20. See p. 206, ante (note), 


208 THE COMING PRINCE. 


This will afford an insight into the character of the 
predicted serpent worship ofthe last days.* Satan’s 
master lie will be a travesty of the incarnation: he 
will energize a man who will claim universal worship 
as being the manifestation of the Deity in human 
form. And not only will there be a false Messiah, 
but another being, his equal in miraculous power, 
yet having for his only mission to obtain for him 
the homage of mankind. The mystery of the God- 
head will thus be parodied by the mystery of 
iniquity, and the Father, the Son, and the Spirit 
will have their counterpart.in the Dragon, the Beast, 
and the False Prophet. 

A silent heaven marks this age of grace. Whirl- 
wind and earthquake and fire may awe, yet, as in 
the days of the old Hebrew prophet,{ God is not in 
these, but in the “still small voice” which tells of 


* “All the world wondered after the Beast; and they 
worshipped the Dragon (serpent) which gave power unto the 
Beast; and they worshipped the Beast” (Rev. xiii. 3, 4). 

+ The lamb-like Beast of Rev. xiii. 11, called the False 
Prophet in Rev. xix. 20. The language of xiii. 3, 12, suggests 


that there will be some impious travesty of the resurrection 
of our Lord. 

{ “The Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent 
the mountains, but the Lord was not in the wind; and after 
the wind an earthquake, but the Lord was not in the earth- 
quake; and after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was 
not in the fire; and after the fire, @ st¢l/ small voice” (1 Kings 
XIk Lae) s 


THE COMING PRINCE. 209 


mercy and secks to win lost men from the power of 
darkness to Himself. But the very silence which 
betokens that the throne of God is now a throne of 
grace is appealed to as the crowning proof that God 
is but a myth; and the coarse blasphemer’s favourite 
trick is to challenge the Almighty to declare Himself 
by some signal act of judgment. In days to come, 
the impious challenge will be taken up by Satan, 
and death shall seize on men who refuse to bow 
before the image of the Beast.* 

The Antichrist will be more than a profane and 
brutal persecutor like Antiochus Epiphanes and 
some of the Emperors of Pagan Rome; more than 
a vulgar impostor like Barcochab.t Miracles alone 


can silence the scepticism of apostates, and in the 


* In the persecutions under Pagan Rome, death was often 
the penalty for refusing to worship Cesar’s image; but Rev. 
xiii. 15 clearly points to some mysterious death which shall 
result in the very presence of the image of the future Cesar. 
The same power which will enable the False Prophet to give 
life to the image, will destroy the life of him who refuses to 
worship it. 

+ In one of the darkest hours of their history, when the 
continued persecution of the Jews threatened the race with 
utter extinction, Barcochab proclaimed himself the Messiah, 
and led them in a revolt against the Romans, which ended 
in a carnage of the ill-fated people more horrible than any 
which had preceded it (A.D. 130-132). The man seems to 
have been a contemptible impostor who duped the people by 
juggler’s tricks, such as blowing fire from his mouth ; and yet 


14 


210 THE COMING PRINCE. 


exercise of all the Dragon’s delegated power, the 
Beast will command the homage of a world that 
has rejected grace. “All that dwell upon the earth 
shall worship him, whose names are not written in 
the book of life.’* If it were possible, the very elect 


“cc 


would be deceived by his mighty “ signs and 
wonders.” ;f but faith, divinely given, is a sure, 
as it is the only, safeguard against credulity and 
superstition. 

But this is what he will become in the zenith of 
his career. In his origin he is described as a “ little 
horn,” $—like Alexander of Macedon, the king of a 
petty kingdom. Possibly he will be the head of some 
new Principality to arise in the final dismemberment 
of Turkey; it may be on the banks of the Euphrates, 
or perhaps upon the Asian shore of the A2gean Sea. 
The name of Babylon is strangely connected with 
events to come, and Pergamus, so long the home of 
serpent worship in its vilest forms, is the only place 
on earth which Scripture has identified with Satan’s 
throne.§ 

Of the great political changes which must precede 
his advent, the most conspicuous are the restoration 


he attained to such an eminence, and brought about disasters 
so terrible, that some have sought to find in his career the 
fulfilment of the prophecies of Antichrist. 

* Rev. xiii. 8. + Matt. xxiv, 24. 

* Dan, vii. 8. § Rev. ii. 13. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 211 


of the Jews to Palestine, and the predicted division 
of the Roman earth. The former of these events 
has already been considered in a previous chapter, 
and as regards the latter there is but little to be said. 
The attempt to enumerate the ten kingdoms of the 
future would involve a profitless inquiry.* History 
repeats itself ; and if there be any element of period- 
icity in the political diseases by which nations are 
afflicted, Europe will inevitably pass through another 
crisis such as that which darkened the last decade of 
the eighteenth century. And should another revo- 
lution produce another Napoleon, it is impossible to 
foretell how far kingdoms may become consolidated, 
and boundaries may be changed. Moreover in fore- 
casting the fulfilment of these prophecies, we are 
dealing with events which, while they may occur 
within the lifetime of living men, may yet be de- 
layed for centuries. Our part is not to prophecy, 
but only to interpret; and we may well rest con- 
tent with the certainty that when the Apocalyptic 
visions are in fact fulfilled, their fulfilment will 
be clear, not merely to minds educated in mysticism, 
but to all who are capable of observing public 
facts. 

Through the gradual unfolding, it may be, of 
influences even now in operation; or far more pro- 


* See App. II., Note D. 


212 THE COMING PRINCE. 


bably as the outcome of some great European crisis 
in the future, this confederation of nations * shall 
be developed, and thus the stage will be prepared 
on which shall appear that awful Being, the great 
leader of men in the eventful days which are to 
close the era of Gentile supremacy. 

If we are to understand aright the predicted course 
of the Antichrist’s career, certain points connected 
with it must be clearly kept in view. The first is 
that up to a certain epoch he will be, notwith- 
standing his pre-eminence, no more than human. 
And here we must judge of the future by the past. 
At two-and-twenty years of age, Alexander crossed 
the Hellespont, the prince of a petty Grecian state. 
Four years later he had founded an Empire 
and given a new direction to the history of the 
world. 

In the career of Napoleon Bonaparte, modern 
history affords a parallel still more striking and 
complete. When, now just a hundred years ago, 
he entered the French military school at Brienne, 
he was an unknown lad, without even the advantages 


* I say nations, not kingdoms, advisedly, for though they 
will ultimately be kingdoms, z.e., under monarchical govern- 
ment, yet defore the advent of the Kaiser such say not be the 
case. That this division of the Roman earth will take place 
before his appearance is expressly stated ; but whether a year, 
a decade, or a century before, we are not informed. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 213 


which rank and wealth afford. So utterly obscure 
was his position that, not only did he owe his 
admission to the school to the influence of the 
Governor of Corsica, but calumny has found it 
possible to use that trifling act of friendly patronage 
to the disparagement of his mother’s name. If 
then such a man, by the gigantic force of his 
personal qualities, combined with the accident of 
favouring circumstances, could attain the place which 
history has assigned to him, the fact affords the 
fullest answer to every objection which can be urged 
against the credibility of the predicted career of the 
man of prophecy. 

Nor will it avail to urge that the last fifty years 
have so developed the mental activity of civilized 
races, and have produced such a spirit of inde- 
pendence, that the suggestion of a career like 
Napoleon’s being repeated in days to come in- 
volves an anachronism. “In proportion as the 
general standard of mental cultivation is raised, and 
man made equal with man, the ordinary power 
of genius is diminished, but its extraordinary power 
is increased, its reach deepened, its hold rendered 
more firm. As men become familiar with the 
achievements and the exercise of talent, they learn 
to despise and disregard its daily examples, and to 
be more independent of mere men of ability ; but 
they only become more completely in the power 


4a 


214 THE COMING PRINCE. 


of gigantic intellect, and the slaves of pre-eminent 
and unapproachable talent.” * 

By the sheer force of transcendent genius the 
man of prophecy will gain a place of undisputed 
pre-eminence in the world; but if the facts of his 
after career are to be understood, considerations of 
a wholly different kind must be taken into account. 
A strange crisis marks his course. At first the 
patron of religion, a true “eldest son of the church,” 
he becomes a relentless and profane persecutor. At 
first no more than a king of men, commanding the 
allegiance of the Roman earth, he afterwards claims 
to be divine, and demands the worship of Chris- 
tendom. 

And we have seen how this extraordinary change 
in his career takes place at that epoch of tremendous 
import in the history of the future, the beginning 
of the 1,260 days of the latter half of Daniel’s 
seventieth week. Then it is that that mysterious 
event takes place, described as “war in heaven” 
between the Archangel and the Dragon. As the 
result of that amazing struggle, Satan and his angels 
are “cast out into the earth,” and the Seer bewails 
mankind because the devil is come down into their 
midst, “having great wrath because he knoweth 
that he hath but a short time.” 


* Alford, Gr. Test. Proleg. 2 Thess., § 36. 
J HReveexiln 752. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 215 


The next feature in the vision is the rise of the 
ten-horned Beast.* This is not the event described 
in the seventh of Daniel. The Beast, doubtless, is _ 
the same both in Daniel and the Apocalypse, repre- 
senting the last great empire upon earth; but in 
the Apocalypse it appears at a later stage of its 
development. Three periods of its history are 
marked in Daniel. In the first it has ¢ez horns. In 
the second it has eleven, for the little horn comes 
up among the ten. In the third, it has but ezghz, 
for the eleventh has grown in power, and three of 
the ten have been torn away by it. Up to this 
point Daniel’s vision represents the Beast merely 
as “the fourth kingdom upon earth,” the Roman 
empire as revived in future times, and here the 
vision turns away from the history of the Beast to 
describe the action of the little horn as a blasphemer 
and persecutor.f 

It is at this epoch that the thirteenth chapter of 
Revelation opens. The three first stages of the 
history of the empire are past, and a fourth has 
been developed. It is no longer a confederacy of 
nations bound together by treaty, with a Napoleon 


if INE Se 1 

+ The passage (Dan. vii. 2-14) is quoted in full at pp. 36, 37, 
ante. The distinctions above noticed clear up the seeming 
inconsistency between Daniel’s visions and the Revelation, 
alluded to at p. 199, ave. 


216 THE COMING PRINCE. 


rising up in the midst of them and struggling for 
supremacy; but a confederacy of kings who are the 
lieutenants of one great Kaiser, a man whose tran- 
scendent greatness has secured to him an undisputed 
pre-eminence, And this is the man whom the 
Dragon will single out to administer his awful 
power on earth in days to come. And from the 
hour in which he sells himself to Satan he will be 
so energized by Satan, that “ALL power and signs 
and lying wonders” shall characterize his after 
course.* 

There is a danger lest in dwelling on these visions 
as though they were enigmas to be solved, we should 
forget how appalling are the events of which they 
speak, and how tremendous the forces which will 
be in exercise at the time of their accomplishment. 
During this age of grace Satan’s power on earth is 
so restrained that men forget his very existence. 
This, indeed, will be the secret of his future triumphs. 
And yet how unspeakably terrible must be the 
dragon’s power, witness the temptation of our Lord! 
It is written, “The devil, taking Him up into an 
high mountain, showed unto Him all the kingdoms 
of the world in a moment of time; and the devil 
said unto Him, All this power will I give Thee, 


ec 4 a? ¢ , Che Be a A 

6 dyopos . . . ov €oTW 1) TMapovaia Kar évépyeay Tod SaTava 

> ~ 8 , ‘ / , / , s o. 
ev mdon Ovvapyer, Kal anpelois, Kal Tépace Wevdous (2 Thess, ii. 


8, 9). 


THE COMING PRINCE. 217 


and the glory of them, for that is delivered unto 
me, and to whomsoever I will I give it. If Thou, 
therefore, wilt worship me, all shall be Thine.” * 

It is this same awful being who shall give to the 
Beast his throne, his power, and great authority,f— 
all that Christ refused in the days of His humiliation. 
The mind that has realized this stupendous fact will 
not be slow to accept what follows: “And power 
was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and 
nations; and all that dwell upon the earth shall 
worship him, whose names are not written in the 
book of life of the Lamb.” { 

Of the events which afterwards must follow upon 
earth, it behoves us to speak with deep solemnity 
and studied reserve. The phenomenon of sudden 
and absolute darkness is inconceivably terrible, even 
when eagerly looked for with full intelligence of the 
causes which produce it. How unspeakable then 
would be its awfulness, if unexpected, unaccounted 
for, and prolonged, it may be for days together. 
And such shall be the sign which Holy Writ declares 


* Luke iv. 5-7. + Rev. xili, 2: eRe veexitia7j os 

§ The Astronomer Royal (Sir G. B. Airy) used these words 
in a lecture delivered at the Royal Institution, 4th July, 1853, 
upon the total solar eclipses of 1842 and 1851 :—“ The phe- 
nomenon, in fact, is one of the most terrible that man can 
witness, and no degree of partial eclipses gives any idea of its 
horror.” 


218 THE COMING PRINCE. 


shall mark the advent of earth’s last great woe.” 
The signs and wonders of Satanic power shall still 
command the homage of mankind, while the thunders 
of a heaven no longer silent will break forth upon 
the apostate race. Then will be the time of “the 
seven last plagues,” wherein “is filed up the wrath 
of God,’—the time when “the vials of the wrath 
of God” shall be poured out upon the earth.f And 
if in this day of grace the heights and depths of 
God’s longsuffering mercy transcend all human 
thoughts, His WRATH will be'no less Divine. “The 
day of vengeance of our God,” “the great and the ter- 
rible day of the Lord,’—such are the names divinely 
given to describe that time of unexampled horror. 
And yet when in the midnight darkness of the 
last apostasy, Divine longsuffering will only serve to 
blind and harden, mercy itself shall welcome the 
awful breaking of the day of vengeance, for bless- 
ing lies beyond it. Another day is still to follow. 
Earth’s history, as unfolded in the Scriptures, reaches 
on to a Sabbatic age of blessedness and peace; an 
age when heaven shall rule upon the earth, when 
“the Lord shall rejoice in all His works,” { and prove 


* “The sun shall be turned into darkness ... before the 
great and the terrible day of the Lord come” (Joel ii. 31). See 
Pp. 174, ante. 

t+ Rev. xv. 1; xvi. 1. See pp. 142-146, ante. 

Y Psalm civ. 31. 


THE COMING PRINCE. 219 


Himself to be the God of every creature He has 
made.* 

Further still, the veil is raised, and a brief glimpse 
afforded us of a glorious eternity beyond, when every 
trace of sin shall have been wiped out for ever, when 
heaven will join with earth, and “the tabernale of 
God ”—the dwelling place of the Almighty—shall be 
with men, “and He will dwell with them, and they 
shall be His people, and God Aimse/f shall be with 
them, and be their God.” f 

It was a calamity for the Church of God when 
the light of prophecy became dimmed in fruitless 
controversy, and the study of these visions, vouch- 
safed by God to warn, and guide, and cheer His 
saints in evil days, was dismissed as utterly unpro- 
fitable. They abound in promises which God de- 
signed to feed His people’s faith and fire their zeal, 
and a special blessing rests on those who read, and 
hear, and cherish them.{ One of the most hope- 
ful features of the present hour is the increasing 
interest they everywhere excite; and if these pages 
should avail to deepen or direct the enthusiasm even 
of a few in the study of a theme which is inexhausti- 
ble, the labour they have cost will be abundantly 
rewarded, 

* Psalm cxlv. 9-16. 


+ Rev. xxi. 3. The order of these events is noticed at 
pp. 177-181, ance. ee tNeVarla3: 


APPENDIX I 
CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 


HE point of contact between sacred and profane 

chronology, and therefore the first certain date 
in biblical history, is the accession of Nebuchad- 
nezzar to the throne of Babylon (cf. Dans is 1. and 
Jer. xxv. 1). From this date we reckon on to Christ 
and back to Adam. The agreement of leading 
chronologers is a sufficient guarantee that David 
began to reign in B.C. 1056-5, and therefore that 
all dates subsequent to that event can be definitely 
fixed. But beyond this epoch, certainty vanishes. 
The marginal dates of our English Bible represent 
in the main Archbishop Ussher’s chronology,* and 
notwithstanding his eminence as a chronologer some 
of these dates are doubtful, and others entirely 
wrong. 


Of the doubtful dates in Ussher’s scheme the 


* Bishop Lloyd, to whom was entrusted the task of editing 
the A.V.,in this respect made a few alterations, as ex. g7., in 
the book of Nehemiah he rejected Ussher’s chronology, and 
inserted the true historical date of the reign of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 221 


reigns of Belshazzar and “ Ahasuerus ” may serve as 
examples. Belshazzar’s case is specially interesting. 
Scripture plainly states that he was King of Babylon 
at its conquest by the Medo-Persians, and that he 
was slain the night Darius entered the city. On 
the other hand, not only does no ancient historian 
mention Belshazzar, but all agree that the last king 
of Babylon was Nabonidus, who was absent from 
the city when the Persians captured it, and who 
afterwards submitted to the conquerors at Borsippa. 
Thus the contradiction between history and Scrip- 
ture appeared to be absolute. Sceptics appealed to 
history to discredit the book of Daniel; and com- 
mentators solved or shirked the difficulty by reject- 
ing history. The cuneiform inscriptions, however, 
have now settled the controversy in a manner as 
satisfactory as it was unexpected. On clay cylinders 
discovered by Sir H. Rawlinson at Mughier and 
other Chaldean sites, Belshazzar (Belsaruzur) is 
named by Nabonidus as his eldest son. The infer- 
ence is obvious, that during the latter years of his 
father’s reign, Belshazzar was King-Regent in Baby- 
lon. According to Ptolemy’s canon Nabonidus 
reigned seventeen years (from B.C. 555 to B.C. 538), 
and Ussher gives these years to Belshazzar. 

In common with many other writers, Ussher has 
assumed that the King of the book of Esther was 
Darius Hystaspes, but it is now generally agreed that 


222 APPENDIX I. 


it is the son and successor of Darius who is there 
mentioned as Ahasuerus—“a name which ortho- 
graphically corresponds with the Greek Xerxes.” * 

The great durbar of the first chapter of Esther, 
held in his third year (ver. 3), was presumably with a 
view to his expedition against Greece (B.C. 483); and 
the marriage of Esther was in his seventh year (ii. 16), 
having been delayed till then on account of his 
absence during the campaign. The marginal dates 
of the book of Esther should therefore begin with 
B.C. 486, instead of B.C. 521, as given in our English 
Bibles, : 

But these are comparatively trivial points, whereas 
the principal crror of Ussher’s chronology is of real 
importance. According to 1 Kings vi. 1, Solomon 
began to build the Temple “in the 480th year after 
the children of Israel were come out of the land of 
Egypt.’ The mystic character of this era of 480 
years has been noticed in an earlier chapter.t Ussher 
assumed that it represented a strictly chronological 
period, and reckoning back from the third year 
of Solomon, he fixed the date of the Exodus as 
B.C. 1491,—an error which vitiates his entire system. 

In Acts xiii, 18-21, St. Paul, in treating of the 


* Rawlinson’s Herodotus, iv., p. 212. ‘Xerxes (old Persian 
Khshayarshd) is derived by Sir H. Rawlinson from Khshaya, ‘a 
King’” (Jézd. II1., 446, App. Book VI. note A). 

+ Pages 81-85, ante. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 223 


interval between the Exodus and the end of Saul’s 
reign, specifies three several periods; viz., 40 years, 
about 450 years, and 40 years = 530 years. From 
the accession of David to the third year of Solomon, 
when the temple was founded, was forty-three years. 
According to this enumeration therefore, the period 
between the Exodus and the temple was 530 + 43 
years = 573 years. Clinton, however, whose chrono- 
logy has been very generally adopted, conjectures that 
there was an interval of twenty-seven years between 
the death of Moses and the first servitude, and an in- 
terval of twelve years between “Samuel the prophet” 
(1 Sam. vii.) and the election of Saul. Accordingly 
he estimates the period between the Exodus and the 
temple as 573 + 27 + 12 years = 612 years.* 

Clinton’s leading dates, therefore, are as follows :— 

B.C. 4138.—Adam. 

» 2482.—The Deluge. 

» 2055.—The Call of Abraham. 

» 1625.—The Exodus. 

» 1096.—The Election of Saul. 

» 1056.—David. 

“ —1016.—Solomon. 


* Josephus appears to confirm this in Azz. xx. Io § 1, where 
he specifies 612 years between the Exodus and the temple, but 
in Azz. viii. 3 § 1, he fixes the same period at 592 years. Itis 
supposed that in the longer era he included the twenty years 
during which both the temple and the palace were building. 


224 APPENDIX I. 


B.C. 976.—Rehoboam. 
»  606—The Captivity (Ze, the Servitude to 
Babylon). 

In this chronology Browne proposes three correc- 
tions (Ordo Sac., §§ 10, 13); viz. he rejects the two 
conjectural terms of twenty-seven years and twelve 
years above noticed; and he adds two years to the 
period between the Deluge and the Exodus. If this 
last correction be adopted (and it is perfectly legiti- 
mate, considering that approximate accuracy is all 
that the ablest chronologer can claim to have attained 
for this era), let three years be added to the period 
between the Deluge and the Covenant with Abraham, 
and the latter event becomes exactly, as it is in any 
case approximately, the central epoch between the 
Creation and the Crucifixion. The date of the 
Deluge will thus be put back to B.C. 2485, and there- 
fore the Creation will be B.c. 4141. 

The following most striking features appear in the 
chronology as thus settled :— 

From Adam to the covenant with 

Abraham (B.C. 4141 to B.C 2055) is 2086 years. 

From Abraham to the crucifixion of 


Christ (B.C. 2055 to A.D. 32) is = 120800 ter 
From Adam to the Deluge (B.C. 4141 
to B.C. 2485) is. : j ., 1656 — 


From the Deluge to the Covenant 
(B.C. 2485 to B.C. 2055) is ‘ -) ARO 


3? 


val 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 22 


5 


From the Covenant to the Exodus 


(B.C. 2055 to B.C. 1625) is s . 430 years, 
From the Exodus to the Crucifixion 
(B.C. 1625 to A.D. 32) is : : LO56.": 


The Covenant here mentioned is that recorded in 
Gen. xii. in connection with the call of Abraham. 
The statements of Scripture relating to this part of 
the chronology may seem to need explanation in two 
respects. 

Stephen declares in Acts vii. 4 that Abraham’s 
removal from Haran (or Charran) took place after the 
death of his father. But Abraham was only seventy- 
five years of age when he entered Canaan; whereas 
if we assume from Gen. xi. 26 that Abraham was 
born when Terah was but seventy, he must have 
been one hundred and thirty at the call, for Terah 
died at two hundred and five.t The fact however is 
obvious from these statements, that though named 
first among the sons of Terah, Abraham was not the 
firstborn, but the youngest: Terah was seventy when 
his eldest son was born, and he had three sons, Haran, 
Nahor, and Abraham. To ascertain his age at 


* Cf. Browne Ordo S@c. § 13. His system, however, compels 
him to specify the destruction of Jerusalem (A.D. 70) as the close 
of the Mosaic economy, which is certainly wrong. The cruci- 
fixion was the great crisis in the history of Judah and of the 
world. 

+ Comp. Gen, xi, 26, 31, 323 xii. 4. 

15 


226 APPENDIX I. 


Abraham’s birth we must needs turn to the history, and 
there we learn it was one hundred and thirty years. * 
And this will account for the deference Abraham 
paid to Lot, who, though his nephew, was nevertheless 
his equal in years, possibly his senior ; and moreover, 
as the son of Abraham’s eldest brother, the nominal 
head of the family.t 

Again. According to Exod. xii. 40 “the sojourning 
of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was 430 
years.” If this be taken to mean (as the statement 
in Gen. xv. 13, quoted by Stephen in Acts vii. 6, 
might also seem to imply) that the Israelites were 
four centuries in Egypt, the entire chronology must 
be changed. But, as St. Paul explains in Gal. iii. 17, 
these 430 years are to be computed from the call of 
Abraham, and not from the going down of Israel 
into Egypt. The statement in Gen. xv. 13 is 
explained and qualified by the words which follow in 
ver. 16. The entire period of Israel’s wanderings was 
to be four centuries, but when the passage speaks 
definitely of their sojourn in Egypt it says: “In the 
fourth generation they shall come hither again ”—a 


* Clinton, #. 47., voli.,p. 299. Alford’s supercilious comments 
on this (Gr. Test., Acts vii. 4) could be easily disposed of were 
the occasion opportune for the discussion this would involve. 
Indeed a passing reference to Gen xxv. 1, 2, would have 
modified his statements. 

+ Gen. xiii. 8, 9. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 227 


word which was accurately fulfilled, for Moses was 
the fourth in descent from Jacob.* 

It was not till 470 years after the covenant with 
Abraham that his descendants took their place as 
one of the nations of the earth. They were slaves in 
Egypt, and in the wilderness they were wanderers ; 
but under Joshua they entered the land of promise 
and became a nation. And with this last event 
begins a series of cycles of “seventy weeks ” of years. 

From the entrance into Canaan (B.C. 1586-5) to the 
establishment of the kingdom under Saul (B.C. 1096) 
was 490 years. 

From the kingdom (B.C. 1096) to the servitude 
to Babylon (B.C. 606) was 490 years. 

From the epoch of the servitude (B.c. 606) until 
the royal edict of the twentieth year of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus, the national independence of Judah 
was in abeyance, and with that date began the 
mystic era of 490 years, which form the “seventy 
weeks” of the prophecy of Daniel. 

Again the period between the dedication of the 
first temple in the eleventh year of Solomon (B.C. 
1006-5) and the dedication of the second temple 
in the sixth year of Darius Hystaspes of Persia 


(B.C. 515), was 490 years.f 


* His mother was a daughter of Levi (Exod. ii. 1). 
+ It is a remarkable coincidence that the era of the second 


228 APPENDIX I. 


Are we to conclude that these results are purely 
accidental? No thoughtful person will hesitate to 
accept the more reasonable alternative that the 
chronology of the world is part of a Divine plan 
or “economy of times and seasons.” 

The chronological inquiry suggested by the data 
afforded by the books of 2 Kings, 2 Chronicles, 
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel, is of principal 
importance, not only as establishing the absolute 
accuracy of Scripture, but also because it throws 
light upon the main question of the several eras of 
the captivity, which again are closely allied with 
the era of the seventy weeks. 

The student of the book of Daniel finds every 
step beset with difficulties, raised either by avowed 
enemies, or gwast expositors of Holy Writ. Even 
the opening statement of the book has been assailed 
on all sides. That Daniel was made captive in the 
third year of Jehoiakim “is simply an invention 
of late Christian days,” declares the author of 
Messiah the Prince (p. 42), in keeping with the style 
in which this writer disposes of history sacred and 
profane, in order to support his own theories. 

In Dean Milman’s History of the Jews, the page 
which treats of this epoch is full of inaccuracies, 


temple was so nearly this same period of 490 years, B.C. 515 
to about B.c. 18, when Herod rebuilt it. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 229 


First he confounds the seventy years of the desola- 
tions, predicted in Jer. xxv., with the seventy years 
of the servitude, which had already begun. Then as 
the prophecy of Jer. xxv. was given in the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim, he fixes the first capture of 
Jerusalem in that year, whereas Scripture expressly 
states it took place in Jehoiakim’s third year 
(Dan. i. 1). He proceeds to specify B.C. 601 as the 
year of Nebuchadnezzar’s invasion; and here the 
confusion is hopeless, as he mentions two periods of 
three years each between that date and the king’s 
death, which nevertheless he rightly assigns to the 
year B.C. 598. 

Again, Dr. F. W. Newman’s article on the Captivi- 
ties, in Kitto’s Cyclopedia, well deserves notice as 
a specimen of the kind of criticism to be found in 
standard books ostensibly designed to aid the study 
of Scripture. 

“ The statement with which the book of Daniel 
opens is” (he maintains) “in direct collision with 
the books of Kings and Chronicles, which assign 
to Jehoiakim an eleven years’ reign, as also with 
Wer. xxv. i.) It partially rests on 2° Chron. xxxvi. 6, 
which is itself not in perfect accordance with 2 Kings 
xxiv. In the earlier history the war broke out 
during the reign of Jehoiakim, who died before its 
close; and when his son and successor Jehoiachin 
had reigned three months, the city and its king were 


230 APPENDIX I. 


captured. But in the Chronicles the same event is 
made to happen twice over at an interval of three 
months and ten days (2 Chron. xxxvi. 6 and 9); 
and even so we do not obtain accordance with the 
received interpretation of Dan. i. 1-3.” | 

This writer’s conclusions are adopted by Dean 
Stanley in his Fewish Church (vol. ii., p. 459), wherein 
he enumerates among the captives taken with Jehoia- 
chin in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar, the 
prophet Daniel, who had gained a position at the 
court of Babylon six years before Jehoiachin came 
to the throne! * 

A reference to the Five Great Monarchies (vol. iii., 
pp. 488-494), and the Fastz FHellenict, will show how 
thoroughly consistent the sacred history of this 
period appears to the mind of a historian or a 
chronologer; and moreover how completely it 
harmonizes with the extant fragments of the history 
of Berosus. 

Jehoiakim did in fact reign eleven years, In his 
third year he became the vassal of the King of 
Babylon. For three years he paid tribute, and in 
his sixth year he revolted. There is not a shadow 
of reason for believing that the first verse of Daniel 
is spurious; and apart from all claim to Divine 
sanction for the book, the idea that such a writer— 


* Compare 2 Kings xxiv. 12 with Dan. ii. 1. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 231 


aman of princely rank and of the highest culture,* 
and raised to the foremost place among the wise 
and noble of Babylonia—was ignorant of the date 
and circumstances of his own exile, is simply 
preposterous. But according to Dr. Newman, he 
needed to refer to the book of Chronicles for the 
information, and was deceived thereby! A com- 
parison of the statements in Kings, Chronicles, and 
Daniel clearly establishes that the narratives are 
independent, each giving details omitted in the 
other books. The second verse of Daniel appears 
inconsistent with the rest only to a mind capable 
of supposing that the living king of Judah was 
placed as an ornament in the temple of Belus along 
with the holy vessels ; for so Dr. Newman has read 
it. And the apparent inconsistency in 2 Chron. 
xxxvi. 6 disappears when read with the context, 
for the eighth verse shows the writer’s knowledge 
that Jehoiakim completed his reign in Jerusalem. 
Moreover the correctness of the entire history is 
signally established by fixing the chronology of the 
events, a crucial test of accuracy. 

Jerusalem was first taken by the Chaldeans in 
the third year of Jehoiakim (Dan. i. 1). His fourth 
year was current with the first of Nebuchadnezzar 
(Jer. xxv. 1). This accords with the definite 


Danwmlesn4. 


232 APPENDIX I. 


statement of Berosus that Nebuchadnezzar’s first 
expedition took place before his actual accession 
(Jos., Apion, i. 19). According to the canon of 
Ptolemy, the accuracy of which has been fully 
established, the reign of Nebuchadnezzar dates from 
B.C. 604, 2.2, his accession was in the year beginning 
the first Thoth (which fell in January) B.C. 604, 
and the history leaves no doubt it was early in that 
year. But the captivity, according to the era of 
Ezekiel, began in Nebuchadnezzar’s eighth year 
(comp. Ezek. i. 2 and 2 Kings xxiv. 12); and in the 
thirty-seventh year of the captivity, Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s successor was on the throne (2 Kings xxv. 27). 
This would give Nebuchadnezzar a reign of at least 
forty-four years, whereas according to the Canon (and 
Berosus confirms it) he reigned only forty-three years, 
and was succeeded by Evil-Merodach (the Iluoradam 
of the Canon), in B.C. 561. 

It follows therefore that Scripture antedates the 
years of Nebuchadnezzar, computing his reign from 
B.C. 605.* This would be sufficiently accounted for 
by the fact that, from the conquest of Jerusalem in 
the third year of Jehoiakim, the Jews acknowledged 
Nebuchadnezzar as their suzerain. It has been 
overlooked, however, that it is in accordance with 
the ordinary principle on which they reckoned 


* Clinton; 2v 7, vols 4s, p. 367. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 233 


regnal years, computing them from Nisan to 
Nisan.* In B.c. 604 the rst Nisan fell on or 
about the 1st April,f and according to Jewish 
reckoning, the King’s second year would begin on 
that day, no matter how recently he had ascended 
the throne. Therefore “the fourth year of Jehoiakim 
that was the first year of Nebuchadnezzar” (Jer. 
XxXv. I), was the year beginning Nisan B.C. 605 ; 
and the third of Jehoiakim, in which Jerusalem was 
taken and the servitude began, was the year begin- 
ning Nisan B.C. 606. 

This result is most remarkably confirmed by 
Clinton, who fixes the summer of B.C. 606 as the 
date of Nebuchadnezzar’s first expedition.t 

It is further confirmed by, and affords the explana- 
tion of a statement of Daniel, which has been 
triumphantly appealed to in depreciation of the 
value of his book. If, it is urged, the King of 
Babylon kept Daniel three years in training before 
admitting him to his presence, how could the prophet 
have interpreted the King’s dream in his second 
VeatreCane 4 5, 16511. 1) Daniel, a citizen ‘of 
Babylon, and a courtier withal, naturally and of 
course computed his sovereign’s reign according to 


* See p. 240, fost. 

+ The Paschal new moon, in B.C. 604, was on the 31st 
of March. 

ID Joh Go oy KP 


234 APPENDIX 1. 


the common era in use around him (as Nehemiah 
afterwards did in like circumstances.)* But as the 
prophet was exiled in B.c. 606, his three years’ pro- 
bation terminated at the close of B.c. 603, whereas 
the second year of Nebuchadnezzar, computed from 
his actual accession, extended to some date in the 
early months of B.C. 602. 

Again. The epoch of Jehoiachin’s captivity was 
in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings 
XxXiv. 12), Zé. his eighth year as reckoned from Nisan. 

But the ninth year of the captivity was still 
current on the tenth Tebeth in the ninth year of 
Zedekiah and seventeenth of Nebuchadnezzar (comp. 
Ezeko xxiv. 1-2, with 27 Kings xxv. 1-8): 

And the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar 
and eleventh of Zedekiah, in which Jerusalem was 
destroyed, was in part concurrent with the twelfth 
year of the captivity (comp. 2 Kings xxv. 2-8 with 
Beko xxXill. 20 

It follows therefore that Jehoiachin (¥econiah) 
must have been taken at che close of the Jewish year 
(“when the year was expired,” 2 Chron. xxxvi. I0), 
that is the year preceding Ist Nisan, B.c. 597; and 
Zedekiah was made king (after a brief interregnum) 
early in the year beginning on that day.f And 


* See p. 253, post. 
+ This is confirmed by Ezek. xl. 1, compared with 2 Kings 
xxv, 8, for the twenty-fifth year of the captivity was the fourteenth 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 235 


it also follows that whether computed according 
to the era of Nebuchadnezzar, of Zedekiah, or of 
the captivity, B.c. 587 was the year in which “the 
city was smitten.’* 

The first link in this chain of dates is the third 
year of Jehoiakim, and every new link confirms 
the proof of the correctness and importance of that 
date. It has been justly termed the point of 
contact between sacred and profane history; and 
its importance in the sacred chronology is immense 
on account of its being the epoch of the servitude 
of Judah to the King of Babylon. 

The servitude must not be confounded with the 
captivity, as it generally is. It was rebellion against 
the Divine decree which entrusted the imperial sceptre 
to Nebuchadnezzar, that brought on the Jews the 
further judgment of a national deportation, and 
the still more terrible chastisement of the “ desola- 
tions.” The language of Jeremiah is most definite 


in this respect. “I have given all these lands into 
the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, 
my servant.” “The nation which will not serve 


the same Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, 


year after the destruction of Jerusalem (viz., the nineteenth 
ef Nebuchadnezzar), reckoned zzclustvely according to the 
ordinary pratice of the Jews. 

* These results will appear at a glance by reference to the 
table appended. 


236 APPENDIX I. 


that nation will I punish, saith the Lord, with the 
sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, 
until I have consumed them by his hand.” But 
the nations that bring their neck under the yoke 
of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those will 
I let remain still in their own land, saith the Lord, 
and they shall till it and dwell therein” (Jer. xxvii. 
6, 8 11; and comp. chap. xxxviii. 17-21). 

The appointed era of this servitude was seventy 
years, and the twenty-ninth chapter of Jeremiah 
was a message of hope to the captivity, that at 
the expiration of that period they should return to 
Jerusalem (ver. 10). The twenty-fifth chapter, on 
the other hand, was a prediction for the rebellious 
Jews who remained in Jerusalem after the servitude 
had commenced, warning them that their stubborn 
disobedience would bring on them utter destruction, 
and that for seventy years the whole land should 
be “a desolation.” 

To recapitulate. The thirty-seventh year of the 
captivity was current on the accession of Evil- 
Merodach (2 Kings xxv. 27), and the epoch of that 
king’s reign was B.C. 561. Therefore the captivity 
dated from the year beginning Nisan 598 and 
ending Adar 597. But this was the eighth year 
of Nebuchadnezzar according to Scripture reckoning. 
Therefore his first year was Nisan 605 to Nisan 604. 
The first capture of Jerusalem and the beginning 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 237 


of the servitude was during the preceding year, 
606-605. The final destruction of the city was in 
Nebuchadnezzar’s nineteenth year, z., 587, and the 
siege began 10th Tebeth (or about 25th December), 
589, which was the epoch of the desolations. The 
burning of Jerusalem cannot have been B.c. 588, 
as given by Ussher, Prideaux, etc., for in that case* 
the captivity would have begun B.C. 599, and the 
thirty-seventh year would have ended before the 
accession of Evil-Merodach. Nor can it have been 
B.C. 586, as given by Jackson, Hales, etc., for then 
the thirty-seventh year would not have begun 
during Evil-Merodach’s first year. 

This scheme is practically the same as Clinton’s,t 
and the sanction of his name may be claimed for 
it, for it differs from his only in that he dates 
Jehoiakim’s reign from August B.C. 609, and Zede- 
kiah’s from Fune B.C. 598, his attention not having 
been called to the Jewish practice of computing reigns 
from Visan ; whereas I have fixed Nisan B.c. 608 
as the epoch of Jehoiakim’s reign, and Nisan 
BC. 597 for Zedekiah’s. Not of course that 
Nisan was in fact the month-date of the accession, 


* As this event was in the nineteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar 
(2 Kings xxv. 8), and the captivity began in his eighth year 
(2 Kings xxiv. 12). 

+ Clinton, 7. #., vol. i., p. 319. 

t Lbid., pp. 328-329. 


238 APPENDIX 1. 


but that, according to the rule of the Mzishna and 
the practice of the nation, the reign was so reckoned. 
Jehoiakim’s date could not be Nisan B.C. 609, 
because his fourth year was also the first of 
Nebuchadnezzar, and the thirty-seventh year, 
reckoned from the eighth of Nebuchadnezzar, was 
the first of Evil-Merodach, ze, B.C. 561, which 
date fixes the whole chronology as Clinton himself 
conclusively argues.* It follows from this also that 
Zedekiah’s date must be B.C. 597, and not 598. 

The chronology adopted by Dr. PuseyT is essen- 
tially the same as Clinton’s. The scheme here 
proposed differs from it only to the extent and 
on the grounds above indicated. His suggestion 
that the fast proclaimed in the fifth year of 
Jehoiakim{ referred to the capture of Jerusalem 
in his third year, is not improbable, and points to 
Chisleu (Nov.) B.c. 606 as the date of that event. For 
the reasons above stated, it could not have been 
B.C. 607, as Dr. Pusey supposes, and the same 
argument proves that Canon Rawlinson’s date for 
Nebuchadnezzar’s expedition (B.C. 605) is a year 
too late.§ 

The correctness of this scheme will, I presume, 
be admitted, as regards the cardinal point of differ- 
ence between it and Clinton’s chronology, namely, 


* Fasti H., vol. i., p. 319. + Daniel, p. 401. 
16 OZ SoA ©: § Five Great Mon., iv. 488. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 239 


that the reigns of the Jewish kings are reckoned 
from Nisan. It remains to notice the points of 
difference between the results here offered and 
Browne’s hypotheses (Ordo S@c, §§ 162-169). He 
arbitrarily assumes that Jehoiachin’s captivity and 
Zedekiah’s reign began on the same day. This leads 
him to assume further (1) that they were reckoned 
from the same day, viz., the Ist Nisan, and (2) that 
Nebuchadnezzar’s royal years dated from some date 
between Ist Nisan and 10 Ab 606 (§ 166). Both 
these positions are untenable. (1) The Jews cer- 
tainly reckoned the reigns of their kings from Ist 
Nisan, but there is no proof that they so reckoned 
the years of ordinary periods or eras such as the 
captivity. (2) The presumption is strong, confirmed 
by all the synchronisms of the chronology, that they 
computed Nebuchadnezzar’s royal era either accord- 
ing to the Chaldean reckoning, as in Daniel, or 
according to their own system, as in the other books. 
The following table will show at a glance the 
several eras of the servitude to Babylon, king Jehoi- 
achin’s captivity, and the desolations of Jerusalem. 
In using the table it is essential to bear in mind 
two points already stated. 1. The year given in 
the first column is the Jewish year beginning the 
Ist Nisan (March—April). For example, B.c. 604 
is the year beginning the 1st April, 604; and B.C. 
589 is the year beginning the 15th March, 589. 


240 APPENDIX I. 


According to the Mishna,* “On the 1st of Nisan 
is a new year for the computation of the reign of 
kings, and for festivals.” To which the editors of 
the English translation add this note: “The reign 
of Jewish kings, whatever the period of accession 
might be, was always reckoned from the preceding 
Nisan; so that if, for instance,a Jewish king began 
to reign in Adar, the following month (Nisan) would 
be considered as the commencement of the second 
year of his reign. This rule was observed in all 
legal contracts, in which the reign of kings was 
always mentioned.” ; 

2. The years of the different eras are only i” 
part concurrent. For example, the first year of the 
desolations dates from the tenth day of Tebeth 
(25th December), B.c. 589, and the tenth year of the 
captivity begins even later,t while the ninth year 
of Zedekiah and seventeenth of Nebuchadnezzar 
dates from the 1st Nisan (15th March) B.c. 580. 

If these points be kept in view the chronology 
of the table will be found to harmonize every chrono- 
logical statement relating to the period embraced in 
it, contained in the Books of Kings, Chronicles, 
Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and Daniel. 


* Treatise, Kosh Tashanah, \. 3 
+ See p. 234, ante. 


‘oquv Ee ‘d ‘syxeutor A1ojeur[dxe 20S 


v Fai iS 1 «| S66 
€ II Z rom 965 if 
“(QI ‘AIxx surg z) stead 11 poustoyy Zz Ol | ‘Yyeryapez 6 L6S om 
‘(azuv ‘ofz “bEz ‘dd aas “uryoeroyof 
‘ZI “AIXX SSUTY Z) Iezzoupeyonqayy Jo rvak yg oy UL Uedeq AqIAWdeo | JO syjuow € 
asoyam ‘(yeruooa[) uryovioyaf jo usier syJuour £ sy} popnyoutr read siz, I Cm II 8 g6S 
8 oI Ht 66S 
Z 6 9 009 
9 8 5 109 
S L v ZO9 
b 9 € £09 
(‘TL ‘ueq) odvut void oY} Jo UOISTA € S z boo 


*(1 ‘Axx ‘10{) Soo Suestny ISI SuruUIseq Ava ay} 6:3"z *IVZZ9U 
09 IN TUUTOq | : 


«(TezzaupeyonqaN jo raf jsi oy} sem yey} “wryeroyel jo 19k yb oy ,, z v -peyonqan | So9g 
‘[nNVG Japun WoOpsuUryy 9y} Jo JUOWYSITG"ISA OY} TdI~e (steak Jo SYoOM 

of 10) sreak o6b ‘uedoq uo[kqeg 0} opnjzAIes oy} JAS SIU) UIT *(wuryeITq) | ‘ressejod 

‘aun ‘1Ez% *d ves ‘(z ‘I ‘1 ued) sezzaupeyonqany Aq uaxe} woresniof wryeroyal | -oqeN jo 
"Sog ‘uesINT SI 0} ‘909 ‘uLsTNY 381 VIO ‘UNyLIOYEl Jo reok pIL oy, 1 |jo zeah part} reak y}0z | 909 
2'a 

a CH 
B n 

ge fee |e | aw | Bom | se 
SHNUVNAU GNV SINFAT 2S, 28 ES, 52,5" 235 iS sh 
8 5 se aes Ine (7 5 on xo 


ZIdWTL GNODXS FHL AO NOILVIIGHA FHL OL NOTA@VAI OL AANLIAXXS THL WONL 


SIaVL AV IDO IONOUHO 


“YJUOUT YIOI ay} Jo Aep y}S 9y} UO sopIxa oY} payer ouTALY 
sMouU 94} ‘IZ “IIxxx ‘yazq ur ,, Ayandes mmo jo qeak yiZI agL,, 
pales ‘(azuy ‘bEz -d aas “6 °g “€ ‘% -axx sSury z) IezzaupeyonqeanN jo 
qeok yy6I ay} pur “Yeryapez jo rvak YI oy} UT yJUOU yyS ay} Jo Aep 
44 ey} uo JuINq pur ‘YjUOW Yh ay} Jo Kep yI6 ay) UO uaye} urapesnio [ 

‘(1 ‘xxx ya) ,, rezzau 
“peyonqen, jo rwak yigr oy} sem yorym “yeryapaz Jo xvak yor MUL» 

; *(a7uw ‘ol ‘69 *dd 9as) ,, suoty 
“FIOSe ,, 243 JO yoods ayi—,,“yJaqo, Jo ysvy 94} ,,—yloqay, Jo Lep 
MOI oy} uo “Aezzaupeyonqen Aq aut} pasty} OY} Joy poysoaui wearesnio{ 


(‘% ‘1 *t yazq) Aytaryydeo ay} yo reak waS ay} pue “(fz ‘m1xx sSury z) 
qeaosseg syeisof wo sea yo ay} ut Asaydoad 0} ueseq oraz 


TOO HO DG 


7 


61 
gt 
Li 
91 
SI 
U1 
€1 


ZI 


— 


Mm ORO DO 


‘SHUVWAUN ANV SLNAAR 


*suol]e]Osaq 
oy} jo e1q 


*AAndeD 
94} jo BIg 


lz 
gz 
Sz 
vz 
€z 
Zz 
1z 


O@ 


*OPNITAIBS 
ayy jo wry 


‘(ganuuyuo)—ATGVL TVWOIDOTONOUHOD 


II 


St mo nO OD 


“yepnt 
jo ssury 


9% 
Sz 
bz 
£z 
Zz 
IZ 
Oz 


16S 
£6S 
$6 


"'3°a 


*(1€ snp ‘zaf) ,, uostid jo 
Jno Y}IOJ JYSnoIq ,, sem uryovtoyal ivak sty} up ‘reek yey} Jo asojd ay} SpIvAMO} 
1} Juermo sem Aytaydes s,uryoeroyaf jo rvak yWZE oy} pue ‘196 Judy mS 
ynoqe 10) uestny 3SI Sutpoooid reak oy} ‘a'z ‘ava ystmol oy} st oTqe} sIy} ut zOS 
qeak ayy yng “(azn ‘eEz +d as) ‘19S ‘ova (‘uf WIT) You, JsI suruuiseq re9k 
ay} Ul Sem (TOVporoyy-[IAy) Wepvionyy Jo uoisseooe oy} ‘uoUvD oY} 0} SUIpI0DNW 


‘(1 "[x "yezq) woyesnief Jo uoronssap sy} wo (peu0xoor 
Ayyensn smoaf oy se ‘acesmpour) yybr oy} sem Apandeg oy} Jo weak Sz oy, 


If 
of 


6z 


or 
6£ 


*IIZIIOYS 


[esa N 
10 
ressy3uany | 69S 
Zz 09S 
“yoep 


-O19.- [IAQ] 19S 


by zoS 
eb £96 
zy oS 
Iv SoS 
ov 99S 
6¢ 106 
gt goS 
LE 69S 
9£ oS 
Se 1ZS 
vf zZ$ 
€€ ££ 
ze VLS 
If SL 
of 9LS 
6z LLS 
Qz gl 
lz | OLS 


(MIA “114 ‘uvq) rezzeysfeg jo avak pat 
St) Ul SEM JLOD 9Y} puv WeY dy} Jo uoIsIA sty pur ‘eek 4SI OY} UT SVM S]seag 
MOT OY} JO UOISIA SJaluRC ‘sIprUoqeN ‘ToYyey sty Jo owNeyy ayy ur jueSor 


euvoaq (suorduosuy 9y} Jo anznsesjag oy3) Jezzeysjag ‘1eah sty} aojoq 10 up| 6% gS 99 St 
gh ZS $9 at 
Ly 9S to €1 
ov SS £9 ZI 
cr vs zQ II 
br £s 19 or 
€v zs 09 6 
ev 1S 6S 8 
1v oS gS £ 
ob 6v LS 9 
: 6¢ gb 9S S 
gt LY SS v 
lite ob bS € 
9f Sv os Zz 
‘snjoporayy Aq snyaudqeT 
pure ‘suorjdiosuy oy} Ul jYeuUNqeN poj[vd st uouvD ay} Jo snipeuoqeN oy} S¢ bry z& | ‘snpruoqeny 
bE fv 1g v 
co zv | oS € 
ze iy | 6b z 
| 
Yel oO es 
us ee | ae | ge 
"SNUVWAY GNV SLNZAT as 25 | - oF <9 
oe (ede FEN, Be 
2 ; i 


‘(panuuor)—ATIVL TWOIDOIONOUHOD 


‘(gun ‘gg *d 998) 4722 ay} pjInq 0} JOIpa ay Jo 9}¥p arr 
atoyaq sreak of puv “(Soor ‘o'a) a[dura} s,uomojosg jo uorjeorpap oy} 19Ye suvod 
o6h “(zz-Sr ‘1A vizq) S19 uvsINT ur JaAosseg oy} Je pojeoIpep sem oduay oy], 
*(S1 ‘1A vazq) sntzeq jo read yYXQ oy} UL Iepy jo ep pr€ oy} uo poysiuy sem opdwiay, ayy, 


"(up ‘ol ‘daas ‘gi Sey) snizeq jo revak puz oy} ut yjuow 416 ay} Jo hep yybe 
2y} UO ple] sem oidutey, puovsg sy} Jo uoTjepunoj oy], “suOIyZjosaq oY} Jo puy 
‘laqgup ‘LS ‘d) sadseyshyy snieqy 


(‘x-"x "WeC]) WOISIA JsvT Ss JorueC Jo rea qq 


(‘9€S ‘uestyy ISI OY) TIT} JusLIN se OpNytAIaS ay} Jo Ivod YO 2YT, “q'N) 
“OPN }Iaras ey} JO pua : utsyesniaf 0} umjor 0} smaf oy} Surztoyyne sn1kJD Jo aa10aq 


‘read Siy} UT Sea syaoa Of 94} Jo UOISIA Syatueq ‘snika Aq uaye} uo[kqug 


29 


19 
09 
6S 


OtmMmo & 


z 
"T snueqg 


*sosaqures) 


OF ING NAA 9 t1N© Noo 


ssntka 
% 
‘(@PaW Ot) 
sniieq 
Lt 
co 


$1S 
QI 
“1S 
gi 
61S 


ozS 
1zS 
zzG 
€zS 
bzS 
ozs 
gzS 
LzS 
gz 
6zS 
ofS 
1gS 
zes 
ees 
pes 
SEs 


ofS 
LES 


ges 
6£S 


| ob$ 


APPENDIX 1. 


246 


‘aquv “ez pue L6 ‘dd aag t 


“ZI I Te) 4 
‘ajuw “Lzz dag “sreak 9a1y} Aq ASojouorzyo suo woy szayrp SJCP VSI TL % 


‘UOIXYIO — 

eters, } Ixy} aBYL—3s141yD ns 
"s1eah QQ0z ‘MET 94.—sasop, $zg1 
‘steak ofF } 

fjueusa0D ayy,—wreyeiqy $Soz 
‘sea h oft +f 
‘svak ggoz ‘POO PYUL—Yyeon , Sghz 
es re) ‘uoNeaIy oYT—wepy , IVI 


" 


“NOIXIMIONYD AHL AGNV NOILVAYO FHL 
NUaMIAG INIOd IVYLNAO AHL SVM WVHVUAV AO TIVO FHL LVHL ONIMOHS 


SSWNSITATIVUVd TVOIDOTONOYHD AO AIAVL 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 247 


CERTAIN LeapING Daves 1n History, SACRED 
AND PROFANE.* 


2055. The Covenant with Abraham. 
1625. The Exodus. The giving of the Law. 
1585. The entrance into Canaan under Joshua. 
1096, Saul. The kingdom established. 
1056. David. 
1016. Solomon 
1014. The Temple founded. 
1006. The Temple dedicated. 
976. Rehoboam. Israel revolts from Judah, and becomes 
a separate kingdom under Jeroboam. 
776. Era of the Olympiads begins. 
753. Era of Rome (A. U. C.) begins. 
747. Era of Nabonassar begins. 
726. Hezekiah king of Judah (reigned 29 years). 
721. Israel (the ten tribes) carried captive to Assyria. 
697. Manasseh (55 years). 
642. Amon (z years). 
640. Josiah (31 years). 
627. Jeremiah began to prophesy. 
608. Jehoiakim (11 years). 
606. BasyLon.—Jerusalem taken by Nebuchadnezzar 
The servitude began. 


* These dates are Clinton’s, subject to remarks in App. I., ante. 
They are selected mainly to throw light on Daniel’s visions. The names 
of historians, etc., are introduced in the fifth century B.c. to indicate the 
character of the age in which the prophetic era of the seventy weeks 
began. 


APPENDIX I. 


9! . Jerusalem taken the second time by the Babylonians. 


King Jehoiachin’s captivity. 


. Jerusalem besieged the third time by the Babylonians. 


The Desolations. 


. Jerusalem taken and destroyed. 
. Death of Nebuchadnezzar and accession of Evil- 


Merodach. 


. Cyrus begins to reign in Persia. 
. Persta.—Babylon taken by the Medes and Persians. 
. Cyrus succeeds Darius in the empire. Decree to 


build the temple. 


. Darius Hystaspes of Persia. 
. The foundation of the second temple. Haggai and 


Zechariah prophesied. 


. Dedication of the second temple. 
. Battle of Marathon. 
. Xerxes succeeds Darius; the Ahasuerus of the book 


of Esther. 


. Herodotus the historian born, 
. Battles of Thermopyle and Salamis. 
. Themistocles banished by ostracism. Thucydides 


the historian born. 


. Socrates born (died 399). 

. Flight of Themistocles to Persia. 

. Artaxerxes Longimanus of Persia. 

. Decree of Artaxerxes to beautify the temple (Ezra vii.) 
. Persians defeated by the Athenians at Salamis in 


Cyprus. 


. Era of the 70 weeks begins, Twentieth year of 


Artaxerxes: Jerusalem restored. Herodotus, ¢. 
39, engaged on his history. 


CHRONOLOGICAL TREATISE AND TABLES. 249 


B.C, 


4209. 
424. 
405. 
397: 


359: 
336. 
333- 


323- 
Bites 
301. 
170. 
168. 
165. 


63. 
40. 


37: 


Plato born (died 347). 

Darius Nothus of Persia (Neh. xii. 22). 

Artaxerxes Mnemon of Persia. 

Malachi. The dispensation of ‘the Prophets ” 
closes. End of the first week of Daniel’s 70 weeks. 

Ochus of Persia. 

Darius Codomanus of Persia. 

GREECE.—Battle of Issus. (Battle of Granicus, 334 ; 
and of Arbela, 331.) 

Death of Alexander the Great. 

Era of the Seleucide begins. 

Battle of Ipsus. 

Jerusalem taken by Antiochus Epiphanes. 

The temple defiled by Antiochus. 

Jerusalem retaken by Judas Maccabeus. The temple 
cleansed, and the Feast of the Dedication ap- 
pointed. (z Macc. iv. 52-59; John x. 22). 

RomeE.—Pompey takes Jerusalem. 

Herod the Great appointed king of Judea by the 
Romans. 

Herod takes Jerusalem, and is acknowledged as king 
by the Jews. 


. Battle of Actium. 

. Augustus Emperor of Rome. 

. The Nativity. 

. Death of Herod. Archelaus made Ethnarch of 


Judea, and Herod Antipas set over Galilee. 


. Tiberius Emperor of Rome (from 19th August). 
. 15th year of Tiberius, from roth Aug. A.D. 28, to 


roth Aug. 29. The Lord’s ministry began in this 
year, Luke iii. 


250 APPENDIX 1. 


A.D. 


32. The crucifixion (at the fourth Passover of the Lord’s 
ministry). 


THE JeEwisH MONTHS. 


Nisan, or Abib : : March—April. 


ZigeOr lyan ; ; April—May. 
Sivan. : ‘ ; May—June. 
Tammuz . - : . June—July. 
Ab. : ; - : July—Aug. 
Elul : : c ; Aug.—Sept. 
Tisri, or Ethanim . - Sept.—Oct. 
Bul, or Marchesvan ; Oct.—Nov. 
Chisleu . : . . Nov.—Dec. 
Tebeth . : : : Dec.—Jan. 
Sebat . . , F Jan.—Feb. 
Adar. ; : : Feb.—March, 


Ve-Adar (the intercalary month). 


Full information on the subject of the present ‘‘ Hebrew 
Calendar” will be found in an article so entitled in Excyc. 
Brit. (oth ed.), and also in Lindo’s Fewish Calendar, a 
Jewish work, The Afshna is the earliest work relating to it. 


APPENDIX II. 


NOTE A. 


ARTAXERXES LONGIMANUS AND THE CHRONOLOGY 
OF HIS REIGN. 


So thorough is the unanimity with which the Artaxerxes of 
Nehemiah is now admitted to be Longimanus, that it is no 
longer necessary to offer proof of it. Josephus indeed attri- 
butes these events to Xerxes, but his history of the reigns of 
Xerxes and Artaxerxes is so hopelessly in error as to be 
utterly worthless. In fact he transposes the events of these 
respective reigns (see Az. XI., caps v. and vii.) Nehemiah’s 
master reigned not less than thirty-two years (Neh. xiii. 6) ; 
and his reign was subsequent to that of Darius Hystaspes 
(comp. Ezra vi. 1 and vii. 1), and prior to that of Darius 
Nothus (Neh. xii. 22). He must, therefore, be either Longi- 
manus or Mnemon, for no other king after Darius Hystaspes 
reigned thirty-two years, and it is certain Nehemiah’s mission 
was not so late as the twentieth of Artaxerxes Mnemon, viz., 
B.C. 385. 

This appears, first, from the general tenor of the history ; 
second, because this date is later than that of Malachi, 
whose prophecy must have been considerably later than the 
time of Nehemiah; and third, because Eliashib, who was 
high priest when Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, was grandson 


252 APPENDIX II. 


of Jeshua, who was high priest in the first year of Cyrus 
(Neh. iii. 1; xii. 10; Ezra ii, 2; iil. 2); and from the first 
year of Cyrus (B.c. 536), to the twentieth of Artaxerxes 
Longimanus (B.c. 445), was ninety-one years, leaving room 
for precisely three generations. * 

Moreover, the eleventh chapter of Daniel, if read aright, 
affords conclusive proof that the prophetic era dated from 
the time of Longimanus. The second verse is generally in- 
terpreted as though it were but a disconnected fragment of 
history, leaving a gap of over 130 years between it and the 
third verse, whereas the chapter is a consecutive prediction 
of events within the period of the seventy weeks. There were 
to be yet (ze. after the issuing of.the decree to build Jeru- 
salem) “three kings in Persia.” These were Darius Nothus 
(mentioned in Neh. xii. 22), Artaxerxes Mnemon, and 
Ochus ; the brief reigns of Xerxes II., Sogdianus, and 
Arogus being overlooked as being, what in fact they were, 
utterly unimportant, and indeed two of them are omitted in 
the Canon of Ptolemy. ‘ The fourth” (and /asf) king was 
Darius Codomanus, whose fabulous wealth—the accumu- 
lated horde of two centuries—attracted the cupidity of the 
Greeks. What sums of money Alexander found in Susa 
is unknown, but the silver ingots and Hermione purple 
he seized after the battle of Arbela were worth over + 
£,20,000,000. Verse 2 thus reaches to the close of the 
Persian Empire ; verse 3 predicts the rise of Alexander the 
Great ; and verse 4 refers to the division of his kingdom 
among his four generals. 

According to Clinton (/ ., vol. ii., p. 380) the death of 


* Encyc. Brit., oth ed., title “ Artaxerxes.” 
t W. K. Loftus, “ Chaldea and Susiana,” p. 341. 


CHRONOLOGY OF ARTAXERXES’ REIGN. 253 


Xerxes was in July B.c. 465, and the accession of Artaxerxes 
was in February B.c. 464. Artaxerxes of course ignored 
the usurper’s reign, which intervened, and reckoned his own 
reign from the day of his father’s death. Again, of course, 
Nehemiah, being an officer of the court, followed the same 
reckoning. Had he computed his master’s reign from 
February 464, Chisleu and Nisan could not have fallen in 
the same regnal year (Neh. i. 1; i. 1). No more could 
they, had he, according to the Jewish practice, computed 
it from Nisan. 

Dr. Pusey here remarks,* ‘“ The accession of Artaxerxes 
after the seven months of the assassin Artabanus would fall 
in the middle of 464. For it is clear from the sequel of the 
months in Neh. i., ii., and Ezra vii. 7-9, that Chisleu fell 
earlier in the year of his reign than Nisan, and Nisan than 
Ab. Then the reign of Artaxerxes must have begun 
between Ab and Chisleu B.c. 464.” This is altogether a 
mistake. As already mentioned, Chisleu and Nisan fell in 
the same regnal year; and so also did Nisan and ¢he first 
day of Ab (Ezra vii. 8, 9). But the rst Ab of B.c. 459 (the 
seventh year of Artaxerxes) fell on or about the 16th July, 
and therefore the passages quoted are perfectly consistent 
with the received chronology, and serve merely to enable us 
to fix the dates more accurately still, and to decide that the 
death of Xerxes and the epoch of the reign of Artaxerxes 
should be assigned to the /atter part of July B.c. 465. 

Those who are not versed in what writers on prophecy 
have written on this subject, will be surprised to learn that 
this date is assailed as being nine years too late. All 
chronologers are agreed that Xerxes began to reign in 


* Daniel, p. 160. 


254 APPENDIX I, 


B.C. 485, and that the death of Artaxerxes was in B.C. 423; 
and so far as I know, no writer of repute, unbiassed by 
prophetic study, assigns as the epoch of the latter king’s 
reign any other date than B.c. 465* (or 464; see ante). 
This is the date according to the Canon of Ptolemy, which 
has been followed by all historians ; and it is confirmed by 
the independent testimony of Julius Africanus, who, in his 
Chronography,t describes the twentieth year of Artaxerxes 
as the 115th year of the Persian Empire [reckoned from 
Cyrus, B.c. 559] and the fourth year of the eighty-third 
Olympiad. This fixes B.c. 464 as the first year of that 
king, as it was in fact the year of his actual accession. 

It was Archbishop Ussher who first raised a doubt upon 
the point. Lecturing on “ Daniel’s Seventies” { in Trinity 
College, Dublin, in the year 1613, difficulties connected 
with his subject suggested an inquiry which led him ulti- 
mately to put back the reign of Longimanus to B.c. 474, 
which is the date given in his Annales Vet. Test. The 
same date was afterwards adopted by Vitringa, and a century 
later by Kriiger. But Hengstenberg is regarded as the 
champion of this view, and the treatise thereon in his 
Christology § omits nothing that can be urged in its favour. 

The objections raised to the received chronology depend 


* On this point I have consulted the author of Zhe Five Great 
Monarchies, a book to which frequent reference is made in these pages, 
and I am indebted to Canon Rawlinson’s courtesy and kindness for the 
following reply: ‘‘ I think you may safely say that chronologers are now 
agreed that Xerxes died in the year B.c. 465. The Canon of Ptolemy, 
Thucydides, Diodorus, and Manetho are agreed; the only counter 
authority being Ctesias, who is quite untrustworthy.” 

} Ante-Nicene Christian Library, vol.ix., second part, p 184. 

t Works, vol. xv., p. 108. 

§ Arnold’s trans., pp. 443-454. 


CHRONOLOGY OF ARTAXERXES’ REIGN. 255 


mainly on the statement of Thucydides, that Artaxerxes was 
on the throne when Themistocles reached the Persian 
Court; for it is urged that the flight of Themistocles could 
not have been so late as B.c. 464.* But, as Dr. Pusey 
remarks,t “they have not made any impression on our 
English writers who have treated of Grecian history.”+ In 
common with the German writers, Dr. Pusey ignores Ussher 
altogether in the controversy, though Dr. Tregelles § rightly 
claims for him the foremost place for scholarship among 
those who have advocated the earlier date. The apparent 
difficulty of making the prophecy and the chronology agree 
has led Dr. Pusey, following Prideaux, in opposition to 
Scripture, to fix the seventh year of Artaxerxes as the epoch 
of the seventy weeks, while it induced Dr. Tregelles, |! 
sheltering behind Ussher’s name, to adopt the B.c. 455 
date for the twentieth year of that king’s reign. Bishop 
Lloyd when affixing Ussher’s dates to our English Bible 
reverted to the received chronology when dealing with the 
book of Nehemiah. 

It is unnecessary to enter here upon a discussion of this 
question. Nothing short of a reproduction of the entire 
argument in favour of the new chronology would satisfy its 
advocates; and for my present purpose it is a sufficient 
answer to that argument, that although everything has been 
urged which ingenuity and erudition can suggest in support 
of it, it has been rejected by all secular writers. Unfulfilled 


* Kriiger’s arguments are reviewed by Clinton in #. 7%, ii., p. 217. 

+ Daniel, p. 171, note. 

t See ex. gr. Mitford, ii., 226 ; Thirlwall, ii, 428; Grote, v., 379 ; 
and of Germans see Niebuhr, Lect. Anc. Hist. (Schmitz ed.), ii., 180-181, 

§ Daniel, p. 266. 

| Zbcd., p. 99, no7e. 


256 APPENDIX II. 


prophecy is only for the believer, but prophecy fulfilled has 
a voice for all. It is fortunate, therefore, that the proof of 
the fulfilment of this prophecy of the seventy weeks does 
not depend on an elaborate disquisition, like that of 
Hengstenberg’s, to disturb the received chronologies. 
One point only I will notice. It is urged in favour of 
limiting the reign of Xerxes to eleven years, that no event 
is mentioned in connection with his reign after his eleventh 
year. The answer is obvious: first, that it is to Greek his- 
torians, writing after his time, that we are mainly indebted 
for our knowledge of Persian history ; and secondly, the 
battles of Thermopyle and Salamis may well have induced 
a king of the temperament and character of Xerxes to give 
himself up toa life of indolent ease and sensual enjoyment. 
But further, the twelfth year of Xerxes is expressly 
mentioned in the book of Esther (iii. 7), and the narrative 
proves that his reign continued to the twelfth (Jewish) 
month of his thirteenth year.* Hengstenberg answers this 
by asserting that it was customary with Hebrew writers to 
include in a regnal era the years of a co-regency where it 
existed, and he appeals to the case of Nebuchadnezzar as a 


* The Feast of Purim derives its name from the fact that when 
Haman planned the destruction of the people of Mordecai, he cast lots 
day by day to find ‘‘a lucky day ” for the execution of his scheme. A 
whole year—the twelfth year of Xerxes—was thus consumed (Esther 
iii. 7); and the decree for the slaughter of the Jews was made on the 13th 
Nisan in the following year (zézd. iii. 12). The decree in their favour was 
granted two months later (zdzd. viii. 9), and the king is mentioned in 
connection with the execution of that decree in the twelfth month of that 
year (zbid. ix. 1, 13-17). The reign of Xerxes therefore certainly continued 
to the last month of his thirteenth year. The last chapter of Esther, moxe- 
over, clearly shows that his reign did not end with the events recorded 
in the book, but that his promotion of Mordecai was the beginning 
of a new era in his career. 


CHRONOLOGY OF ARTAXERXES’ REIGN. 257 


proof of such a custom.* If Nebuchadnezzar’s reign was 
in fact reckoned thus, this solitary instance would establish 
no such custom, for it would prove nothing more than that 
the Jews in Jerusalem, knowing nothing of the politics or 
customs of Babylon, reckoned Nebuchadnezzar’s reign upon 
a system of their own. But I believe this theory about 
Nebuchadnezzar’s reign is a thorough blunder. If in the 
sacred history he is called King of Babylon, in connection 
with his first invasion of Judea, it is because the writers were 
his contemporaries. ‘Lord Beaconsfield was Chancellor 
is a 


of the Exchequer in Lord Derby’s administrations’ 
statement which will be rightly condemned as an anachron- 
ism if made by the historian of the future, but it is precisely 
the language which would have been used by a contemporary 
writer acquainted with the living statesman. I have shown 
elsewhere (App. I., ante) that the Jews reckoned Nebuchad- 
nezzar’s reign according to their own custom, as dating from 
the Nisan preceding his accession. Unless, therefore, some 
entirely new case can be made in support of the co-regency 
theory of Xerxes’s reign, it remains that the book of Esther 
is absolutely conclusive against Ussher’s date, and in favour 
of the received chronology. 


NOTE B. 
THE DATE OF THE NATIVITY. 


In treating of the date of the birth of our Lord, the 
arguments in favour of an earlier date than that which is 
here adoptéd are too well known to be left unnoticed. 


* Christology (Arnold’s ¢vans.), § 737: 


17 


258 APPENDIX II. 


+ 


Dr. Farrar states the question thus in his Life of Christ 
(Excursus I.) :— 

“ Our one most certain datum is obtained from the fact 
that Christ was born before the death of Herod the Great. 
The date of that event is known with absolute certainty, 
for (i) Josephus tells us that he died thirty-seven years after 
he had been declared king by the Romans. Now it is 
known that he was declared King A.U.C. 714; and, there- 
fore, since Josephus always reckons his years from Nisan to 
Nisan, and counts the initial and terminal fractions of Nisan 
as complete years, Herod must have died between Nisan 
A.U.C. 750, and Nisan A.U.C. 751, ze, between B.c. 4 
and Bc. 3 of our era. (ii) Josephus says that on the 
night in which Herod ordered Judas, Matthias, and their 
abettors to be burnt, there was an eclipse of the moon. 
Now this eclipse took place on the night of March 12th, 
Bc. 4, and Herod was dead at least seven days before 
the Passover, which, if we accept the Jewish reckoning, fell 
in that year on April 12th. But according to the clear 
indication of the Gospels, Jesus must have been born at 
least forty days before Herod’s death. It is clear, therefore, 
that under no circumstances can the nativity have taken 
place later than February B.c. 4.’* 

This passage is a typical illustration of the relative value 
attached to the statements of sacred and profane historians. 
In the histories of Josephus an incidental mention of an 
eclipse or of the length of a king’s reign suffices to give 


* Dr. Farrar’s book has done much to popularize a controversy which 
hitherto has interested only the few. It may be well to notice, there- 
fore, that his sweeping statement as to the date of Herod’s death is 
doubtful (see Clinton, Fast? Rom., A.D. 29), and that Josephus does zot 


always reckon reigns in the manner indicated (see p. 262, post). 


THE DATE OF THE NATIVITY. 259 


“absolute certainty,” before which the clearest and most 
definite statements of Holy Writ must give place, albeit 
they relate to matters of such transcendent interest to 
the writers that even if the Evangelists be dismissed 
to the category of mere historians, no mistake was 
possible. 

The following is a more temperate statement of the 
question, by the Archbishop of York, in an article (fesus 
Christ) contributed to Smith’s Bible Dictionary :—“ Herod 
the Great died, according to Josephus, in the thirty-seventh 
year after he was appointed king. His elevation coincides 
with the consulship of Cn Domitius Calvinus and C. 
Asinius Pollio, and this determines the date A.U.C. 714. 
There is reason to think that in such calculations Josephus 
reckons the years from the month Nisan to the same month, 
and also that the death of Herod took place in the beginning 
of the thirty-seventh year, or just before the Passover ; if then 
thirty-six complete years are added, they give the year of 
Pherod s death, AV U:C.-7 50.” 

According to this, the commonly received view, Herod’s 
death took place within the first six days of a Jewish year, 
and these days are reckoned as a complete year in his 
regnal era. Now it is admitted that in computing time the 
Jews generally included both the terminal units of a given 
period. A signal and well-known instance of this is afforded 
by the words of the Lord Himself, when He declared He 
would lie in death for three days and nights. What mean- 
ing did these words convey to Jews? Four-and-twenty 
hours after His burial they came to Pilate and said, “ We 
remember that that deceiver said, while He was yet alive, 
‘After three days 1 will rise again;’ command, there- 
fore, that the sepulchre be made sure wstel the third 


260 APPENDIX I1. 


day.” * Had that Sunday passed leaving the seal upon the 
tomb unbroken, the Pharisees would boldly have proclaimed 
their triumph; whereas, by our modes of reckoning, the 
resurrection ought to have been deferred till Monday 
night, or Tuesday morning.t 

Again, it may be assumed that Herod’s accession dated 
in fact from B.c. 40, and, therefore, that B.c. 4 was the 
thirty-seventh and last year of his reign. Further it is 
probable he died s/ortly before a Passover. The question 
remains whether his death occurred at the beginning or 
toward the close of the Jewish year. 

Josephus relates that when the event took place Archelaus 
remained in seclusion during seven days, and then presented 
himself publicly to the people. His first reception was not 
unfavourable, though he had to yield to many a popular 
demand then pressed on him ; and after the ceremonial, he 
“went and offered sacrifice to God, and then betook him- 
self to feast with his friends.’’ Soon, however, discontent 


* Matt. xxvii. 63,64 ; comp. 2 Chron. x. 5-12. ‘* He said unto them, 
Come again unto me after three days . . . so Jeroboam and all the 
people came to Rehoboam on the third day?” 

+ Whether such a system of reckoning appears strange or natural 
\epends on the habit of thought of the individual. A professor of theo- 
logy might have trouble in defending it in class, but a prison chaplain 
would have no difficulty in explaining it to his congregation! Our own 
civil day isa vuxOnpepov, beginning at midnight, and the law takes no 
cognizance of a fart of a day. Therefore in a sentence of three days’ 
imprisonment, the prescribed term is equal to seventy-two hours; but 
though the prisoner seldom reaches the gaol till evening, the law holds 
him to have completed a day’s imprisonment the moment midnight 
strikes, and the gaoler may lawfully release him the moment the prison 
is opened the second morning after. As a matter of fact a prisoner 
committed for three days is seldom more than forty hours in gaol. This 
mode of reckoning and speaking was as familiar to the Jew as it is to 
the Aadituds of our police courts, 


ID GU2 IDVNITS, (2 MEV, INGHI DUT 261 


and disaffection began to smoulder and spread, and fresh 
demands were made upon the king. To these again he 
yielded, though with less grace, instructing his general to 
remonstrate with the people, and persuade them to defer 
their petitions till his return from Rome. These appeals 
only increased the prevailing dissatisfaction, and a riot 
ensued. The king still continued to parley with the sedi- 
tious, but, ‘upon the approach of the feast of unleavened 
bread,” when the capital became thronged with the Jews 
from the country, the state of things became so alarming 
that Archelaus determined to suppress the rioters by force 
of arms. This was “ upon the approach of the feast,” and 
the Jews considered the Passover was “nigh at hand” 
upon the eighth day of Nisan, when they repaired to Jeru- 
salem for the festival.* 

The Passover began the 14th Nisan. This final riot 
took place during the preceding week. The earlier riot 
occurred before that again, z.e., before the date of the in- 
cursion of Jews for the festival, the 8th Nisan. This again 
was preceded by some interval, measured from the day - 
following the court mourning for Herod, which had lasted 
seven days. The history, therefore, establishes conclusively 
that Herod’s death was more than fourteen days before the 
Passover, and therefore at the close and not at the beginning 
of a Jewish year. 

But which year? His death must have been afver the 


* «‘\Vhen the people were come in great crowds to the feast of un- 
leavened bread on the eighth day of the month Xanthicus ” (¢.e., Nisan) 
(Jos., Wars, vi. 5, 3. Comp. John xi. 553 xil. I). “The Jews’ 
Passover was nigh at hand, and many went out of the country up to 
Jerusalem before the Passover to purify themselves. Then Jesus sis 
days before the Passover came to Bethany.” 


262 APPENDIX I1. 


eclipse of 13th March, B.c. 4* But the eclipse was only a 
month before the Passover of that year, and his death was 
fourteen days at least before the Passover ; could then the 
events recorded by Josephus as occurring in the interval 
between the eclipse and the king’s death have taken place 
in a fortnight? Let the reader turn to the Amsigucties and 
judge for himself whether it be possible. The natural 
inference from the history is that the death was not weeks 
but months after the eclipse, and therefore, again, at the 
close of the year. 

The correctness of this conclusion can be established 
by the application of the strictest of all tests, that of referring 
to the historian’s chronological statements. 

In his Wars (ii. 7, 3), Josephus assigns the banishment 
of Archelaus to the zth year of his government; in his 
later work (Anz, xvii. 13, 3), he states it was in his ¢enth 
year. And these dates are given with a definiteness and in 
a manner which preclude the idea of a blunder. They are 
connected with the narration of a dream in which Archelaus 
saw a number of ears of corn (nine in the /Vars, ten in the 
Antiquities), devoured by oxen,—presaging that the years 


* There was no lunar eclipse visible at Jerusalem between that of the 
13th March B.c. 4 and that of 9th January B.c. 1. Many writers take 
the latter to be the eclipse of Herod, and assign his death to that year. 
That of B.c. I was a fine total eclipse, totality coming on at fifteen 
minutes past midnight, whereas that of B.c. 4 was but a partial eclipse, 
and the greatest magnitude was not till 2 h. 34 m. a.m. (Johnson, 
Eclipses Past and Future). But though every consideration of this 
character points to B.C. 1 as the date of Herod’s death, the weight of 
evidence generally is in favour of B.c. 4. Of recent writers, the former 
year is adopted by Dr. Geikie (Life of Christ, 6th ed., p: 150), and 
notably by the late Mr. Bosanquet, who argues the question in his 
Messiah the Prince, and more concisely in a paper read before the 
Society of Biblical Archzeology on 6th June, 1871. 


(eGR IOVAIGE (NP IebF INCAIRATNE: 263 


of his rule were about to be brought abruptly to an end. 
Now whether a ruler be Christian, Jew, or Turk, his ninth 
year is the year beginning with the eighth anniversary 
of his government, and his tenth year that beginning with 
the ninth anniversary ; and it is mere casuistry to pretend 
that there is either mystery or difficulty in the matter. It 
is evident that the difference between the two statements of 
the historian is intentional, and that in his two histories 
he computed the Ethnarch’s government from two different 
epochs. But if Herod died in the first week of the Jewish 
year, as these writers maintain, this would be impossible, 
for Archelaus’s actual accession would have synchronized 
with his accession according to Jewish reckoning. Whereas 
if his government dated from the close of a Jewish year, 
A.D. 6* would be his ninth year in fact, but his tenth year 
according to JZishna rule of computing reigns from 
Nisan. 

In numerous treatises on this subject will be found an 
argument based on John ii. 20, ‘‘ Forty and six years was 
this temple in building.” According to Josephus (it is 
urged), “ Herod’s reconstruction of the temple began in the 
eighteenth year of his reign,”f and forty-six years from that 
date would fix a.D. 26 as the year in which these words were 
spoken, and therefore as the first year of our Lord’s ministry. 
That writers of repute should have written thus may be de- 
scribed as a literary phenomenon. Not only does Josephus 
not say what is thus attributed to him, but his narrative 
disproves it. The foundation for the statement is that either 


* This is the year specified by Dion Cassius for the Ethnarch’s 
banishment. Clinton, / Z., A.D. 6. 
{ Farrar, Life of Christ, App. Exc. I. 


264 APPENDIX I. 


in his eighteenth or nineteenth year * Herod made a speech 
proposing to rebuild the temple. But the historian adds, 
that finding his intentions and promises thoroughly distrusted 
by the people, “the king encouraged them, and told them 
he would not pull down their temple till all things were 
gotten ready for building it up entirely again. And as he 
promised them this beforehand, so he did not break his 
word with them, but got ready a thousand waggons, that 
were to bring stones for the building, and chose out ten 
thousand of the most skilful workmen, and bought a thou- 
sand sacerdotal garments for the priests, and had some of 
them taught the art of stone-cutlers, and others of carpenters, 
and then began to build ; dwt this was not till everything was 
well prepared for the work.”+ What length of time these 
preparations occupied, it is of course impossible to decide, 
but. if, as Lewin supposes, the work was begun at the 
Passover of B.c. 18, then forty-six years would bring us 
exactly to A.D. 29—the first Passover of the Lord’s ministry. 


NOTE C. 


THE CONTINUOUS HISTORICAL SYSTEM OF PROPHETIC 
INTERPRETATION. 


Tue historical interpreters of prophecy have grasped a 
principle the importance of which is abundantly proved by 
the striking parallelisms between the visions of the Apoca- 


* It depends on the meaning of the word yeyordrog in the passage, 
whether the eighteenth or nineteenth year be intended. The narrative, 
as a whole, points to the nineteenth year. Cf Lewin’s Fasti Sacri, 
pp. lvi. and 92. 

{ Josephus, Avzt., xv. 11, 27. 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETERS. 265 


lypse and the events of the history of Christendom. But 
not content with this, they have on the one hand brought 
discredit on prophetic study by wild and arrogant predic- 
tions about the end of the world, and on the other, they 
have reduced their principle of interpretation to a system, 
and then degraded it to a hobby. The result is fortunate in 
this respect, that the evil cannot fail to cure itself, and the 
time cannot be far distant when the “continuous historical 
interpretation,” in the form and manner in which its cham- 
pions have propounded it, will be regarded as a vagary of 
the past. The events of the first half of the present century 
produced on the minds of Christians such an impression in 
its favour, that it bid fair to gain general acceptance. But 
the late Mr. Elliott’s great work has thoroughly exposed its 
weaknesses. A perusal of the first five chapters of the 
ffore Apocalyptice cannot fail to impress the reader with a 
sense of the genuineness and importance of the writer's 
scheme, nor will he fail to appreciate the erudition displayed, 
and the sobriety with which it is used. But when he passes 
from the commentary upon the first five seals, to the account 
of the sixth seal, he must experience a revulsion of feeling 
which will be strong just in proportion to his apprehension 
of the ¢rweness and solemnity of Holy Writ. Let any one 
read the last six verses of the sixth chapter of Revelation, a 
passage the awful solemnity of which has scarcely a parallel 
in Scripture, and with what feelings will he turn to Mr. 
Elliott’s book to find that the words are nothing more than 
a prediction of the downfall of paganism in the fourth cen- 
tuiy ! (see p. 138, ante). 

The words of the Apocalyptic vision in relation to the 
great day of Divine wrath (Rev. vi. 17), are the language of 
Isaiah (xiii. 9, 10) respecting ‘‘the day of the Lord,” and 


266 APPENDIX, 


again of Joel’s prophecy (Joel il. 1, 30, 314), quoted by 
St. Peter on the day of Pentecost (Acts ii, 16-20). Nor is 
this all. The twenty-fourth chapter of St. Matthew is a 
Divine commentary upon the visions of the sixth chapter of 
Revelation, and each of the seals has its counterpart in the 
Lord’s predictions of events preceding His second advent, 
ending with the mention of these same terrible convulsions 
of nature here described. Therefore, even if the mind be 
‘educated ” up to the point of accepting such an interpreta- 
tion of the vision of the sixth seal, these other Scriptures 
remain to be accounted for. 

Many other points in Mr. Elliott’s scheme might be cited 
as equally faulty. Take for example the laboured essay on 
the subject of the two witnesses, culminating in the amazing 
anti-climax that their ascent to heaven (Rev. xi. 12) was 
fulfilled when Protestants obtained ‘‘an advancement to 
political dignity and power.” (Hore Ap., il, 410). Still 
more wild and reckless is his exposition of Rev. xii. 5. “It 
seems clear” (he says) ‘‘ that whatever the woman’s hope in 
her travail, the lesser consummation was the one figured in 
the man-child’s birth and assumption, viz., he elevation of 
the Christians, first to recognition as a body politic, then very 
quickly to the supremacy of the throne in the Roman Empire” 
(vol. ii., 12). The reference to Wilberforce in connection 
with Rev. xv. is almost grotesque (vol. ili, 430). And 
finally he drifts upon the rock on which every man who 
follows this false system must inevitably be wrecked—the 
chronology of prophecy: proving by cumulative evidence 
that the year 1865 would usher in the millennium, or if not 
1865, then 1877 or 1882 (vol. ili., 256-266). 

“An apocalyptic commentary which explains everything 
is self-convicted of error.” This dictum of Dean Alford’s 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETERS. 267 


(Gr. Zest.: Rev. xi. 2) applies with full force to Mr. Elliott’s 
book. Maintaining as he does that these visions have re- 
ceived their absolute and final fulfilment, he is bound “to 


’ 


and as the result these lucubrations 
mar a work which if recast by some intelligent student of 


explain everything ;’ 


prophecy would be of the highest value. In days like these, 
when we have to contend for the very words of Scripture, 
we cannot afford to dismiss them as harmless puerilities. 
They have given an impetus to the scepticism of the age, 
and have encouraged Christian men to treat the most solemn 
warnings of coming wrath as mere stage thunder. 

Mr. Elliott’s mantle appears now to have fallen upon the 
author of the Approaching End of the Age. Mr. Grattan 
Guinness’s treatise upon lunisolar cycles and epacts will be 
deemed by many the most interesting and valuable portion 
of the work. The study of it has confirmed an impression 
I have long entertained, that in some mystic interpretation 
of the prophetic periods of Daniel, the chronology of Gentile 
supremacy and of the Christian dispensation lies concealed. 
Professor Birks, however, justly remarks, that it is “ very 
doubtful whether much of the speciality on which Mr. 
Guinness founds this part of his theory is not due to a partial 
selection unconsciously made of some epact numbers out of 
many, and that the special relations of the epacts to the 
numbers 6, 7, 8, 13, would probably disappear on a compre- 
hensive examination of all the epact numbers” (Zhoughts 

n Sacred Prophecy, p. 64). 

It might also be remarked that with the latitude obtained 
by reckoning sometimes in lunar years, sometimes in 
lunisolar years, and sometimes in ordinary Julian years, the 
list of seeming chronological coincidences and parallelisms 
might be still further increased. The period from the 


268 APPENDIX I. 


Council of Nice (A.D. 325) to the death of Gregory XIII. 
(1585) was 1,260 years. From the edict of Justinian (533) 
to the French Revolution was 1,260 years ; and again from 
A.D. 606, when the Emperor Phocas conferred the title of 
Pope on Boniface III., to the overthrow of the temporal 
power (1866-1870), was also 1,260 years. If these facts 
prove anything, they prove, not that the periods mentioned 
are the fulfilment of Daniel’s visions, for Daniel’s visions 
relate to the history of Judah, with which these events have 
nothing to do, but that the chronology of such events is 
marked by cycles composed of multiples of seventy. There- 
fore, they greatly strengthen the @ frior7 presumption that 
this is a general characteristic of “the times and seasons” 
as divinely planned, and that the visions will, hereafter, be 
literally fulfilled. In aword, such proofs prove far too much 
for the cause they are intended to support. 

I have already noticed the transparent fallacy of sup 
posing that the ten-horned beast and the Babylon of the 
Apocalypse can doth be typical of Rome (p. 134, ante). 
In the Approaching End of the Age this fallacy is accepted 
apparently without suspicion or misgiving, for the writer 
neither adopts nor improves upon the pleasing romance 
by which Mr. Elliott attempts to conceal the absurdity of 
such a view. 

As the Harlot comes to her doom by the agency of the 
Beast, it is absolutely certain that they are not identical ; 
and every proof these writers urge to establish that the 
Church of Rome is Babylon, is equally conclusive to prove 
that the Papacy is not the Beast, the Man of Sin. Their 
whole system is like a house of cards which falls to pieces 
the moment it is tried. As such books are read by many 
who are unyersed in history it may be well to repeat once 


HISTORICAL INTERPRETERS. 269 


more, that the division of the Roman earth into ten king- 
doms has never yet taken place. That it has been parti- 
tioned is plain matter of history and of fact: that it has 
ever been divided into ten is a mere conceit of writers of 
this school.* 

Of Dan. ix. 24-27 Mr. Guinness writes, “From the then 
approaching command to restore and to build again Jeru- 
salem, to the coming of Messiah the Prince, was to be 
seventy weeks” (p. 417). Thisis a typical instance of the 
looseness of the historical school in dealing with Scripture. 
The words of the prophecy are, ‘‘ From the going forth of 
the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto 
the Messiah the Prince shall be seven weeks and threescore 
and two weeks.” + As this error underlies his entire exposi- 
tion of the prophecy which forms the special subject of these 
pages, it is needless to discuss it. He follows Prideaux in 
computing the weeks from the seventh year of Artaxerxes 
(see p. 62, ante). 

Again, in common with almost all commentators he con- 
founds the seventy years of Judah’s servitude with the 
seventy years of the desolations of Jerusalem. The pro- 


* See p. 39, ante, Elliott’s list ofthe ten kingdomsis the following :— 
The Anglo-Saxons, Franks, Allmans, Burgundians, Visigoths, Suevi, 
Vandals, Ostrogoths, Bavarians, and Lombards. If any one can read 
the seventh chapter of Daniel and the thirteenth chapter of Revelation 
and accept such an interpretation, there is really no common ground on 
which to discuss the matter. 

+ I deprecate the idea that my object is to review this or any other 
book. Were such my intention I could point out other similar errors. 
Ex. gr. in Pt. IIL, chap. 1, the writer enumerates five points of identity 
between the Harlot and the Church of Rome, and of these five the two 
last are sheer blunders, viz., ‘‘The minister of the harlot makes fire to 
descend from heaven,” “ And ¢he harlot requires all to receive her mark,”’ 
(Comp. Rev. xiii, 13, 16.) 


270 APPENDIX II. 


phecy he quotes from Jer. xxv. (p. 414) was given in the fourth 
year of Jehoiakim, whereas the servitude began in his third 
year ; and it foretold a judgment which fell seventeen years 
later (see p. 240, ante). It would seem ungracious to notice 
minor inaccuracies, such as that of confounding Belshazzar 
with Nabonidus, the last king of Babylon (see p. 221, ante). 

Such a book is useful in so far as it deals positively with 
the historical fulfilment as a primary and partial realization 
of the prophecies ; and as a full and fearless indictment of 
the Church of Rome it is most valuable. But in the dog- 
matic negation of a literal fulfilment, in the blind and 
obstinate determination to establish, no matter at what cost 
to Scripture, that the Apocalypse has been “ FULFILLED in 
the events of the Christian era,” such a work cannot fail to 
be dangerous and mischievous. The real question at issue 
here is the character and value of the Bible. If the views 
of these writers be just, the language of Holy Writ in such 
passages as the close of the sixth chapter of Revelation is 
the most utter bombast. And if wild exaggeration charac- 
terize one portion of the Scriptures, what confidence can we 
have in any part? If the Great Day of Divine wrath, 
described in terms of unsurpassed solemnity, were nothing 
but a brief crisis in the history of a campaign now long 
past, the words which tell of the joy of the blessed and the 
doom of the impenitent may after all be mere hyperbole, 
and the Christian’s faith may be mere credulity. 


THE TEN KINGDOMS. Pag 


NOTE D. 
THE TEN KINGDOMS. 


“‘ PROPHECY is not given to enable us to prophesy,” and no 
one who has worthily pursued the study will fail to feel 
misgivings at venturing out upon the tempting field of fore- 
casting “things to come.” By patient contemplation we 
may clearly discern the main outlines of the landscape of 
the future ; but “until the day dawn,” our apprehension of 
distances and details must be inadequate, if not wholly false. 
The great facts of the future, so plainly revealed in Scrip- 
ture, have been touched on in preceding pages. For what 
follows here no deference is claimed save what may be ac- 
corded to a “pious opinion” based on earnest and careful 
inquiry. 

Next to the restoration of the Jews, the most prominent 
political feature of the future, according to Scripture, is 
the tenfold partition of the Roman earth. The emphasis 
and definiteness with which ¢ex kingdoms are specified, 
not only in Daniel, but in the Revelation, forbid our inter- 
preting the words as describing merely a division of power 
such as has existed ever since the disruption of the Roman 
Empire, though this is undoubtedly a feature of the prophecy. 
Babylon, Persia, Greece, and Rome in turn sought to grasp 
universal dominion. That there should be a commonwealth 
of nations living side by side at peace, was a conception 
that nothing in the history of the world could have 
suggested. 

The principal clew which Scripture affords upon the 
subject is the connection between these kingdoms and the 


272 APPENDIX II. 


Roman Empire.* But some latitude must probably be 
allowed as to boundaries, otherwise we should have to 
choose between two equally improbable alternatives, namely, 
either that our own nation shall have sunk to the position 
of a province, not even Ireland remaining under her sway,t 
or else that the England which is to be numbered among 
the ten kingdoms will include the vast empire of which this 
island is the heart and centre. May we not indulge the 
hope that however far our nation may lapse in evil days to 
come from the high place which, with all her faults, she has 
held as the champion of freedom and of truth, she will be 
saved from the degradation of participating in the vile 
confederacy of the latter days ? 

These considerations as to boundaries apply also to Ger- 
many, though in a lower degree ; and Russia is clearly out 
of the reckoning altogether. The special interest and im- 
portance of these conclusions depend upon the fact that the 
antichrist is to be at first a patron and supporter of the 
religious apostasy of Christendom (see p. 201, ante), and 
that England, Germany, and Russia are precisely the three 
first-rate Powers who are outside the pale of Rome. 

But there is no doubt that Egypt, Turkey, and Greece 
will be numbered among the ten kingdoms ; ¢ and is it not 
improbable in the extreme that these nations will ever accept 
the leadership of a man who is to appear as the champion 
and patron of the Latin Church? A striking solution of 


* “The ten horns out of this kingdom” (Dan. vii. 24). 

+ Ireland was entirely, and Scotland was in part, outside the terri- 
torial limits of the Roman Empire. 

~ In Dan. xi. 40, Egypt and Turkey (or the Power which shall then 
possess Asia Minor) are expressly mentioned by their prophetic titles as 
separate kingdoms at this very time. 


THE TEN KINGDOMS. 273 


this difficulty will probably be found in the definite predic- 
tion, that while the ten kingdoms will ultimately own his 
suzerainty, ¢hree of the ten will be brought into subjection 
by force of arms (Dan. vii. 24. See p. 214, ante). 

Turning again to the West, the names of France, Austria, 
Italy, and Spain present themselves; and seven of the 
kingdoms are thus accounted for. Can the list be com- 
pleted? Belgium, Switzerland, and Portugal remain, and 
these too would claim a place were we dealing with the 
Europe of to-day; but as it is the future we are treating of, 
any attempt to press the matter further seems futile. It has 
been confidently urged by some that as the ten kingdoms 
were symbolised by the ten toes of Nebuchadnezzar’s image, 
—five on either foot,—five of these kingdoms must be de- 
veloped in the East, and five in the West. The argument 
is plausible, and possibly just ; but its chief force depends 
upon forgetting that in the prophet’s view the Levant and 
not the Adriatic, Jerusalem and not Rome, is the centre of 
the world. 

To the scheme here indicated the objection may naturally 
be raised: Is it possible that the most powerful nations of 
the world, England, Germany, and Russia, are to have no 
part in the great drama of the last days? But it must be 
remembered, first, that the relative importance of the great 
Powers may be different at the time when these events 
shall be fulfilled, and secondly, that difficulties of this kind 
may depend entirely on the si/ence of Scripture, or, in other 
words, on our own ignorance. I feel bound to notice, how- 
ever, that doubts which have been raised in my mind regard- 
ing the soundness of the received interpretation of the 
seventh chapter of Daniel point to a more satisfactory 


answer to the difficulties in question. 
18 


274 APPENDIX II. 


As the vision of the second chapter specifies the four 
empires which were successively to rule the world, and as 
the seventh chapter also enumerates four “ kingdoms,” and 
expressly identifies the fourth of these with the fourth king- 
dom of the earlier vision, the inference appears legitimate that 
the scope of both visions is the same throughout. And this 
conclusion is apparently confirmed by some of the details 
afforded of the kingdoms typified by the lion, the bear, and 
the leopard. So strong indeed is the prima facie case in 
support of this view, that I have not felt at liberty to depart 
from it in the foregoing pages. . At the same time I am con- 
strained to own that this case is less complete than it appears 
to be, and that grave difficulties arise in connection with it; 
and the following observations are put forward tentatively 
to promote inquiry in the matter :— 

1st. Daniel ii. and vii. are both in the Chal dee portion of 
the Book, and are therefore bracketed together, and sepa- 
rated from what follows. This strengthens the presumption, 
therefore, which would obtain in any case, that the later 
vision is not a repetition of the earlier one. Repetition is 
very rare in Scripture. 

2nd. The date of the vision of the seventh chapter was 
the first year of Belshazzar, and therefore only some two or 
three years before the fa// of the Babylonian empire.* How 
then could the vise of that empire be the subject of the 
prophecy? Verse 17 appears definite that the rise ofall these 
kingdoms was future. 

3rd. In the history of Babylonia there is nothing to corre-’ 
spond with the predicted course of the tirst Beast, for it is 
scarcely legitimate to suppose that the vision was a pro- 


* See Chron. Table, App. I, ante, 


THE TEN KINGDOMS. 275 


phecy of the career of Nebuchadnezzar, whose death had 
taken place upwards of twenty years before the vision was 
given. Moreover, the transition from the lion with eagle’s — 
wings to the human condition, though it may betoken 
decline in power, plainly typifies a signal rise morally and 
intellectually. 

4th. Neither is there in the history of Persia anything 
answering to the bear-like beast with that precision and 
fulness which prophecy demands. The language of the 
English version suggests a reference to Persia and Media; 
but the true rendering appears to be: “It made for itself 
one dominion,”* instead of “ It raised up itself on one side.” 

5th. While the symbolism of the sixth verse seems at first 
sight to point definitely to the Grecian Empire, it will 
appear upon a closer examination that at tts advent the 
leopard had four wings and four heads. This was its primary 
and normal condition, and it was in this condition that 
«¢ dominion was given to it.” This surely is very different 
from what Dan. viii. 8 describes, and what the history of 
Alexander’s Empire realised, viz., the rise of a single power, 
which in its decadence continued to exist in a divided 
state. 

6th. Each of the three first empires of the second chapter 
(Babylon, Persia, and Greece) was in turn destroyed and 
engulphed by its successor ; but the kingdoms of the seventh 
chapter all continued together upon the scene, though “ the 
dominion,” was with the fourth (Dan. vii. 12). Verse 3 
seems to imply that the four beasts came up together, and 
at all events there is nothing to suggest a series of empires, 
each destroying its predecessor, though the symbolism of 


* Tregelles, Danzel, p. 34. 


276 APPENDIX II. 


the vision was (in contrast with that of chap. ij.) admirably 
adapted to represent this. Compare the language of the 
next vision (Dan. viii. 3-6). 

7th. While the fourth beast is unquestionably Rome, the 
language of the seventh and twenty-third verses leaves no 
doubt that it is the Roman Empire in its revived and future 
phase. Without endorsing the views of Maitland, Browne, 
etc.,* it must be owned that there was nothing in the 
history of ancient Rome to correspond with the main 
characteristic of this beast unless the symbolism used is to 
be very loosely interpreted. To ‘devour the earth,” “tread 
it down and break it in pieces,” is fairly descriptive of other 
empires, but Ancient Rome was precisely the one power 
which added government to conquest, and instead of tread- 
ing down and breaking in pieces the nations it subdued, 
sought rather to mould them to its own civilization and 
polity. 

All this—and more might be added +—-suggests that the 
entire vision of the seventh chapter may have a future 
reference. We have already seen that sovereign power is 
to be with a confederacy of ten nations ultimately heading 
up in one great Kaiser, and that several of what are now 
the first-rate Powers are to be outside that confederacy : it 
is in the last degree improbable, therefore, that such a 
supremacy will be attained save after a tremendous struggle. 
At this moment the international politics of the old world 
centre in the Eastern Question, which is after all merely a 


* See p. 38, azde. 
+ The beasts of Dan. vii. are these named in Rev. xiii. 2, to repre- 
sent the Antichrist. Though this admits of the explanation given at 


Pp. 202, ante, it may also be used a a strong argument in favour of the 
view above set forth, 


THE TEN KINGDOMS. 277 


question of the balance of power in the Mediterranean. Now 
Dan. vii. 2 expressly names the Mediterranean (“the Great 
Sea”) as the scene of the conflict between the four beasts. 
May not the opening portion of the vision then refer to the 
gigantic struggle which must come some day for supremacy 
in the Mediterranean, which will doubtless carry with it the 
sovereignty of the world? The lion may possibly typify 
England, whose vast naval power may be symbolized by the 
eagle’s wings. The plucking of the wings may represent 
the loss of her position as mistress of the seas. And if such 
should be the result of the impending struggle, we would 
be eager to believe that her after course shall be charac- 
terized by moral and mental pre-eminence: the beast, we 
read, was ‘‘ made to stand upon the feet as a man, anda 
man’s heart was given to it.” 

If the British lion have a place in the vision, the Muscovite 
bear can scarcely be omitted; and it may confidently be 
averred that the bear of the prophecy may represent the 
Russia of to-day fully as well as the Persia of Cyrus and 
Darius. The definiteness of the symbolism used in respect 
of the leopard (or panther) of the vision makes it more 
difficult to refer this portion of the prophecy to Germany 
or any other nation in particular. It would be easy to 
make out an ad captandum case in support of such a view, 
but it may suffice to remark that if the prophecy be still 
unfulfilled, its meaning will be incontestable when the time 
arrives, 


APPENDIX III. 
AMELROSPEECL AND UA REPLY, 


(ADDITIONAL CHAPTER FOR THE FOURTH EDITION.) 


DEPENDS ALL 
A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 


“TAKE heed that no man deceive you.” Such were the 
first words of our Lord’s reply to the inquiry, “ What shall 
be the sign of Thy coming, and of the end of the age?” 
And the warning is needed still. “It is not for you to 
know the times or the seasons,” was almost His last 
utterance on earth, before He was taken up. And if this 
knowledge was denied to His holy apostles and prophets, 
we may be sure it has not been disclosed to us to-day. 
Nor can a secret which, as the Lord declared, ‘the Father 
hath put in His own power,” * be discovered by astronomical 
research or flights of higher mathematics. 

But, on the other hand, no thoughtful Christian can 
ignore the signs and portents which mark the days we live 
in. I little thought as I penned the introductory chapter 
of this book that the advance of infidelity would be with 
such terribly rapid strides. In the few brief years that 
have since elapsed the growth of scepticism within the 
Churches has exceeded even the gloomiest forecast. And 
side by side with this, again, the spread of spiritualism 
and demon-worship has been appalling. Its votaries are 


* Acts i. 7. 
281 


282 APPENDIX II. 


reckoned by tens of thousands; and in America it has 
already been systematised into a religion, with a recognised 
creed and cult. 

But these dark features of our times, striking and solemn 
though they be, are not the most significant. While the 
warned-against apostasy of the last days thus seems to be 
drawing near, we are gladdened by signal triumphs of the 
Cross. It is not merely that at home and abroad the 
Gospel is being preached by such multitudes with a freedom 
never known before, but that, in a way unprecedented since 
the days of the Apostles, the Jews are coming to the faith of 
Christ. The fact is but little known that during the last 
few years more than a quarter of a million copies of the New 
Testament in Hebrew have been circulated among the Jews 
in Eastern Europe, and the result has been their conversion 
to Christianity, not by ones and twos, as in the past, but in 
large and increasing numbers. Entire communities in some 
places have, through reading the word of God, accepted 
the despised Nazarene as the true Messiah. ‘This is wholly 
without parallel since Pentecostal times. 

Then again, the return of the Jews to Palestine is one 
of the strangest facts of the day. There is scarcely a 
country in the world that does not offer more attractions 
to the settler, be he agriculturist or trader; and yet, since 
The Coming Frince was written, more Jews have migrated 
to the land of their fathers than returned with Ezra when 
the decree of Cyrus brought the servitude to a close. But 
yesterday the prophecy that Jerusalem should be inhabited 
“‘as towns without walls” seemed to belong to a future 
far remote. The houses beyond the gates were few in 
number, and no one ventured abroad there after nightfall. 
To-day the existence of a large and growing Jewish town 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 283 


outside the walls is a fact within the knowledge of every 
tourist, and year by year the immigration and the building 
still go on. 

If I venture to touch upon the international politics of 
Europe, it will be but briefly, in connection with the 
prophecy of the seventh chapter of Daniel. I have given 
in detail my reasons for suggesting that the “ historical ” in- 
terpretation of that vision does not exhaust its meaning,* 
and I own to a deepening conviction that every part of it 
awaits its fulfilment. There, as elsewhere in the Scriptures, 
“‘the great sea” must surely mean the Mediterranean ; and 
a terrible struggle for supremacy in the Levant appears to 
be the burden of the earlier portion of the vision. The 
nearness of such a struggle is now being anxiously discussed 
in every capital in Europe, and nowhere more anxiously 
than here at home. Never indeed since the days of Pitt 
has there been such cause for national anxiety; and the 
question of the balance of power in the Mediterranean has 
recently gained a prominence and interest greater and more 
acute than ever before attached to it. 

I will not notice topics of a more doubtful character, but 
confine myself to these; nor will I attempt by word- 
painting to exaggerate their significance. But here we are 
face to face with great public facts. On the one hand, 
there is this spread of infidelity and demon-worship, pre- 
paring the way for the great infidel and devil-inspired 
apostasy of the last days; and, on the other hand, there 
are these spiritual and national movements among the Jews, 


* See pp. 273-277, ante. Were I now writing that note in the 
light of passing events, I should specify France where I have named 
Germany, and I should allude to the efforts now making by Russia 
to acquire a naval station in the Mediterranean. 


284 APPENDIX JIT. 


wholly without precedent during all the eighteen centuries 
which have elapsed since their dispersion. And, finally, 
the Cabinets of Europe are watching anxiously for the 
beginning of a struggle such as prophecy warns us will 
ultimately herald the rise of the last great monarch of 
Christendom. Is all this to be ignored? Is there not 
here enough on which to base, I will not say the belief, but 
an earnest hope, that the end may be drawing near? If 
its nearness be presented as a hope, I cherish and rejoice 
in it; if it be urged as a dogma, or an article of faith, I 
utterly repudiate and condemn. it. 

As we dwell on these things a double caution will be 
opportune. ‘These events and movements are not in them- 
selves the fulfilment of the prophecies, but merely indications 
on which to found the hope that the time for their fulfil- 
ment is approaching. Any who searched their Bibles 
amidst the strange, and startling, and solemn events of a 
century ago must surely have concluded that the crisis 
was then at hand; and it may be that once more the tide 
which now seems so rapidly advancing may again recede, 
and generations of Christians now unborn may still be 
waiting and watching upon earth. Who will dare to set 
a limit to the long-suffering of God? and this is His own 
explanation of His seeming ‘ slackness.” * 

We need further to be warned against the error into 
which the Thessalonian Christians were betrayed. Their 
conversion was described as a turning from idols to serve 
the true God and “to wait for His Son from heaven.” 
And the coming of the Lord was presented to them as 
a practical and present hope, to comfort and giadden them 


* 2 Peter iii. 9. 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 285 


as they mourned their dead.* But when the Apostle passed 
on to speak of “the times and seasons” and “the day of 
Jehovah,” ¢ they misunderstood the teaching ; and, suppos- 
ing that the coming of the Lord was immediately connected 
with the day of Jehovah, they concluded that that awful day 
was breaking. On both points they were wholly wrong. 
In the Second Epistle the Apostle wrote, ‘“‘ Now we beseech 
you, brethren, in behalf of the coming of our Lord Jesus 
Christ and our gathering together unto Him, to the end 
that ye be not quickly shaken from your mind, nor yet be 
troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by epistle as from 
us [referring of course to the First Epistle], as that the day 
of the Lord is now present.” f 

“The times and seasons” are connected with Israel’s 
hope and the events which will precede the realisation 
of it.§ The Church’s hope is wholly independent of them. 
And if the Christians of the early days were taught to “live 
looking for that blessed hope,” how much more may we! 
Not a line of prophecy must first be fulfilled; not a single 
event need intervene. And any system of interpretation 
or of doctrine which clashes with this, and thus falsifies the 
teaching of the Apostles of our Lord, stands thereby con- 
demned. |i 


* 1 Thess, i. 9, 10, and iv. 13-18. 

+ 1 Thess. v. 1-3. 

t 2 Thess. ii, 1, 2, R.V. ‘‘ The day of Christ” in A.V. is a wrong 
reading. 

SACS OM7= 

|| See 1 Cor. xi. 26: ‘* As often as ye eat this bread and drink this 
cup, ye do show the Lord’s death ¢// He come.” No past but the 
Cross ; no future but the Coming. To separate the believer from the 
Coming is as great an outrage upon Christianity as to separate him from 
the Cross. 


286 APPENDIX 11, 


Let us then beware lest we fall into the common error 
of exaggerating the importance of contemporary movements 
and events, great and solemn though they be; and let 
the Christian take heed lest the contemplation of these 
things should lead him to forget his heavenly citizenship 
and his heavenly hope. The realisation of that hope will 
but clear the stage for the display of the last great drama 
of earth’s history as foretold in prophecy. 

If the digression may be pardoned, it may be well to 
amplify this, and explain my meaning more fully. That 
Israel will again be restored to the place of privilege and 
blessing upon earth is not a matter of opinion, but of 
faith; and no one who accepts the Scriptures as Divine 
can question it. Here the language of the Hebrew pro- 
phets is unusually explicit. Still more emphatic, by reason 
of the time when it was given, is the testimony of the 
Epistle to the Romans. The very position of that Epistle 
in the sacred Canon gives prominence to the fact that the 
Jew had then been set aside. The New Testament opens 
by chronicling the birth of Him who was Son of Abraham 
and Son of David,* the seed to whom the promises were 
made and the rightful Heir to the sceptre once entrusted 
to Judah ; and the Gospels record His death at the hands 
of the favoured people. Following the Gospels comes the 
narrative of the renewed offer of mercy to that people, 
and of their rejection of it. ‘To the Jew first” is stamped 
upon every page of the Acts of the Apostles; and it 
characterised the transitional Pentecostal dispensation of 
which that book is the record. The Pentecostal Church 
was essentially Jewish. Not only were the Gentiles in a 
minority, but their position was one of comparative tutelage, 


PoMattoia ts 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 287 


as the record of the Council of Jerusalem gives proof.* 
Even the Apostle of the Gentiles, in the whole course of 
his ministry, brought the Gospel first to the Jews. “It 
was necessary that the word of God should first have been 
spoken to you,” he said to them at Antioch.t “The 
salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and they will 
hear it,” was his final word to them at Rome when they 
rejected his testimony and “ departed.” ¢ 

And ¢he next book of the Canon ts addressed to believing 
Gentiles. But in that very Epistle the Gentiles are warned 
that “God has not cast away His people.” Through un- 
belief the branches are broken off, but the root remains, 
and “God is able to graft them in again.” ‘And so all 
Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall come out 
of Sion the Deliverer, and He shall turn away ungodliness 
from Jacob.”§ Judgment will in that day mingle with 
mercy, for He “whose fan is in His hand” will then 
gather His wheat into the garner, but burn up the chaff 
with unquenchable fire. The true remnant of the covenant 
people will become the “all Israel” of days of future 
blessedness. 

That remnant was typified by the ‘‘men of Galilee” 
who stood around Him on the Mount of Olives as “ He 
was taken up, and a cloud received Him out of their 


* Acts xv. See also chap. xi. 19. 

} Acts xiii. 46; cf xvil. 2, xviii, 4. 

{ Acts xxviii. 29. 

§ Rom. xi. ; see vv. I, 2, II, 12, 15-26. Note that “all Israel” is 
not = every Israelite, for in the Greek there is no such ambiguity as 
in English; and the seeming contradictions in the chapter are ex- 
plained by the fact that the “cast away” of vy. I, 2, is a wholly 
different word from the ‘‘ casting away ” of ver. 15, and the “ fall” of 
ver. II from the “‘ fall” of ver. 12. 


288 APPENDIX TI1/. 


sight.” And as with straining’ eyes they watched Him, 
two angel messengers appeared to renew the promise 
which God had given centuries before through Zechariah 
the prophet: “This same Jesus shall so come in like 
manner as ye have seen Him go into heaven”;* “ His 
feet shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, 
which is before Jerusalem on the east.” T 

A glance at the prophecy will suffice to show that the 
event it speaks of is wholly different from the Coming of 
the First Epistle to the Thessalonians. It is the same 
Lord Jesus, truly, who is coming for His Church of this 
dispensation and coming to His earthly people gathered in 
Jerusalem in a dispensation to follow ; but otherwise these 
“Comings” have absolutely nothing in common. ‘The 
later manifestation—His return to the Mount of Olives— 
is an event as definitely localised as was His ascension 
from that same Mount of Olives; and its purpose is 
declared to be to bring deliverance to His people on earth 
in the hour of their supreme peril. The earlier Coming 
will have no relation to locality at all. All the wide world 
over, wherever His dead have been laid to rest, “the 
trump of God” shall call them back to life, in “ spiritual 
bodies” like His own; and wherever living “saints” are 
found, they “ will be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye,” and all shall be caught up together to meet 
Him in the air. While the profane sceptic ridicules all 
this, and the religious sceptic ignores it, the believer re- 
members that his Lord was thus caught up to heaven ; 
and as he ponders the promise, his wonder leads to 
worship, not to unbelief. 


* Acts i. I-19. t Zech. xiv. 4. 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 289 


And this event, which is the Church’s proper hope, is 
as independent of the chronology, as it is of the geography, 
of earth. It is with the fulfilment of Zsvae/’s hope that the 
‘times and seasons ” have to do, and the signs and portents 
that belong to them. The Lord’s public manifestation to 
the world is a further event distinct from both. Our 
Jehovah-God will come with all His holy ones ;* the Lord 
Jesus will be revealed in flaming fire, taking vengeance. 
What interval of time will separate these successive stages 
of ‘the Second Advent,” we cannot tell. It is a secret not 
revealed. All that concerns us is, “rightly dividing the 
word of truth,” to mark that they are in all respects 
distinct. 


* Zech. xiv. 5. 

t+ 2 Thess. i. 7, 8. The ‘‘mighty angels” of the prophecy are, I 
presume, the ‘‘ holy ones” of Zech, xiv. 5. 

{ Between the first of these and the second, there will no doubt 
intervene a period at least as long as that which elapsed between His 
coming to Bethlehem and His manifestation to Israel at His first 
advent, and probably a period very much more prolonged. Whether 
the interval between the second and third will be measured by days or 
years, we are wholly unable to decide. The only certain indication of 
its length is that the Antichrist, whose power will be broken by the 
one, will be actually destroyed by the other. 

Iam here assuming that all the events which are yet to be fulfilled 
will occur in a comparatively brief period. But I wish to guard my- 
self against the idea that I assert this. I deprecate in the strongest 
way the idea, now so common, that students of astronomy and mathe- 
matics have solved the mystery which God has expressly kept in His 
own power. Could any student of the Old Testament have dreamed 
that nearly two thousand years would intervene between the sufferings 
of Christ and His return in glory? Would the early Christians have 
tolerated such a suggestion? And if another thousand years should 
yet run their course before the Church is taken up, or if a thousand 
years should intervene between that event and the Coming to the 
Mount of Olives, not a single word of Scripture would be broken. As 


ay 


290 APPENDIX ILI, 


I use the expression “ Second Advent” merely as a con- 
cession to popular theology, for it has no Scriptural warrant. 
It would be better to discard it altogether, for it is 
the cause of much confusion of thought and not a little 
positive error. It is a purely theological term, and it 
belongs properly to the great and final Coming to judge 
the world. But while many refuse to believe that there 
will be any revelation of Christ to His people upon earth 
until the epoch of that great crisis, the more careful student 
of Scripture finds there the clearest proof that there will be 
a “Coming” defore the era popularly called “the millen- 
nium.” Here again there are those who, while clearly 
recognising a ‘‘pre-millennial advent,” have failed to notice 
the difference, so plainly marked in Scripture, between the 
Coming for the Church of the present dispensation, the 
Coming to the earthly people in Jerusalem, and the Coming 
to destroy the Lawless One and to set up the kingdom. 

But, it may be urged, Is not the expression justified by 
the closing verse of the ninth chapter of Hebrews? It is 
only the superficial reader of the passage, I reply, who 
can use it thus. ‘‘ Unto them that look for Him shall He 
appear the second time,” our Authorised Version renders it. 
And the words are taken as though they were equivalent 
to ‘His second appearing,” “the Appearing” being a 
recognised synonym for ‘‘ the Coming.” But this is merely 
trading on the language of our English version. The word 


I have said on p. 181, ‘‘it is only in so far as prophecy falls within 
the seventy weeks that it comes within the range of human chrono- 
logy.” (See also pp. 153-158, azte.) Much is made of supposed eras 
of 1,260 and 2,520 years. But even if we could certainly fix the epoch 
of any such era, the question would remain whether they may not be 
mystic periods, like the 480 years of 1 Kings vi. I. (See p. 81, ante.) 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 291 


actually employed is wholly different. It is a general word, 
and it is the very word used with reference to His mani- 
festation to His disciples after the Resurrection.* And 
further, the definite article must be omitted: ‘“ Insomuch 
as it is appointed unto men once to die, and after this 
cometh judgment, so Christ also, having been once [ze., 
once for all] offered to bear the sins of many, shall appear 
a second time, apart from sin, to them that wait for Him, 
unto salvation.” The statement is not prophetic, but 
doctrinal; and the doctrine in question is not the Advent, 
but the priesthood. It is not the prediction of an event to 
be realised by those who shall be alive on earth at the time 
of the end, but the declaration of a truth and a fact to be 
realised by every believer, no matter in what dispensation 
his sojourn upon earth may fall. 

The passage therefore cannot be appealed to in sup- 
port of the dogma that never again but omce will Christ 
appear to His people upon earth. And as the expression 
“Second Advent” is so intimately connected with that 
dogma, it would be well that all intelligent students of 
Scripture should unite in discarding it. The Coming of 
Christ is the hope of His people in every age. 


The only adverse criticism I have seen of Zhe Coming 
Prince has appeared in Jater editions of Zhe Approach- 
ing Lind of the Age. Feelings of esteem and friendship 
for the author influenced my notice of that work, but no 
considerations of this kind have restrained his pen in 
replying to my strictures; and the fact that a writer so 
able and so bitterly hostile has not ventured to question 


* Tt occurs four times in I Cor, xv. 5-8, 


292 APPENDIX II. 


in a single point the main conclusions here established is a 
Eee proof that they are irrefutable. 

. Grattan Guinness complains that I have rade no 
hee to “reply ” to his book. My only reference to it 
has been made incidentally in an appendix note ; and in so 
far as it deals with the ‘‘ primary and partial realisation of 
the prophecies” I have taken the liberty of praising it. 
Why then should I “reply ” to a treatise in respect of that 
in it which I value and adopt? ‘These pages give proof 
how thoroughly I accept a historical interpretation of 
prophecy ;* and if any one demands why then I have not 
given it greater prominence, I recall St. James’s answer 
when the Apostles were accused of neglecting in their 
teaching the writings of Moses. ‘“ Moses,” he declared, 
“hath in every city them that teach him.” What was 
needed, therefore, if the equilibrium of doctrine was to be 
maintained, was that ¢ey should teach grace. On similar 
grounds the task I here set myself was to deal with the 
Julfilment of the prophecies. But I have no controversy 
with those who use their every talent in unfolding the 
“historical” interpretation of them. My quarrel is only 
with men who practically deny the Divine authorship of 
the sacred word, by asserting that their apprehension of it 
is the limit of its scope, and exhausts its meaning. And 
The Coming Prince is a crushing reply to the system which 
dares to write “‘ Hudjilled” across the prophetic page. “‘ The 
real question at issue here,” I again repeat, “is the character 
and value of the Bible.” Dr. Guinness asserts that the 
apocalyptic visions have been fulfilled in the events of the 
Christian era. I hold him to that issue, and | test it by a 


* See, eg., Chap. XI. and App., nete C, 


ANH LROSPECLVAND TA REPT V: 293 


reference to the vision of the sixth chapter. Has this been 
fulfilled, as in fact he dares to assert it has? The question 
is vital, for if this vision still awaits fulfilment, so also do all 
the prophecies which follow it. Let the reader decide this 
question for himself, after studying the closing verses of the 
chapter, ending with the words, “For THE GREAT DAY 
oF His WRATH IS COME, and who shall be able to stand?” 

The old Hebrew prophets were inspired of God to 
describe the terrors of “the great day of His wrath,” and 
the Holy Spirit has here reproduced their very words.* 
The Bible contains no warnings more awful in their 
solemnity and definiteness. But just as the lawyer writes 
“Spent” across a statute of which the purpose has been 
satisfied, so these men would teach us to write “ Fulfilled” 
across the sacred page. ‘They tell us, forsooth, that the 
vision meant nothing more than to predict the rout of 
pagan hordes by Constantine! t To speak thus is to come 
perilously near the warned-against sin of those who “take 
away from the words of the book of this prophecy.” But 
when our thoughts turn to these teachers themselves we 
are restrained by remembering their piety and zeal, for 
“their praise is in all the Churches.” Let us then banish 
from our minds all thoughts of the mez, and seize upon the 
system which they advocate and support. No appeal to 
honoured names should here be listened to. Names as 
honourable, and a hundred times more numerous, can be 
cited in defence of some of the crassest errors which corrupt 
the faith of Christendom. What then, I ask, shall be 
our judgment on a system of interpretation which thus 


* Cf Isa. xiii. 9, 10, and Joel ii. 31, ili. 15 5 see also Zeph. i. 14, 15. 
+ See pp. 138-141, ane, and especially the quotation from Dean 
Alford. 


294 APPENDIX III. 


blasphemes the God of truth by representing the most 
awful warnings of Scripture as wild exaggeration of a sort 
but little removed from falsehood ? 

If it be urged that the events of fifteen centuries ago, 
or of some other epoch in the Christian dispensation, were 
within the scope of the prophecy, we can consider the 
suggestion on its merits; but when we are told that the 
prophecy was thus /wdfi//ed, we can hold no parley with the 
teaching. It is the merest trifling with Scripture. And 
more than this, it clashes with the great charter truth of 
Christianity. If the day of wrath has come, the day of 
grace is past, and the Gospel of grace is no longer a Divine 
message to mankind. To suppose that the day of wrath 
can be an episode in the dispensation of grace is to betray 
ignorance of grace and to bring Divine wrath into contempt. 
The grace of God in this day of grace surpasses human 
thought ; His wrath in the day of wrath will be no less 
Divine. The breaking of the sixth seal heralds the 
dawning of that awful day ; the visions of the seventh seal 
unfold its unutterable terrors. But, we are told, the 
pouring out of the vials, the “seven plagues which are 
the last, for tn them ts finished the wrath of God,” * is being 
now accomplished. The sinner, therefore, may comfort 
himself with the knowledge that Divine wrath is but stage 
thunder, which, in a practical and busy world, may safely 
be ignored ! t 

I called attention to Dr. Guinness’s statement that “ from 
the then approaching command to restore and to build 
again Jerusalem to the coming of Messiah the Prince was to 


pa Revaexvenlypkvaves 
t It is only by reason of its almost inconceivable silliness that such 
teaching can escape the charge of profanity. 


ALRUTROSPRCTIAND 1A REPLY. 295 


be seventy weeks ” ; andI added, “ This is a typical instance 
of the looseness of the historical school in dealing with 
Scripture.” Of this, and of some other errors which I 
noticed, the only defence he offers is that “‘ expressions not 
strictly correct, yet perfectly legitimate, because evidently 
elliptical, are for brevity’s sake employed.” How brevity 
is attained by writing “seventy” instead of “sixty-nine ” 
I cannot conceive. The statement is a sheer perversion 
of Scripture, unconsciously made, no doubt, to suit the 
exigencies of a false system of interpretation. The pro- 
phecy plainly declares the period “unto Messiah the 
Prince ” to be sexty-nine weeks, leaving the seventieth week 
to be accounted for after the specified epoch; but Dr. 
Guinness’s system can give no reasonable account of the 
seventieth week, and so, unconsciously, I repeat, he shirks 
the difficulty by misreading the passage. Insist on his 
reading it aright and accounting for the last seven years of 
the prophetic period, and his interpretation of the vision at 
once stands refuted and exposed. 

When the language of Scripture is treated so loosely 
by this writer, no one need be surprised if my words fare 
badly at his hands. He is wholly incapable of deliberate 
misrepresentation, and yet his inveterate habit of inaccuracy 
has led him to misread Zhe Coming Prince on almost 
every point on which he refers to it.* 


* For instance, he becomes vehement in denouncing my statement 
that “all Christian interpreters are agreed ” in recognising a parenthesis 
in Daniel’s prophetic vision of the beasts. No doubt he read the 
passage as though I had there spoken of the /a// of the Roman 
empire, and not its “rise”; for the statement is indisputably true, 
and he himself is numbered among the ‘‘ Christian interpreters ” who 
endorse it. 

Here is another specimen. With reference to the question of the 


206 APPENDIX III. 


The fact is, he only knows two schools of prophetic 
interpretation, the Futurist and his own ; and therefore he 
seems unable even to understand a book which is through- 
out a protest against the narrowness of the one and the 
mingled narrowness and wildness of the other. But his 


ten kingdoms, he says, “Dr. Anderson and other Futurist writers 
. . . teach—(1) that the ten horns are not yet risen ; (2) that when 
they do rise. five will be found in Greek territory, and five only in 
Roman ; and that when at last developed, (3) after a gap of 1,400 years 
of which the prophecy takes no notice at all, (4) they will last for 
three and a half years” (p. 737). 

I have numbered these sentences to enable me briefly to remind the 
intelligent reader that, excepting No. 1, everything here attributed to 
me is in flat opposition to some of the plainest statements in my book. 
In the same way he attributes to me the figment that the career of 
Antichrist will be limited to three and a half years. I have sometimes 
wondered whether he ever read The Coming Prince at all ! 

A word as to his strictures on my title. J am aware of course that 
in the Hebrew of Dan. ix. 26, there is not the articie, but I am not 
misled by the inference he draws from its omission. Had the article 
been used, the prince intended would clearly have been ‘‘ Messiah the 
Prince” of ver. 25. In English the article has not this force, and 
therefore it is rightly inserted, as both the Translators and the Revisers 
have recognised. Dr. Tregelles here remarks, ‘‘ This destruction is 
here said to be wrought by a certain people, not by the prince who 
shall come, but by his people: this refers us, I believe, to the Romans 
as the last holders of undivided Gentile power; they wrought the 
destruction long ages ago. The prince who shall come is the last head 
of the Roman power, the person concerning whom Daniel had received 
so much previous instruction.” Such is the pre-eminence of this great 
leader that he is bracketed with our Lord Himself in this prophecy, 
and the people of the Roman empire are described as being zs people. 
Yet Mr. Guinness believes that Titus is referred to! Really the day 
is past for discussing such a suggestion. 

I may here remark that the rendering of Dan. ix. 27 in the Revised 
Version disposes of the figment that it was Messiah who made a seven 
years’ covenant with the Jews. The causing the sacrifice to cease is 
not an incident in the midst of the ‘‘ week,” but a violation of the 
treaty ‘‘for half of the week.” 


A RETROSPECTAAND A REPLY. 207 


personal references are unworthy of the writer and of the 
subject. I pass on to deal with the only points on which 
his criticisms are of any general interest or importance; I 
mean the predicted division of the Roman earth, and the 
relations between Antichrist and the apostate Church. 

My statement was: ‘The division of the Roman earth 
into ten kingdoms has never yet taken place. That it 
has been partitioned is plain matter of history and of fact ; 
that it has ever been divided into ten is a mere conceit 
of writers of this school.” 

“An astonishingly reckless assertion” Dr. Guinness 
declares this to be; and yet we have but to turn the page 
to obtain from his own pen the plainest admission of its 
truth. It must be borne in mind, he says, that the ten 
kingdoms are to be sought “only in the territory west of 
Greece.” And if we are prepared to accept this theory, we 
shall find, after making large allowances as to boundaries, 
that in this, which is prophetically che least important motety 
of the Roman earth, “the number of the kingdoms of the 
European commonwealth has, as a rule, averaged ten.” 
Mr. Guinness gives a dozen lists—and he tells us he has 
a hundred more in reserve—to prove that, with kaleido- 
scopic instability and vagueness, or, to quote his words, 
“amidst increasing and almost countless fluctuations, the 
kingdoms of modern Europe have from their birth to 
the present day always averaged about ten in number.” 


i 


“ Averaged about ten,” mark, though the prophecy specifies 
ten with a definiteness which becomes absolute by its 
mention of an eleventh rising up and subduing three of 
them. And “modern Europe,” too! Zeal for the Protes- 
tant cause seems to blind these men to the plainest 


teaching of Scripture. Jerusalem, and not Rome, is the 


298 APPENDIX III. 


centre of the Divine prophecies and of God’s dealings 
with His people; and the attempt to explain Daniel’s 
visions upon a system which ignores Daniel’s city and 
people does violence to the very rudiments of prophetic 
teaching. This vaunted canon of interpretation, which 
reads “‘modern Europe” instead of the prophetic earth, 
is, I repeat, “‘a mere conceit of writers of this school.” 
First they minimise and tamper with the language of pro- 
phecy, and then they exaggerate and distort the facts of 
history to suit their garbled reading of it. ‘Can they,” 
Dr. Guinness demands of us, “alter or add to this tenfold 
list of the great kingdoms now occupying the sphere of old 
Rome ?—lItaly, Austria, Switzerland, France, Germany, 
England, Holland, Belgium, Spain, and Portugal. Ten, 
and no more! ten, and no less!” I answer, Yes, we can 
both alter it and add to it. The list includes territory 
which was never within “the sphere of old Rome” at all, 
and it omits altogether nearly half of the Roman earth. 
This is bad enough, but it is not all. For if we accept 
his statements, and seek to interpret the thirteenth chapter 
of Revelation by them, he at once changes his ground and 
protests against our numbering “ Protestant nations ” among 
the ten horns at all. They are “chronologically out of the 
question,” he tells us. Here is the language of this vision 
about Antichrist: “‘And there was given to him authority 
over every tribe, and people, and tongue, and nation. And 
all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, every one 
whose name hath not been written in the book of life.” * 
What mean these most definite and solemn words? 
Nothing, he tells us, but that “ throughout the Dark Ages,” 


* Rev. xiii, 7, 8, R.V. 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 299 


and “prior to the rise of Protestantism,” the Roman Catholic 
religion should prevail in the western moiety of the Roman 
earth. This, he declares, is “the fulfilment of the predic- 
tion.” He calls this “explaining ” Scripture. Most people 
would call it explaining it away ! 

I now come to the last point. ‘Our critics maintain,” 
Dr. Guinness writes, ‘that Babylon runs her career, and 
is destroyed by the ten horns, who then agree and give 
their power to Antichrist, or the Beast. That is, they hold 
that the reign of Antichrist /o//ows the destruction of 
Babylon by the ten horns.” 

The foundation of this statement must be sought in the 
author’s own lucubrations, for nothing to account for it will 
be found in the pages he criticises; and a similar remark 
applies to his references to Zhe Coming Prince in the para- 
graphs which follow. I will not allude to them in detail, 
but in a few sentences dispose of the position he is seeking 
to defend. 

We have now got to the seventeenth chapter of Revela- 
tion. His argument is this: The eighth head of the Beast 
must be a dynasty; the Beast carries the Woman; the 
Woman is the Church of Rome. Therefore the dynasty 
symbolised by the eighth head must have lasted as long 
as the Church of Rome; and thus the Protestant inter- 
pretation is settled ‘‘on a foundation not to be removed.” 

It is not really worth while pausing to show how gratui- 
tous are some of the assumptions here implied. Let us, 
for the sake of argument, accept them all, and what comes 
of it? In the first place, Dr. Guinness is hopelessly involved 
in the transparent fallacy I warned him against on p. 268 
of this volume. The Woman is destroyed by the agency 
of the Beast. How then is he going to separate the Pope 


300 APPENDIX T1711, 


from the apostate Church of which he is the head, and 
which, according to the “ Protestant interpretation,” would 
cease to be the apostate Church if he were no longer 
owned as head ? 

The historicist must here make choice between the 
Woman and the Beast. They are distinct throughout the 
vision, and in direct antagonism at the close. If the Harlot 
represents the Church of Rome, his system gives no account 
whatever of the Beast; it ignores altogether the foremost 
figure in the prophecy, and the vaunted “foundation” of 
the so-called “Protestant interpretation” vanishes into air. 
Or if he takes refuge upon the other horn of the dilemma, 
and maintains that the Beast symbolises the apostate 
Church, the Harlot remains to be accounted for. He 
forgets, moreover, that the Beast appears in Daniel’s visions 
in relation to Jerusalem and Judah. Suppose, therefore, 
we should admit everything he says, what would it amount 
to? Merely a contention that “the springing and germinant 
accomplishment” of these prophecies “throughout many 
ages” (I quote Lord Bacon’s words once more) is fuller 
and clearer than his critics can admit, or the facts of history 
will warrant. The truth still stands out plainly that ‘the 
height or fulness of them” belongs to an age to come, 
when Judah shall once more be gathered in the Promised 
Land, and the light of prophecy which now rests dimly 
upon Rome shall again be focussed on Jerusalem. 

The popularity of the historical system lies no doubt in 
the appeal it makes to the ‘Protestant spirit.” But surely 
we can afford to be sensible and fair in our denunciation 
of the Church of Rome. Who can fail to perceive the 
growth of an antichristian movement that may soon lead 
us to hail the devout Romanist as an ally? With such, 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 301 


the Bible, neglected though it be, is still held sacred as the 
inspired word of God; and our Divine Lord is reverenced 
and worshipped, aibeit the truth of His Divinity is obscured 
by error and superstition. I appeal here to the Pope’s 
Encyclical Letter of the 18th November, 1893, on the study 
of the Holy Scriptures. The following is an extract from 


it :— 


“We fervently desire that a greater number of the faithful 
should undertake the defence of the holy writings, and attach 
themselves to it with constancy; and, above all, we desire that 
those who have been admitted to Holy Orders by the grace of 
God should daily apply themselves more strictly and zealously to 
read, meditate upon, and explain the Scriptures. Nothing can be 
better suited to their state. In addition to the excellence of such 
knowledge and the obedience due to the word of God, another 
motive impels us to believe that the study of the Scriptures 
should be counselled. That motive is the abundance of advan- 
tages which follow from it, and of which we have the guarantee 
in the words of Holy Writ: ‘ All Scripture is given by inspiration 
of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, 
for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be 
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works.’ It is with 
this design that God gave man the Scriptures; the examples of 
our Lord Jesus Christ and His apostles show it. Jesus Him- 
self was accustomed to appeal to the holy writings in testimony 
of His Divine mission.” 


There is here surely, in some sense at least, the ground 
for a common faith, which might, as regards individual 
Christians, be owned as a bond of brotherhood; but an 
impassable gulf divides us from the ever-increasing host of 
so-called Protestants who deny the Divinity of Christ and 
the inspiration of the Scriptures. These have their true 
place in the great army of infidelity which will muster at 
last around the banner of the Antichrist. 


302 APPEND Xeiid. 


My protest is made, not in defence of the Papacy, but 
of the Bible. If any one can point to a single passage of 
Scripture relating to Antichrist, whether in the Old Testa- 
ment or in the New, which can, without whittling it down, 
and frittering away the meaning of the words, find its fudf/- 
ment in Popery, I will publicly retract, and confess my 
error. Take 2 Thessalonians ii. 4 as a sample of the rest. 
The “man of sin” “ opposeth and exalteth himself against 
all that is called God or that is worshipped [ Gee&, that is an 
object of worship], so that he sitteth in the temple of God, 
setting himself forth as God.” This means merely, forsooth, 
that on certain occasions the Pope’s seat in St. Peter’s is 
raised above the level of the altar on which the “conse- 
crated wafer” lies! Such statements—I care not what 
names may be cited in support of them—are an insult to 
our intelligence and an outrage upon the word of God.* 


* The reference to the Temple is explained by Dan. ix. 27, xii. 11, 
and Matt. xxiv. 15. See p. 84, ante. These teachers ask us to 
believe that while the Church of Rome is the Beast and the Harlot 
and everything that is corrupt and infamous in apostate Christianity, yet 
St. Peter’s, the great central shrine of this apostasy, is owned by God 
as being the Temple of God. The sacrifice of the Mass they denounce 
2s idolatrous and blasphemous, and yet we are to suppose that Holy 
Scripture refers to it as representing all that is Divine on earth! The 
sacred words admit of only one meaning, viz., that the Antichrist, 
claiming to be himself Divine, will suppress all worship rendered to any 
other god. 

Such are the wild extravagances and puerilities of interpretation and 
of forecast which mar the writings of these interpreters, that men have 
come to regard these visions, which ought to inspire reverence and awe, 
as “principal subjects of ridicule’”—the speciality of mystics and 
faddists. How great the need, then, for a united and sustained effort 
to rescue the study from the contempt into which it has fallen ! 

Each of the recognised schools of interpretation has truth which the 
rival schools deny. A new era would begin if Christians would turn 


A RETROSPECT AND A REPLY. 303 


Then, again, in the ninth verse, the coming of the ‘“ Law- 
less One” is said to be “according to the working of Satan, 
with all power and signs and lying wonders.” These words 
are explained by the vision of the Beast in the thirteenth 
chapter of the Revelation, which declares that “the Dragon 
gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority.” 
And we have from the lips of our blessed Lord Himself the 
warning, that the “great signs and wonders,” thus to be 
wrought by Satanic power, shall be such that, “if it were 
possible, they shall deceive the very elect.”* In a word, 
the awful and mysterious power of Satan will be brought 
to bear upon Christendom with such terrible effect, that 
human intellect will be utterly confounded. Agnosticism 
and infidelity will capitulate in presence of overwhelming 
proof that supernatural agencies are at work. And if faith 
itself, divinely given, shall stand the test, it is only because 
it'is impossible for God to allow His own elect to perish. 

When we demand the meaning of all this, we get 
answer ‘‘Popery.” But where, we ask, are the “great 
signs and wonders” of the Popish system? And, in reply, 
we are told of its millinery, and its mummery, and all the 
well-known artifices of priestcraft, which constitute its 
special stock-in-trade. As though there were anything in 
these to deceive the elect of God! To take the low ground 
of mere Protestantism, it is notorious that here in England 
none become entangled in the toils of Rome save such as 
have already become enervated and corrupted by sacerdo- 


from all these schools—Preterist, Historical, and Futurist—and learn 
to read the prophecies as they read the other Scriptures: as being the 
word of Him who is, and was, and is to come, our Jehovah-God, with 
whom present, past, and future are but one ‘‘eternal now,” 

* Matt. xxiv. 24 


304 AL PEND Xa LL 


talism and superstition within the communion they abandon. 
And it is no less notorious that, in Roman Catholic 
countries, the majority of men maintain towards it an 
attitude of either benevolent or contemptuous indifference. 
Remembering, m(¢ er, that the followers of the Beast 
are doomed to enu.ess and hopeless destruction, we go 
on to inquire whether this is to be the fate of every Roman 
Catholic. By no means, we are assured; for, in cpite of 
the evils and errors of the Romish Church, some within its 
pale are reckoned among the number of ‘“‘ God’s elect.” 
What conclusion, then, are we to come to? Are we to 
accept it as a canon of interpretation that Scripture never 
means what it says? Are we to hold that its language is 
so loose and unreliable as to. be practically false? We 
repudiate the profane suggestion ; and, adopting the only 
possible alternative, we boldly assert that all these solemn 
words still await their fulfilment. In a word, we are shut 


up to the conclusion that THE ANTICHRIST IS YET TO COME, 


THE THREE ERAS O 


490 Years 


490 Years 
aan to the Kingdom. 


gdom to the Servitude, 


From the Kin 


From Can: 


be ha thd Co a SHTIINAD 
91 Jo 
“*BLIASSV 0} aa 
eatjdevo ported ovasy 1ZZ 
“qeorny 
“YBresy 
“*BOsOH : 
*soury = j 
“qeuor cs x 
< q 
fo] A 
“BUST mn p 
ysl gd i 
a 
(sequiy, uy, 
9U} 10) [oBaAsy Jo WOASY 976 
‘SLaHdOUg aH, ‘o(dmey, omy, 9001 
“MOULOIOS 9TOI 
“aIAV 9G90L 
‘Tavs Jopun peystqeyso wopsury 9601 
ro 
q 
4 
Q 
p 
ior) 
rs 
a 
3 
| 
sl 
< 
(se 
g 
CONeN @ OUNDEq SMOIQIA Oy, 
“‘UBBUB) OFUT COURTIUA 1G) 


‘AVGNL FO AUOLSTH GHL FO WVYNVIG TvOINO 


Ces te te? PL Pe ae ks teeters Y 


TIONOUHO 


008)- 


006)- 


OOTI|- 


O0€1)- 


0091)- 


HTV 


40 


‘SUIUOLINGAD 


ENTY WEEKS 


Od ‘HOY OllVaaVg THY 
‘poyiunel yepnue pus [ovis] 
‘qUOAPY SNOTMOLY ONY, 


‘aqao’y FHL IO AVQ FHL 


(1g xt "weq) “yoo MIOZeGL ———> WA ZED 
“HONIUG DNINOO ay 
‘smOpSUTy Udy, OU 
*‘SoUOAIaJUI Uoesuedsig Jueselg SU, 


es 5 ' ‘ 
a , . 
A ‘YO qo qeIssey ‘ze ‘a°y | iN, a 9° 
nN 
r cl, aG 
e ll oF *a'v'- 
& Suis] sev poidoooe st pue uroresnser soyeq poleH OF a e Te aks EAA 
i al ¢9 SuvloYy oy} Aq WOYV] Wa|VsSnIEL 
D oh | 
an eh 
he ATS ee 
as tah] | met! oe 
Se ‘sneequooeyy svpne Aq uoyejey cot | A 2 oA 
g ‘souvtdidg snyoomuy sq usxe} Wo[esntel OLE 4 & a & 
Ss So Pas 002) 
3 ; & se 
3 S <a |[o 
a EIS 
iN taal 
g = oo¢!- 
E 81a |___] ees SUss] JO 9/VI"q 
—t nD 
= "9% “XI ‘WRC JO SYOOM 4 OT} JO pu a a 
DRILTY “Se80[0 syoydorg oO O BI 2 
T Yq Ad 90} F a 268 ES ce ae OOFI- 
a o wm 2 
(EGON) porojser morpesnsor CEP Hear a 
e 
i | shana 
i a 
re x “yRLuyooz :rwesseq ‘e|dwoy, puoosg ou, SIs 4 »e oe 
ae 1 , & |-——] 8&¢ suvisi0g pus sopayy oy} Aq u9y¥04 Uo[Aqeq 
aa ToImed rs te 


PNR EX: 


AS 


Abraham, covenant with, 118 2., 
225, 246. 

Actium, battle of, 46. 

Acts of the Apostles, 169, 286. 

Adler, Dr. Herman, 51 z. 

Advent of Christ, 3-4, 131-132, 
154-158, 164, 188-189, 288-2901, 

Agamemnon, ‘190. 

Ahasuerus, (of sther), 222. 

Alexander, battles of, 45 2. 

rise of, 210, 212. 

Alford’s Greek Test., 92 ”., 97 2, 
Dis 7:5, 120 7.8140 72, 152 72, 
162723, 104 7, 172 2 174 2, 
IO 189) 2, 202. 77,,. 203 725 
204 #., 213-214, 226 2., 266. 

Antichrist, 181-184, 191 7., 195 7., 
197, 200, 212. See ‘* Beast,” 
“ Coming Prince,” etc. 

Antiochus Epiphanes, 42, 195 2, 
209. 

Apocalypse, See ‘‘ Revelation.” 

Approaching End of the Age, 267- 
270, 291, etc. 

Arbela, battle of. 45 7., 252. 

Archelaus, 260-262. 

Artabanus, 65. 

Artaxerxes, Longimanus, 
of, 59-64, 121-122. 

date of his reign, 64-66, 121, 
251, etc. 

Astronomer Royal (Sir G. B. Airy), 
124.1., 217 2. 

Auberlen, 200 x. 


B 


Babylon of the Apocalypse, 135, 
177, 178, 184, 199, 268, 299, 


decrees 


| 


Babylon _ restored, 
210. 

Babylonian Empire, 21, 22, 202. 

Bacon, Lord, 130, 146, 300 

Barcochab, 164 7., 209. 

Beast, the ten-horned, 180. 196, 
201, 2C8, 215, 268, °297-208. 

Beasts. See “* Kingdoms,” 
“‘Daniel’s vision,” etc. 

Belshazzar, 221. 

Berosus, 22 72., 232. 

Betrayal, date of the, 106, 112. 

Bible, character of the, 8-10, 14-15, 
18, 171 2. 

Birks, Prof., 267. 

Body of Christ, the mystical, 200 x. 

Bosanquet’s Messiah the Prince, 
58 2., 228, 262 x. 

Bride, the. See ‘* Jerusalem.” 

Browne’s Ordo Saclorum, 38 v., 
82 2., 86 2., 96 2., IOI 2., 103 2., 
106 %., 224, 225 7., 239. 

Bryant’s Ancient Mythology, 207 n. 


157, ¥58 2., 


C. 


Calendar, the Jewish, 100, 114 2, 

the Julian, 128 x. 

Calvinism, 116. 

Canon of Scripture, 9, 10 2. 

Captivity. See  ‘*Jehoiachim,” 
“ Servitude,” etc. 

Cassander, 46 2. 

Chaldee portions of Daniel, 28, 
274. 

Cherubim, the, 206 2. 

Chagigah, of the Talmud, 111 z., 
116 %, 

Christ. Se 
tivity,” etc. 


ce Na- 


¢ Advent,” 


21 


308 


Chronological era—4o years and 
390 years of Ezek. iv. 26 x. 

— of Nabopolassar, 35 7. 

—— of the Olympiads, 65 7. 

—- of Rome (A. U. C.), 65 x. 

— of Nabonassar, 65 x. 

— of the Captivity, 55 2, 234, 
236, 241. 

— of the ‘“Desolations,” 55, 
69-71, 237, 241. 

— of the servitude, 55, 235, 241. 

—— of the temple, 71, 227. 

—— of the 480 years of 1 Kings vi., 
81-83, 222. 

— of the seventy weeks, 52, esc., 
86, 121, 127-128. 

——- of 430 years, 226. 

— of 490 years, 227. 

tables, 223-224, 24!-24v, 

Clinton, Fynes, 65 ., 82 2. 93- 
98, 99 7., 102 2., 166, 223, 226 ~: 
2202321 n 233923700 2508 24C5 
252, 263 n. 

Coming Prince, the, 181, 190, etc. 
See ** Antichrist.” 

Constantine, 139, 141. 

Conversion, 11, 167 2. 

Crucifixion, date of the, 97-98, 122. 

Cupbearer at Persian Court, 59. 

Cyrenius, taxing of, 88-93. 

Cyrus, 55, 56. 


D. 


Daniel, history and character of, 
19-20, 34-35, 49- 

—— analysis of Book of, 28, 120, 
196... 

visions of, the Great Image, 

29-33- 


the Four Beasts, 36-40, 
46, 73) 274-276, 283. 

———— the Ram and the Goat, 
41, etc., 192-193. 

ee the Seventy Weeks, 52, 
etc. 

Darius Codomanus, 252. 

Hystaspes, 55, 57, 70, 22, 

251. 

Nothus, 252. 


David, King, 18, 20, 159, 
Date of the reign of, 220. 


ue A 


INDEX. 


Day, the Jewish, 110. 

of grace, 143-145, 172, 208, 
218, 294. 

— of wrath, 145, 175, 183, 218, 
265, 293-294. 

Democracy, 190. 

Demons, 206. 

Desolations of Jerusalem, 55, 56, 
57) 69-71. 
Devil, 206. 

‘* Dragon.” 
Diadem, in Scripture, 205. 
Tior Cassius, 91 7., 263 2. 
..vagon, the, 203. See ‘* Satan.” 


See “Satan,” 


E. 


Eastern Question, the, 167, 283. 

Eclipse of Herod, the, 258, 262. 

—— total solar, 217. 

Egypt, Empire of, 21, 202. 

Eliiott’s Hore Apocalyptica, 4, 
136 7., 138, 265, 266, 269 z. 

Encyc. Brit., 68 2. 100 n., 114 72, 
207 ., 250, 252 7. 

End of the world, 4. 

England, in the latter days, 272, 
277. 

Eras. See “ Chronological era.” 

Esther, Queen, 98 z. 

book of, 222, 256. 

Eternal state, the, 219. 

Evil-Merodach, 232, 236. 

Exodus, antitype of the, 118. 

date of the, 223. 

Ezekiel, 24, 26 z., 158 2. 


F. 
Faith, 10-13. 
Farrar’s Life of Christ, 92 n., 258, 
263. 


Fasti Hellenict. See “ Clinton.” 

Fasti Sacrt. See “ Lewin.” 

Fausset’s Commentary cited, 186 1. 
201 2. 

Firstfruits, sheaf of the, 114. 

Flood, the, 68, 118 7., 246. 


G. 


Gabriel’s prophecy, 50, 51. 
Geikie, Dr., 262 x. 


INDEX. 309 
Gentiles, sovereignty entrusted to, | Jeremiah, 24, 26, 32. 
BY, S2a42, 2k, 140) 7: Jerusalem, captures of, 22-27, 
-—— times of the, 41, 149 m, 168. 236-237. 


—— fulness of the, 149. 

Germany, not in the ten kingdoms, 
272. 

Gethsemane, 104, 117, 118. 

Grace, reign of, 144-145, 208. 

Granicus, battle of, 45 7. 

Grecian Empire, 32, 42, 202. 

division of, 42, 45 7., 192. 

Gregorian calendar, 128 7. 

Girdlestone’s Syzonyms, O.T., 80 7. 

Guinness, H. Grattan, 267, 269, 291, 
etc. 


1ef 


Haggai, prophecy of, 70. 

Harlot, 178, 199-201, 
“ Babylon.” 

Heads of the beast, 201-202. 

Hengstenberg, 32 2., 98 ., 118 z., 
156 2., 254, 256. 

Herod, ceath of, 94, 258, etc. 

Herodotus, 59 7., 64, 100. 

Hippolytus, 5, 86 2. 

Historical school of interpreters, 
40 ., 134-148, 264-270, 292-300. 

History dates from Nehemiah’s 
time, 64. 


208.. See 


1G 


Idolatry, nature of, 207. 

Infidelity, character of, 5-6. 

Inspiration of Scripture, 8-12, 19, 
106, 129. 

Ipsus, battle of, 45. 

Irenzeus, 182 7. 

Isaiah, 24, 158 2. 

Israel, glory and fall of, 20-21. 

restoration of, 149-152, 286. 

Issus, battle of, 45. 


is 


Jehoahaz, 22. 

Jehoiachin, 23. 

date of his captivity, 234, 236, 
241. 

Jehoiakim, 22. 

chronology of his reign, 228- 

235, 243 


restored by Nehemiah, 60. 
—— the Lord’s entry into, 125-127 
—— future of, 149 7., 168,282,286. 
the Bride, 199-200. 

Jewish Chronicle quoted, 169 #. 

months, 99 7., 250. 

Jews, restoration of, 149-152, 1068, 
169, 181, 186, 210-211, 282, 

Joseph, birthright of, 20. 

Josephus quoted, 10 7., 22 %., 
27 #., 85 2., 91 1., 105 %., 109 2., 
EL 6 42:, WULONI ED 77228 72. 
232, 251, 258, 260, 262, 263. 

Josiah, 21, his passover, 35 ”. 

Judah, sovereignty of, 20, 31, 32. 

Judas the traitor, 104, 110, 117. 

Julius Africanus, 75 7., 82 7.,86 2, 
100 7., 254. 

Justyn Martyr, 89, 90 7., QIe 


RE 


Karaite Jews, 113. 

Kingdom preached by Christ, 47, 
125, 160. 

Kingdoms, the four, 32, 36, 46, 73, 
274, etc. 

the ten, 40, 182, 198, 202 7., 
211, 269 2., 271, etc, 297-299. 

Kitto’s Cyclopedia, 229. 

Kriiger, 254. 


L. 


Lacunza (Ben Ezra) 38 7. 

Lewin’s Fastz Sacri, 96, 
264. 

Lewis, Sir G. C., 68. 

Lindo’s Jewish Calendar, 161 n., 
250. 

Lloyd, Bp., 220 ., 255. 

Loftus, W. K., Chaldea and Susi- 
ana, 59 H., 252 . 

Lysimachus, 46 x. 


127 2., 


M. 


Macmillan’s Magazine, 8n. 
Maitland, 38 7. 
Malachi, prophecy of, 72 


310 


INDEX. 


Matthew, prophetic import of the 
Gospel of, 159, 164. 

Merivale’s Rom. LHist., 92 1. 

‘“‘Messiah the Prince,” date of, 
124-127. 

Mill’s Essays on Religion, 2 n., 10. 

Milman’s fist. Fews, 27 n., 63%, 
161 2., 228, 

Ministry, date of the Lord’s, 95-97, 
1213 

Miracles, 12 2., 160, 209. 

their connection with the pro- 
phecy, 165-167. 

Mishna, the, 101, 102 #., 107 2., 
110 #., 122 #., 161 #., 238, 240, 
250, 263. 

Months, Jewish, 99 2., 250. 

Mosheim quoted, 4. 


N. 


Nabonassar’s era, 65 7. 

Nabonidus, 221. 

Nabopolassar, 21, 22 2. 

Napoleon, career of, 212. 

Nativity, the, 88, 93, 257-264. 

Nebuchadnezzar, his invasions of 
Judea, 22-27, 231, etc. 

his dream, 29-33, 233. 

——- date of his reign, 220, 232, 
236, 257. 

Nehemiah, 59, 251. 

Newman, Dr. F. W., 229. 

Newton, Sir Isaac, 68, 99 m 

Nineveh, 202, 


O. 


Octaéteris, the, 101, 103. 
Olympiads, era of the, 65 . 
Ordo Sec. See “ Browne.” 


v; 


Palestine, future of, 167, 168 

Papacy, the, 134-136, 268, 301, etc. 

Parables, the Lord’s, 162-163. 

Parenthesis in prophecy, 46-47, 
76-87, 

Paschal Feast, date of the, 99-102, 
123, 261. 

-—— significance of, 108, 118. 

-— offerings at, 11. 


Passover, the Lord’s first, 97. 

the last, 107, 122. 

Pentecost, 114. 

Pergamus, 210. 

Persecutions of Papal Rome, 200. 

of Pagan Rome, 209. See 
‘¢ Tribulation.” 

Persian Empire, 32, 42, 202. 

Pester Lloyd newspaper, 142 %. 

Pharaoh-necho, 21. 

Preparation, the Jews’, 112, 113. 

Prideaux, 61 x. 

Prophecy, the fulfilment of, 76, 
119, 130, etc., 143-148, 196-197, 
264-270. 

Prophetic 15-17, 

219. 

Ptolemy, Canon of, 221, 232, 254. 

King, 45 2. 

Purim, feast of, 98 7., 256 2. 

Pusey, Dr55072-,elOme lA ooner 
40 2., 47 2, 54 7., 61 2., 67 x., 
97 7%, 160 %., IOS 7., 233, 253, 
255. 


study, 5, L7ih; 


Q. 


Quarterly Review, 92 n. 
Quirinus, P. Sulpicius, 91-93. 


ine 


Rationalism, 7, 17. 

Rawlinsen, Canon (Five Great 
Mon), quoted, 23 2, 56 x., 
64 2., 230, 238. 

on the date of Artaxerxes’ 
reign, 254 7. 

Rawlinson, Sir H., 221. 

Reconciliation, doctrine of, 79 x. 

Rehoboam, 20. 

Resurrection, 
259-260. 

Revelation, the, 137, 165, 171, etc., 
196, 

Roman Empire, 32, 40 7., 73, 202, 
QS 2 725 

Rome, Church of, 17, 133-136, 
200-201, 299-303. 

Rome, era of (A.U.C.), 65 2. 


day of the, 114, 


| Russia, 272, 277. 


INDEX. SUL 


S. 


Sabbatic Age, the, 218. 

years, 69. 

Satan, 178, 205, 2067., 216, 302.S¢e 
** Dragon.” 

Scepticism, 2 ., 6-8, 10. 17, 120. 


Scriptures, Sze “‘ Bible,” ‘‘ Canon,” 
etc. 

Seals, visions of the, 137, 173, 180, 
265, 294. 


Seleucus, 45 7. 

Sermon on the Mount, 160. 

Serpent worship, 207-208. 

Servitude to Babylon, 24, 55, 235. 

Seventy weeks, prophecy of the, 
51, ete. See ** Chron, Bras.” 

epoch of the, 66, 122, 181. 

Smith’s Bid. Dict., 67 n., 68.n., 
93 1) 259. 

Smith, Professor Goldwin, 8 . 

Solomon, 20, 31, 222. 

Sower, parable of the, 162-163. 

Speaker’s Commentary, 38 x. 

Stanley, Dean, 230. 

Stillingfleet, Bp., quoted, 207. 

Susa, ruins of, 59 . 


Ae 


Tables, chronological, 
241-249. 

Taxing of Cyrenius, 88-89. 

Temple, Solomon’s, 71, 222, 227. 

Ezra’s, 58, 227 7. 

Herod's, 263. 

Temptation, the, 216. 

Ten kingdoms, See ‘‘ Kingdoms.” 

Themistocles, flight of, 255. 

Tlacydides, 64, 255. 

Tiberius Cesar, fifteenth year of, 
95, 96, 97, 121. 

Times newspaper, 190, 191. 

Tregelles, Dr., 28 7., 51 7., 53 1. 

” 63 %-, 73 ty 255, 275 , 206 2. 


i] 


223-224, 


Tribulation, the great, 165, 174, 
179 7., 182, 184, 185. 

Turkish Power, fall of the, 142, 167. 

Types, Mosaic, 115-118. 


U. 


Ussher, chronology of Archbishop, 
220-222, 254. 


We 


Vials, visions ofthe, 142, 177, 218, 294. 
Vitringa, 254. 


Vive 


“Week ” in prophecy, 67. 

the’ seventieth, 72, 74, 77; 
86-87, 181, 184, 295. 

Westcott, Prof., 38 7. 

Wieseler’s Chron. Synopsis, 92 7., 
100 7. 

Woman of Rev. xii., the, 179 %., 
199, 203-204, 266, 299-300. 


X. 
Xerxes, date of the reign of, 65 z., 


222, 253-257. 
feast of, 68 2., 222. 
derivation of the name, 222 z. 


VY; 


Year, ancient form of, 68, 75 2. 
prophetic, 67, etc. 

—— Jewish, 68, 99, 123. 
Julian, 75, 128. 

York, Archbp. of, 259. 


Z. 


Zechariah’s prophecy, 70 #., 126, 
186. 

Zedekiah, 24, 25. 

date of his reign, 234, 237. 

Zumpt, Dr., 91-94. 


i 


Pa he 7 aah ; 
= a hy owe ON ieee et 
, oe : a 
tna 7 A 
oi” Wet “ans a ae ; 


Vid en b ag MEE piah ¢cs F 


ae ae a 
Wile), 9, COOH me itn an iy 
; : mL 
| 


—¢ 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


PH ES-STLENCE--OF "GOD. 
I, 
Fourth Edition. 8vo, Cloth, 5s. 
LONDON : 
HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row, E.C. 


“‘He writes forcibly, eloquently, with much knowledge of what 


others think and say, and with profound conviction and confidence.”— 
Daily News. 


‘*This remarkable book is one which merits the most thoughtful 
study of Christian readers, It is, as to its main topic, a bold and 


honest endeavour to grapple with a profound difficulty which few have 
not felt from time to time.” —ecord. 


‘“Dr, Anderson’s book is well worth reading.”— The Glasgow Herald. 
‘¢ This isan impressive book. . . . It is worthy of the deepest attention 


of all interested in the important subject of which it treats.”—Aderdeen 
Free Press. 


100, 
HUMAN DESTINY. 
Fourth Edition. Cloth, 3s. 6d. 
LONDON: 
HODDER & STOUGHTON, 27, PATERNOSTER Row. 
A HANDBOOK ON THE ESCHATOLOGICAL CONTROVERSY, BEING 
AN ANSWER TO THE WORKS ENTITLED ‘‘ ETERNAL HOPE,” 


‘“LIFE IN CHRIST,” ‘*SALVATOR MuNDI,” AND ‘THE 
RESTITUTION OF ALL THINGS.” 
‘‘ The most valuable contribution on the subject I have ever seen.”— 
The late C. H. SPURGEON, 


III. 


A DOUBTER’S DOUBTS ABOUT SCIENCE 
AND RELIGION. 


Second Edition. Cloth, 35. 6d. 


KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER, & CO., Lrp., 
PATERNOSTER HousE, CHARING Cross Roan. 
From the late Rt. Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P. 
“T wish to thank you for your Doudter’s Doubts, and to say that 
I have read it with a great deal of sympathy... . I presume to 
hope that you will follow up the subjects of your volume with the 


same care, force, and exactitude which in it you have bestowed 
: : ; 
especially upon the main argument.” 


- 


IV. 
THE GOSPEL AND ITS MINISTRY. - 
A HANDBOOK OF EVANGELICAL TRUTH. 
Eighth Edition. Cloth, gilt, 2s. 6d. 
JAMES NESBIT & CO., 21, BERNERS STREET, W. 


NOTE TO THE SEVENTH EDITION. 
THAT the title-page may better describe the contents, a second title has 
been added to this Edition. This little volume is what it now purports 
to be—‘* A HANDBOOK OF EVANGELICAL TRUTH ”—truth in the power 
of which the martyrs lived and died in dark days long past ; truth too 
lightly held in these days of ours, when a false liberality combines with 
a false scepticism to undermine faith. 

For ‘‘divers and strange doctrines” these pages will be searched in 
vain.. Hence their cordial acceptance with those who love the old 
paths, and their failure to achieve popularity in a wider sense. With 
this result the Author is more than.content. And in the earnest hope 
that, in the future, as in the past, it will increase the number of truth- 
lovers, the book is once again re-issued. 


Vv. 
FOR HIS NAME’S SAKE. 
. A PLEA FOR REVERENCE. 
Cloth, 1s. 
JAMES NISBET & CO., 21, BERNERS STREET, W, 


VI. 
DANIEL IN THE CRITIC’S DEN. 
AN ANSWER TO DEAN FarrAr’s ‘‘BooK OF DANIEL.”! 
Cloth, 3s. 6d. 
WM. BLACKWOOD & SONS, 37, PaTERNOSTER Row, EC., 
AND EDINBURGH. 


“We leave it to the same tribunal to appreciate the value and 
importance of Dr. Anderson’s very ingenious and apparently cogent 
elucidation of the. vexed question of the ‘seventy weeks.’”— Zhe Times. 

‘*Tt is impossible not to read and enjoy the exposition. . . . It is 
smartly effected, and is a well-deserved fustigation. . ... While con- - 
gratulating him upon his undoubted success . . .”—Saturday Review. 


