
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



M n ti t Kiu J 



HARVARD DEPOSITORY 
SPECIAL COLLECTION 
CIRCULATION RESTRICTED WM 



^ Ol 



« oo 



MM- 



Cgo»<='° 



''PP'M- 



VM0. 

lif. 















BT 
770 
.F8 
[837 






9 c>^^«>o 



kg :-.^^^^«!j .^. 






I^atbatb BtbinUp ^t|iool 




ANDOVER-HARVARD THEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 



Gift of 
Professor C, Conrad Wright 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by VjOOQIC 



THE 



GOSPEL WORTHY OF ALL 
ACCEPTATION; 



THE DUTY OF SINNERS TO BELIEVE IN 
JESUS CHRIST. 



BY REV. ANDREW FULLER. 



▲BRIDGED BY THE LONDON RELIGIOUS TRACT SOCIETY. 



BOSTON: 

PUBLISHED BY THE 

AMERICAN DOCTRINAL TRACT SOCJETY. 
PERKINS AND MARVIN, Aoirts. 

1837. 



Digitized by Google 






The original Work contains various references to other 
writers, and answers to objections : these are omitted, as not 
necessary in a reprint which is intended for general use at the 
present time. 



d by Google 



CONTENTS. 






PART I. 

The subject shown to be important, stated and, ex- 
plained 5 



PART II. 

Arguments to prove faith in Christ to be the duty of 
all men who hear, or have an opportunity to hear 
the Gospel 23 

Prop. I. Unconverted sinners are commanded, 
exhorted, and invited to believe in Christ for sal- 
vation 23 

H- - 

-<"-<> Prop. II. Every man is bound cordially to re- 
s^ ceive and approve whatever God reveals 38 

- Prop. III. Though the Gospel, strictly speak- 

^ ing, is not a law, but a message of pure grace, yet 

>^ it virtually requires obedience, and such an obedi- 

/- ence as includes saving fiuth 47 

^N Prop. IV. The want of faith in Christ is ascribed 
to men's depravity, and is itself represented as a 
heinous sin 53 



d by Google 



4 CONTENTS. 

Pafe. 
Prop. V. God has threatened and inflicted the 
most awful punishments on sinners, for their not 
believing on the Lord Jesus Christ 60 

Prop. VI. Other spiritual exercises, which sus- 
tain an inseparable connection with faith in Christi 
are represented 9s the duty of men in general 66 



CONCLUDING REFLECTIONS. 

On the warrant to believe 81 

On the influence of faith on justification ....•.• 83 

On the alanning situation of unbelievers 85 

On the duty of ministers in dealing with the un* 
converted 89 



d by Google 



THE 

GOSPEL OF CHRIST 

WORTHY OF ALL ACCEPTATION, &c. 



PART L 

WHEREIN THE SUBJECT IS SHOWN TO BE IM- 
PORTANT, STATED, AND EXPLAINED. 

God, having blessed mankind with the glori- 
ous Gospel of his Son, hath spoken much in his 
word, as it might be supposed he would, of the 
treatment which it should receive from those to 
whom it was addressed. A cordial reception of 
it is called, in Scripture, receiving Christ, allow- 
ing him, believing in him, &c. ; and the contra- 
ry, refusing, disallowing, and rejecting him ; and 
those who thus reject him are, in so doing, said 
to judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life. 
John i. 12. iii. 16. Psa. cxviii. 22. Matt. xxi. 42. 
1 Peter ii. 7. Acts xiii. 46. These are things on 
which the New Testament largely insists : great 
str^i^ is there laid on the reception of the truth. 
The same lips which commissioned the apostles 
to go Bndpreizch the Gospel to every creature, add- 
ed. He that belie veth and is baptized, shall 

BE SAVED ; BUT HE THAT BELIEVETH NOT, SHALL 

BE DAMNED. To OS many as received him, to 

1* 

Digitized by Google 



b THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

them gave he power to become the sons of God ; 
but to them who received him not, but refused 
him, and rejected his way of salvation, he became 
a stumbling-stone, and a rock of offence, that they 
might stumble, and fall, and perish. Thus the 
Gospel, according to the different reception it 
meets with, becomes a savor of life unto life, or 
of death unto decUh. Mark xvi. 16. 1 Peter ii. 8. 
2 Cor. ii. 16. The controversies which have 
arisen concerning faith in Jesus Christ, are not 
so much an object of surprise, as the conduct of 
those who, professing to be Christians, affect to 
decry the subject as a matter of little or no im- 
portance. There is not any principle or ex- 
ercise of the human mind of which the New 
Testament speaks so frequently, and on which 
so great a stress is laid. And, with regard to 
the inquiry, whether faith be required of all men 
who hear, or have opportunity to hear the word, 
it cannot be uninteresting. If it be not, to in- 
culcate it would be unwarrantable and cruel to 
our fellow-sinners, as it subjects them to an ad- 
ditional charge of guilt : but, if it be, to explain 
it away is to undermine the Divine prerogative, 
and, as far as it goes, to subvert the very intent 
of the promulgation of the Gospel, which is, that 
men should believe that Jesus is the Christy tJie 
Son of God, and, believing, have life through his 
name, John xx. 31. This is, doubtless, a very 
serious thing, and ought to be seriously consid- 
ered. Though some good men may be implicat- 
ed in this matter, it becomes them to remember, 
that whosoever breaketh one of the least of Chrisfs 
commambnents^ and teacheth men so, shall be 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATIOH. 1 

icdtted the hast in the kingdom of hecm . If b^ 
Sieving be a commandment, it cannot be one of 
the least : the important relations which it sus- 
tains, as well as the dignity of its object, must 
prevent this : the knowledge of sin, repentance 
for it, and gratitude for pardoning mercy, all de- 
pend upon our admitting it. And, if it be vl great 
commandment, the breach of it must be a great 
sin ; and whosoever teaches men otherwise, is a 
partaker of their guilt ; and, if they perish, will 
be found to have been accessary to their eternal 
ruin. Let it be considered, whether the apostle 
to the Hebrews did not proceed upon such prin- 
ciples, when he exclaimed, " How shall we escape^ 
if we negltct so great salvation?** And the 
Lord Jesus himself, when he declared, "He 

THAT BELIEVETH NOT SHALL BE DAMNED ! " 

In order to determine, whether faith in Christ 
be the duty of all men who have opportunity to 
hear the Gospel, it will be necessary to determine 
what it is, or wherein it consists. Some have 
maintained, that it consists in a persuasion of our 
interest in Christ, and in all the benefits and 
blessings of his mediation. Others, who would 
not be thought to go so far, for the sake of many 
Christians whom they cannot but observe, upon 
this principle, to be, generally speaking, unbe- 
lievers, yet maintain what fully implies it. Though 
they will allow, for the comfort of such Christians, 
that assurance is not of the essence of faith, un- 
derstanding by assurance, an assured persuasion 
of our salvation ; but, that a reliance on Christ 
is sufficient ; yet, in almost all other things, they 
speak as if they did not believe what, at thoee 



d by Google 



8 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

times, they say. It is common for such persons 
to call those fears which occupy the minds of 
Christians, lest they should miss of salvation at 
last, by the name of unbelief; and to reprove 
them for being guilty of this God-dishonoring 
sin, exhorting them to be strong in faith, like 
Abraham, giving glory to God ; when all that is 
meant is, that they should, without doubting, be- 
lieve the goodness of their state. If this be sav- 
ing faith, it must inevitably follow, that it is not 
the duty of unconverted sinners ; for they are not 
interested in Christ, and it cannot possibly be 
their duty to believe a lie. But, if it can be 
proved that the proper object of saving faith is, 
not our being interested in Christ, but the glo- 
rious Gospel of the ever-blessed God, (which is 
true, whether we believe it or not,) a contrary 
inference must be drawn ; for it is admitted on 
all hands, that it is the duty of every man to be- 
lieve what God reveals. 

I have no objection to allowing, that true faith 
hath in it the nature of appropriation ; if, by this 
term, be meant an application of the truths be- 
lieved to our own particular cases. " When the 
Scriptures teach," says a pungent writer, " we are 
to receive instruction, for the enlightening of 
our own minds ; when they admonish, we are to 
take warning; when they reprove, we are to 
be checked; when they comfort, we are to be 
cheered and encouraged ; and when they recom- 
mend any grace, we are to desire and embrace 
it ; when they command any duty, we are to hold 
ourselves enjoined to do it ; when they promise, 
we are to hope; when they threaten, we are to be 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 9 

terrified, as if the judgment were denounced 
against us; and when they forbid any sin, we are 
to think they forbid it unto us. By which appli- 
cation we shall make all the rich treasures con- 
tained in the Scriptures wholly our own, and in 
«uch a powerful and peculiar manner enjoy the 
fruit and benefit of them, as if they had been 
wholly written ybr us, and none other else beside 

U8."» 

By saying faith, we undoubtedly embrace 
Christ for ourselves, in the same sense as Jacob 
embraced Jehovah as ^5 God, Gen. xxriii. 21 ; 
that is, to a rejecting of every idol that stands in 
competition with him. Christ is all-sufficient, 
and suited to save us, as well as others; and it is 
for the forgiveness of our sins that we put our 
trust in him. But this is very different from a 
persuasion of our being in a state of salvation. 

My objections to this notion of faith are as 
follow ; 

Nothing can be an object of faith, except what 
God has revealed in his word : but the interest 
that any individual has in Christ, and the bless- 
ings of the Gospel, more than another, is not re- 
vealed. God has no where declared^ concerning 
any one of us, as individuals, that we shall be 
flaved: all that he has revealed on this subject 
respects us as characters. He has abundantly 
promised, that all who believe in him, love him, 
and obey him; shall be saved ; and a persuasion, 
that, if we sustain these characters, we shall be 
saved, is, doubtless, an exercise of faith: but 

• Downame's " Guide to Godlinem,'* p. 647. 

Digitized by Google 



10 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

whether we ^o them or not, is an object not of 
faith, but of consciousness. " Hereby we do 
know that we know him, if we keep his command- 
ments" " Whoso keepeth his wordy in him vert' 
ly is the love of God perfected : hereby know we 
that we are in him. My little children, let us not 
love in word and in tongue, but in deed and in 
truth : hereby we know that we are of the truth, 
and shall assure our hearts before him" 1 John 
ii. 3. 5. iii. 18, 19. If any one imagine that 
God has revealed to him his interest in his love ; 
and this in a special, immediate, and extraordi- 
nary manner, and not by exciting in him the holy 
exercises of grace, and thereby begetting a con- 
sciousness of his being a subject of grace, let 
him beware, lest he deceive his soul. The Jews 
were not wanting in what some would call the 
faith of assurance : We have one leather, said 
they, even God: but Jesus answered, If God 
were your Father, ye would love me. 

The Scriptures always represent faith as ter- 
minating on something without us ; namely, on 
Christ, and the truths concerning him : but, if it 
consist in a persuasion of our being in a state of 
salvation, it must terminate, principally, on some- 
thing within us ; namely, the work of grace in 
our hearts ; for to believe myself interested in 
Christ, is the same thing as to believe myself a 
subject of special grace. And hence, as was 
said, it is common for many who entertain this 
notion of faith, to consider its opposite, unbelief, 
as a doubting whether we have been really con- 
verted. But, as it is the truth and excellence 
of the things to be interested in, and not his ut» 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 11 

terest in them, that the sinner is apt to disbe- 
lieve ; so it is these, and not that, on which the 
faith of the believer primarily terminates. Per- 
haps what relates to personal interest may, in 
general, more properly be called hope than faith, 
and its opposite, fear, than unbelief. 

To believe ourselves in a state of salvation, 
(however desirable, when grounded on evidence,) 
is far inferior, in its object, to saving faith. The 
grand object on which faith fixes, is the glory of 
Christ, and not the happy condition we are in, 
as interested in him. The latter, doubtless, af- 
fords great consolation ; and the more we dis- 
cover of his excellence, the more ardently shall 
we desire an interest in him, and be the more 
disconsolate while it continues a matter of doubt. 
But if we be concerned only for our own security, 
our faith is vain, and we are yet in our sins. As 
that repentance which fixes merely on the con- 
sequences of sin, as subjecting us to misery, is 
selfish and spurious, so that faith which fixes 
merely on the consequences of Christ's medi- 
ation, as raising us to happiness, is equally 
selfish and spurious. It is the peculiar property 
of true faith, to endear Christ : Unto you that 
believe, he is precious. And, where this is the 
case, if there be no impediments, arising from 
constitutional dejection or other accidental caus- 
es, we shall not be in doubt about an interest in 
him. Consolation will accompany the faith of 
the Gospel : Being justified by faith, we have 
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ. 

All those exercises of faith which our Lord so 



d by Google 



12 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

highly commends in the New Testament — as 
that of the centurion, the woman of Canaan, and 
others — are represented as terminating on his 
cUUsufficiency to heal them, and not as consisting 
in a persuasion that they were interested in the 
divine favor, and, therefore, should succeed. 
Speak the word only^ says the one, and my set' 
vant shall he healed ; for I am a man in author^ 
ity, having soldiers under me ; and I say to this 
man. Go, and he goeth ; and to another, Come, 
and he cometh ; and to my servant, Do thisy and 
he doeth it. Such was the persuasion which the 
other entertained of his all-sufficiency to help 
her, that she judged it enough if she might hut 
partake of the crumbs of his table — the scatter- 
ings, as it were, of mercy. Similar to this is the 
following language : — If I may hut touch the hem 
of his garment, I shall he made whole. — Believe 
ye that I am able to do this 7 They said unto 
him. Yea, Lord, — Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst 
make me clean, — If thou canst do any thing, have 
compassion on us, and help us, Jesus said. If 
thou CANST believe, all things are possible to him 
that helieveth. I allow that the case of these 
people, and that of a sinner applying for forgive- 
ness, are not exactly the same. Christ had no 
where promised to heal all who came for healing ; 
but he has graciously bound himself not to cast 
out any who come to him for mercy. On this 
account, there is a greater ground for faith in 
the willingness of Christ to save, than there was 
in his willingness to heal; and there was less 
unbelief in the saying of the leper, Ip thou 
WILT, thou canst m<Uce me clean, Uian there 



d by Google 



OV ALL ACC£PTATION. 13 

would be in similar language from one who, 
eonvinced of his own utter insufficiency, applied 
to him for salvation. But a persuasion of Christ 
being both able and willing to save all them that 
come unto God by him, and, consequently, to 
save us, if we so apply, is very different frpm a 
persuasion that we are the children of Qod, and 
interested in the blessings of the. Gospel. 

That the belief of the truth which God hath 
revealed in the Scriptures concerning Christ is 
saving faith, is evident from the following pas- 
sages : — Go preach the Gospel to every creature. 
He thai helieveth and is baptized^ shall be saved. 
Believing, here, manifestly refers to the Gospel 
to be preached, and the rejection of which would 
subject the unbeliever to certain damnation. — 
These things are written, that ye might believe 
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and 
that, believing, ye might have life through his 
name. Believing unto life is here described as a 
persuasion of Jesus being the Christ, the Son 
of God : and that on the ground of what was 
written in the Scriptures. Those by the way' ^ 
side are they that hear; then cometh the devil^ 
and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest 
they should believe, and be saved. This language 
plainly denotes that a real belief of the word is 
connected with salvation. Peter confessed. Thou 
art Christ, the Son of th^ living God. Jesus 
answered, Blessed art thou, Simon Bar^ona; for 
fesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but 
my Father who is in heaven. Here it is plainly 
intimated that a belief of Jesus being the Christ, 
the Son of the living God, is saving faith ; and 
2 

Digitized by Google 



14 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

that no man can be strictly said to do this, unless 
he be the subject of a spiritual illumination from 
above. To the same purpose are those express 
declarations of Paul and John : — If thou shcUt 
confess with thy mouth the Lord JesuSy and be- 
lieve in thine heart that God hath raised him 
frem the dead, thou shalt be saved. — Whoso 
believeth that Jefius is the Christ, is born of God. 
— Who is he that overcometh the world, but he 
that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God? — 
Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of 
Gody God dwelkth in him, and he in God. — He 
that hath received his testimony, hath set to his 
seal that God is true. — No man can say that 
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit. — 
Again, While ye have the light, believe in the 
light, that ye may be the children of light. The 
light they then had was that of the Gospel ; and 
had they believed it, they would have been the 
children of light, or true Christians. Ye sent 
unto John, and he bare witness unto the truth. — 
These things I say, that ye might be saved. 
Our Lord could not mean less, by this language, 
than that, if they believed those things which 
John testified, and which he himself confirmed, 
they would be saved ; which is the same thing 
as declaring it to be saving faith. Christ shall 
come to be glorifed in his saints, and to be ad- 
mired in all them that believe, {because our testi- 
mony among you was believed,) in thcU day. The 
words in a parenthesis are evidently intended to 
give the reason of the phrase them that believe, 
and intimate that it was the belief of the Gospel 
testimony that denominated them believers. God 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 15 

hath chosen us to salvation, through sanctification 
of the Spirit, and belief of the truth. It cannot 
be doubted, that, by the belief of the truth, is 
here meant faith in Christ ; and its being con- 
nected with sanctification of the Spirit, and 
eternal salvation, proves it to be saving. Mark 
xvi. 16. John xx. 31. Luke viii. 12. Mttt. 
xvi. 16, 17. Rom. x. 9. 1 John v. 5 : iv. 15. 
John iii. 33. 1 Cor. xii. 3. John xii. 36 : v. 
33, 34. 2 Thess. i. 10 : ii. 13. 

If the foregoing passages be admitted to prove 
the point, (and if they do not, we may despair 
of learning any thing from the Scriptures^ the 
duty of unconverted sinners to believe in Christ 
cannot fairly be called in question ; for, as be- 
fore said, it is admitted on all hands that it is the 
duty of every man to believe what God reveals. 

But to this statement it is objected, that Chris- 
tianity having at that time great opposition made 
to it, and its professors being consequently ex- 
posed to great persecution and reproach, the 
belief and acknowledgment of the Gospel was 
more a test of sincerity than it now is. Men 
are now taught the principles of the Christian 
religion from their youth, and believe them, and 
are not ashamed to acknowledge them, while yet 
they give no evidence of their being bom of 
God, but of the contrary. There is some force 
in this objection, so far as it respects the confes- 
sion of Christ's name; but I do not perceive that 
it affects the belief of the Gospel. It was no 
more difficult to believe the truth at that time 
than at this, though it might b^ much more so to 
avow it With respect to that traditional assent 



d by Google 



16 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

which is given to Christianity in some nations, 
it is of the same nature as that which is given to 
Mohammedanism and Paganism in others. It is 
no more than that of the Jewish nation, in the 
time of our Lord, towards the Mosaic Scriptures. 
They declared themselves to be Moses' disciples, 
and had no doubt but they believed him ; yet 
our Lord did not allow that they believed his 
writings. Had ye believed Moses, says he, ye 
would have believed me ; for he wrote of me. 
John V. 46. The same is, doubtless, true of all 
others who assent to his Gospel, merely from hav- 
ing been educated in it. Did they believe it, they 
would be consistent, and embrace those things 
which are connected with it. It is worthy of 
remark, that those professors of Christianity who 
received not the love of the truth, that they might 
be saved, are represented as not believing the 
truth, and as having pleasure in unrighteousness. 
2 Thes. ii. 10, 12. To admit the existence of a 
few facts, without possessing any sense of their 
humiliating implication, their holy nature, their 
vast importance, or the practical consequences 
that attach to them, is to admit the body without 
the spirit Paul, notwithstanding his knowledge 
of the law, and great zeal on its behalf, whUe 
blind to its spirituality, reckoned himself to be 
without the law, Rom. vii. 9. And such are 
those professing Christians, with respect to the 
Gospel, who receive not the love of the truth, that 
they may be saved. 

It is further objected, that men are said to 
have believed the Gospel, who, notwithstanding, 
were destitute of true religion. Thus, some 



d by Google 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. 17 

among the chief rulers are said to have heUeved 
Jesus, hut did not confess him ; for they loved 
the praise of men more than the praise of God. 
It is said of Simon, that he believed also ; yet he 
was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of 
iniquity. Agrippa is acknowledged, by Paul, to 
have believed the prophets ; and faith is attributed 
even to the devils. The term belief, like almost 
every other term, is sometimes used in an im- 
proper sense. Judas is said to have repented, 
and hanged himself; though nothing more is 
meant by it than his being smitten with remorse, 
wishing he had not done as he did, on account 
of the consequences. Through the poverty of 
language, there is not a name for every thing 
that differs ; and, therefore, where two things 
have the same visible appearance, and differ only 
in some circumstances which are invisible, it is 
common to call them by the same name. Thus 
men are termed honest who are punctual in their 
dealings, though such conduct, in many instances, 
may arise merely from a regard to their own cred- 
it, interest, or safety. Thus the remorse of Ju- 
das is called repentance; and thus the convic- 
tions of the Jewish rulers, of Simon, and Agrippa, 
and the fearful apprehension of apostate angels, 
from what they had already felt, is called faith. 
But as we do not infer, from the application of 
the term repentance to the feelings of Judas, that 
there is nothing spiritual in real repentance, so 
neither ought we to conclude, from the foregoing 
applications of the term believing, that there is 
nothing spiritual in a recU belief of the Gospel. 
" The objects of faith," it has been said, " are 
2* 

Digitized by Google 



18 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

not bare axioms or propositions. The act of the 
believer does not terminate at an axiom, but at 
the thing; for axioms are not formed, but that, 
by them, knowledge may be had of things.*' To 
believe a bare axiom or proposition, in distinc- 
tion from the thing, must be barely to believe 
that such and such letters make certain words ; 
and that such words, put together, have a cer- 
tain meaning : but who would call this believing 
the proposition 1 To believe the proposition, is 
to believe the thing. Letters, syllables, words, 
and propositions, are only means of conveyance ; 
and these, as such, are not the objects of faith, 
but the thing conveyed. Nevertheless, those 
things must have a conveyance, ere they can be 
believed in. The person, bhod, and righteous- 
ness of Christ, for instance, are often said to be 
objects of faith ; and this they doubtless are, as 
they are objects held forth to us by the language 
of Scripture : but they could not meet our faith, 
unless something were affirmed concerning them 
in letters and syllables, or vocal sounds, or by 
some means or other of conveyance. To say, 
therefore, that these are objects of faith, is to say 
the truth, but not the whole truth. The person, 
blood, and righteousness of Christ, revealed in 
the Scriptures as the way of a sinner's acceptance 
with God, are, properly speaking, the objects of 
our faith ; for without such a revelation, it were 
impossible to believe in them. 

Some writers have considered faith in Christ 
as a dependence on him, a receiving him, a com- 
ing to him, and trusting in him for salvation. 
There is no doubt but these terms are frequently 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 19 

used, in the New Testament, to express believing. 
" As many as received him, to them gave he power 
to become the sons of God, even to them that 
beKeve on his name." — '* He that cameth to me 
shall never hunger, and he that helieveth in me 
shall never thirst." — " That we should be to the 
praise of his glory who first trusted in Christ." — 
** I know whom I have trusted, and am persuaded 
that he is able to keep that- which I have commit" 
ted to him against that day." John i. 12 : vi. 35. 
Eph, i. 12. 2 Tim. i. 12. Whether these terms, 
however, strictly speaking, convey the same idea 
as believing, may admit of a question. They 
seem, rather, to be the immediate effects of faith, 
than faith itself. The author of the Epistle to the 
Hebrews describes the order of these things, in 
what he says of the faith of Enoch : — He thai 
eometh to Ood must believe that he is, and that he 
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. 
Here are three different exercises of mind : First, 
believing that Chd is ; second, believing that he 
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; 
third, coming to him : and the last is represented 
as the effect of the former two. The same may 
be applied to Christ. He that eometh to Christ 
must believe the Gospel testimony, that he is the 
Son of (rod, and the Savior of sinners — ^the only 
name given under heaven, and among men, by 
which we must be saved. He must also believe 
the Gospel promise, that he will bestow eternal 
salvation on all them that obey him ; and under 
the influence of this persuasion, he comes to him, 
commits himself to him, or trusts the salvation 
of his soul in his handa. This process m^y be 



d by Google 



30 THB GOSPEL WORTHY 

SO quick as not to admit of the mind being con- 
scious of it ; and especially as, at such a time, it 
is otherwise employed than in speculating upon 
its own operations. So far as it is able to recol- 
lect, the whole may appear to be one complex 
exercise of the soul. In this large sense, also, 
as comprehending not only the credit of the 
Gospel testimony, but the souPs dependence on 
Christ alone for acceptance with God, it in 
allowed that believing is necessary, not only to 
salvation, but to justification. We must come to 
Jesus, that we may have life. Those who attain 
the blessing of justification, must seek it bif faith, 
and not by the works of the law — submitting 
themselves to the righteousness of God. This 
blessing is constantly represented as following 
our union with Christ : and he that is joined to 
the Lord is one spirit. John v. 40. Rom. ix. 
31, 32 : X. 3. 1 Cor. vi. 17. 

Let it but be granted that a real belief of the 
Gospel is not merely a matter presupposed in 
saving faith, but that it enters into the essence 
of it, and the writer of these pages will be far 
from contending for the exclusion of trust or 
dependence. 

The term trust appears to be most appropriate, 
or best adapted of any, to express the confidence 
which the soul reposes in Christ for the fulfilment 
of his promises. We may credit a report of evil 
tidings as well as one of good ; but we cannot be 
said to trust it. We may also credit a report, the 
truth or falsehood of which does not at all concern 
us ; but that in which we place trust must be 
something in which our well-being is involved. 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 21 

The relinquishment of false confidences which 
the Gospel requires, and the risk which is made 
in embracing it, are likewise better e^qpressed by 
this term than by any other. A true belief of the 
record which God has given of his Son, is ac- 
companied with all this ; but the term helirf does 
not, of itself, necessarily convey it When Ja- 
cob's sons brought the coat of many colors to 
him, he credited their story ; he. belieyed Joseph 
to be torn in pieces ; but he could not be said to 
trust that he was. When the same persons, on 
their return from Egypt, declared that Joseph 
was yet alive, Jacob, at first, believed them not. 
But, on seeing the wagons, he was satisfied of 
the truth of their declaration, and trusted in it 
too-leaving all behind him on the ground of it. 

But, whatever difference there may be between 
credit and trusty they agree in those particulars 
which affect the point at issue : the one, no less 
than the other, has relation to revealed truth as 
its foundation. In some cases, it directly refers 
to the divine veracity, as in Ps. cxix. 42, "J 
trust in thy w&rdP And where the immediate 
reference is to the power, the wisdom, or the 
mercy of God, or to the righteousness of Christ, 
there is a remote relation to veracity ; for neither 
the one nor the other would be objects of trust, 
were they not revealed in a way of promise. 
And from hence it will follow, that, trusting in 
Christ, no less than crediting his testimony, is 
the duty of every sinner to whom the revelation 
18 made. 

If it be asked, What ground could a sinner 
who shall, at last, prove to have no interest in 



d by Google 



22 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

the salvation of Christ, ever possess for trusting 
in him ? let it be considered what it was for 
which he was warranted or obliged to trust. 
Was it that Christ would save him, whether he 
believed in him or not ? No — there is no such 
promise ; but an explicit declaration of the con- 
trary. To trust in this, therefore, would be to 
trust in a falsehood. That for which he ought 
to have trusted in him was, the obtaining of 
mercy, in case he applied for it. For this there 
was a complete warrant in the Gospel declara- 
tions. I may add, if any man distrust either the 
power or willingness of Christ to save those that 
come to him, and so continue to stand at a 
distance, relying upon his own righteousness, or 
some false ground of confidence, to the rejection 
of him, it is criminal and inexcusable unbelief. 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATIOl^. 23 



PART U. 

CONTAINING ARGUMENTS TO PROVE THAT FAITH 
IN CHRIST IS THE DUTY OF ALL MEN WHO 
HEAR, OR HAVE OPPORTUNITY TO HEAR, THE 
GOSPEL. 

What has been already advanced on the na^ 
ture of faith in Christ, may contribute to the 
deciding of the question, Whether faith be the 
duty of the ungodly ; but, in addition to this, the 
Scriptures furnish abundance of positive evidence. 
The principal part of that which has occurred to 
me, may be comprehended under the following 
propositions : — 

I. Unconverted sinners are commanded, 

EXHORTED, AND INVITED TO BELIEVE IN ChRIST 
FOR SALVATION. 

It is "here taken for granted, that whatever God 
commands, exhorts, or invites us to comply with, 
is the duty of those to whom such language is 
addressed. If, therefore, saving faith be not the 
duty of the unconverted, we may expect never to 
find any addresses of this nature directed to them 
in the Holy Scriptures. We may expect that 
God will as soon require them to become angels as 
Christians, if the one be no more their duty than 
the other. 

There is a phraseology suited to different pe^ 
riods of time. Previously to the coming of 



d by Google 



24 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, we read 
but little of believing; but other terms, folly 
expressive of the thing, are found in abundance. 
I shall select a few examples, and accompany 
them with such remarks as may show them to be 
applicable to the subject. 

Psalm ii. 11, 12. — Serve the Lord with fear, 
and rgoice with trembling : kiss the Son, lest he 
be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his 
wrath is kindled but a little : blessed are all they 
that put their trust in him. The psalm is evi- 
dently a prophecy of the resurrection and exalta<* 
tion of the Messiah. Whatever reference may 
be had to Solomon, there are several things which 
are not true, of either him or his government ; 
and the whole is applicable to Christ, and is 
plentifully applied to him in the New Testa- 
ment. 

The kings and judges of the earth, who are 
here admonished to serve the Lord Messiah loith 
fear, and to kiss the Son, lest he be angry, are the 
same persons mentioned in verse 2, which words 
we find, in the New Testament, applied to Herod 
and Pontius Pilate^ with the Gentiles, and the 
people of Israel, Acts iv. 27 : that is^ they were 
the enemies of Christ, unregenerate sinners; 
and such, for any thing that appears, they lived 
and died. 

The command of God addressed to these rulers, 
is of a spiritual nature, including unfeigned faith 
in the Messiah, and sincere obedience to his au- 
thority. To kiss the Son, is to be reconciled to 
him, to embrace his word and ordinances, and 
bow to his sceptre. To serve kim wttkfear^ and 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. XO 

rgaice with tremhUngy denote, that they should 
not think meanly of him, on the one hand ; nor 
hypocritically cringe to him, from a mere appre- 
hension of his wrath, on the other ; but sincerely 
embrace his government, and even rejoice that 
they had it to embrace. That which b here 
required of unbelievers, is the very spirit which 
distinguishes believers; a holy fear of Christ's 
majesty, and a humble confidence in his mercy ; 
taking his yoke upon them, and wearing it as 
their highest delight. That the object of the 
command was spiritual, is also manifest from the 
threatening and the promise annexed to it, lest yt 
perish from the way— -blessed wre all they that put 
their trust in him. It is here plainly supposed, 
that, if they did embrace the Son, they should 
not perish from the way, and, if they did put 
their trust in him, they should be blessed. The 
result is — ^Unconverted .sinners are commanded 
to believe in Christ for salvation: therefore^ 
believing in Christ for salvation is their duty. 

Isaiah Iv. 1 — 7. Ho, every one that thirsteth, 
come ye to the waters, and he that hath no money ; 
come ye, buy and eat ; yea, come, buy wine and 
milk without money, and without price. Where- 
fore do ye spend money for thai which is not 
bread; and your labor for that which satisfieth 
not ? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye 
that which is good, and let your soul deUght itself 
in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me ; 
hear, and your soul shall live : and I will make 
an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure 
mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for 
a witness to the people, a leader and tommmukr 
3 

Digitized by Google 



26 THE GOSPEL WORTHT 

to the people. Behold, thou shaU coil a ncttion 
that thou knewest not ; and nations that knew not 
thee shall run unto thee, because of the Lord thy 
God, and for the Holy One of Israel ; for he hath 
glorified thee. Seek ye the Lord while he may be 
found, call ye upon him while he is near. Let the 
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man 
his thoughts ; and let htm return unto the Lord, 
and he will have mercy upon him; and tojour 
God, for he will abundantly pardon. This is 
the language of inyitation : but divine invitation 
implies an obligation to accept it ; otherwise, the 
conduct of those who mcule light of the Gospel 
supper, and preferred their farms and merchan- 
dise before it, had been guiltless. 

The concluding verses of this passage express 
those things literally, which the foregoing ones 
described metaphorically : the persons invited, 
and the invitation, are the same in both. The 
thirst which they are supposed to possess, does 
not mean a holy desire after spiritual blessings, 
but the natural desire of happiness which God 
has implanted in every bosom; and which, in 
wicked men, is directed, not to the sure mercies 
of David, but to that which t5 not bread, or 
which has no solid satisfaction in it. The duty, 
to a compliance with which they are so patheti- 
cally urged, is, a relinquishment of every false 
way, and a returning to God in his name who 
was given for a witness, a leader, and a command- 
er to the people; which is the same thing as 
repentance towards God, and faith towards our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The encouragements held 
up to induce a compliance with tlus duty, are, 



d by Google 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. 27 

the freeness, the substantialness, the durableness, 
the certainty, and the rich abundance of those 
blessings, which as many as repent and believe 
the Gospel shall receive. The whole passage is 
exceedingly explicit, as to the duty of the un- 
converted; neither is it possible to evade the 
force of it by any just or fair method of inter- 
pretation. 

Jeremiah vi. 16. Thus saith the Lord, Stand 
ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths , 
where is the good way, and walk therein, and ye 
shall find rest for your souls : but they said, We 
will not walk therein. The persons here ad- 
dressed are, beyond all doubt, ungodly men. God 
himself bears witness of them, that their ears were 
uncircumcised, and they could not hearken, for 
the word of the Lord was to them a reproach, and 
they had no delight in it, ver. 10. Yea, so hard- 
ened were they, that they were not ashamed when 
they had committed abomination, and so impudent, 
that they could not blush, ver. 15. And such, 
for any thing that appears, they continued ; for 
when they were exhorted to walk in the good 
way, their answer was. We will not walk therein. 
Hence the awful threatening which follows : 
Hear, O earth, behold I will bring evil upon this 
people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because 
they have not hearkened unto my words, nor to my 
law, but r^ected it, ver. 19. 

The good way, in which they were directed to 
walk, must have been the same as that in which 
the patriarchs and prophets had walked in former 
ages; who, we all know, lived and died in the 
£uth of the promised Messiah. Hence, our 



d by Google 



88 THE GOSPfiL WORTHY 

Lord, with great propriety, applied the passage to 
himself, Matt. xi. 28. Jeremiah directed to the 
old paths, and the good way, as the only medium 
of finding rest to the soul : Jesus said, Come unto 
ME, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I 
will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and 
learn of me, and ye shall Jind rest unto your souls. 

We see in this passage also, as in many 
others, in what manner God requires sinners to 
use the means of grace ; not by a mere attendance 
upon them, (which, while the end is disregarded, 
and the means rested in instead of it, is not 
using, but perverting them,) but with a sincere 
desire to find out the good way, and to walk in 
it. God requires no natural impossibilities. No 
man is required to believe in Christ, before he 
has opportunity of examining the evidence at- 
tending his Gospel : but he ought to search into 
it, like the noble Bereans, immediately, and with 
a pure intention of finding and following the 
good way ; which, if he do, like them he will 
soon be *found walking in it. If we teach sinners, 
that a mere attendance on the means of grace is 
that use of them which God requires at their 
hands, and in which consists the whole of their 
duty, as to repentance towards God, and faith 
towards our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be found 
false witnesses for God, and deceivers of the 
souls of men. 

The New Testament is still more explicit 
than the Old. Faith in Jesus Christ, even that 
which is accompanied with salvation, is there 
constantly held up as the duty of all to whom 
the Gospel is preached. 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 29 

John xii. 36. While ye have the light, believe 
in the light , that ye may be the children of light. 
The persons to whom this passage was addressed, 
were unbelievers ; such who, though Jesus had 
done so many miracles among them, yet believed 
not on him, ver. 37: and it appears that they 
continued unbelievers, for they are represented 
as given over to judicial blindness and hardness 
of heart, ver. 40. The light which they were 
exhorted to believe in, appears to be himself, as 
revealed in the Gospel ; for thus he speaks in the 
context, I am come a light into the world, that 
whosoever beUeveth in me should not abide in 
darkness. And that the believing which Christ 
required of them was such, as, had it been com- 
plied with, would have issued in their salvation, 
is manifest, from its being added, that ye may 
be the children of light ; an appellation never 
bestowed on any but true believers. 

John vi. 29. This is the work of God, that 
ye believe on him whom he hath sent. These 
words contain an answer to a question. The 
persons who asked it were men who followed 
Christ for loaves, who believed not, and who, after 
this, walked no more with him, ver. 26. 36. 66. 
Christ had been rebuking them for their mer- 
cenary principles in thus following him about, 
and charging them, saying, LcAor not for the 
meat that perisheth, but for that which endureth 
unto everlasting life, ver. 27. They replied by 
asking. What shall we do, that we might work the 
works of Ood? which was saying, in effect, * We 
have been very zealous for thee in following thee 
hither and thither: yet thou dost not allow that 
3» 

Digitized by Google 



30 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

we please God : thou directest us to labor for 
that which endureth unto everlasting life. What 
wouldest thou have us do? what can we do? 
what must we do, in order to please God ? * To 
this question our Lord answers, This is the work 
of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent ; 
which, if it be a proper answer, is the same as 
saying, This is the first and greatest of all 
duties; and, without it, no other duty can be 
acceptable. 

It has been said, in answer to the argument 
from this passage, " The words contain a declara- 
tion, that believing in Christ for salvation is 
necessary to the enjoyment of eternal life, and 
that faith in him is an act acceptable and pleasing 
to God ; but afford no proof, that it is required 
of men in a state of unregeneracy. To declare 
to unregenerate persons the necessity of faith, in 
order to salvation, which is what our blessed Lord 
here does, falls very far short of asserting it to be 
their present duty." 

We see, by this answer, that Mr. Brine, who 
will be allowed to have been one of the most 
judicious writers on that side the question, was 
fully convinced of three things. First : That the 
persons here addressed were unregenerate sin- 
ners. Second : That the faith recommended is 
saving. Third : That, when faith is called the 
work of Oody it does not mean the work which 
God performs, but an act of theirs, which would 
be a^ceptahle and pleasing to him. Yet we are 
told, that our Lord merely expresses the necessity 
of it, without asserting it to be their present <2if^y. 
Was it not the object of their inquiry, then, 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 81 

What was their present duty ? or, What they 
ought to do, in order to please God ? What 
else can be made of it ? Further : how can our 
Lord be supposed, in answer to their question, 
to tell them of an act which was necessary, ac- 
ceptable, and pleasing to God, but which was 
not their present duty ? Is such an answer wor- 
thy of him? Nay, how could their believing 
be an act acceptable and pleasing to God, if it 
were not their present duty? God is pleased 
with that only in us which he requires at -our 
hands. 

John V. 22, 23. The Father hath committed 
all judgment unto the Son, that all men should 
honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, 
He that honoreth not the Son, honoreth not the 
Father which hath sent Mm. That men are 
obliged to honor th^ Father by a holy, hearty 
love to him, and adoration of him, under every 
character by which he has manifested himself, 
will be allowed by all, except the grossest Anti- 
nomians; and, if it be the will of the Father that 
all men should honor the Son, even as they 
honor the Father, nothing less can be required 
of them than a holy, hearty love to him, and 
adoration of him, under every character by 
which he has manifested himself. But such a 
regard to Christ necessarily supposes faith in 
him ; for it is impossible to honor him, while we 
reject him in all or any of his offices, and neg- 
lect his great salvation. To honor an infallible 
teacher, is to place an implicit and unbounded 
confidence in all he says : to honor an advocate, 
is to commit our cause to him : to honor a phy- 



d by Google 



32 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

sician, is to trust our lires in his hands : and to 
honor a king, is to bow to his sceptre, and 
cheerfully obey his laws. These are characters 
under which Christ has manifested himself. To 
treat him in this manner, is to honor him ; and 
to treat him otherwise, is to dishonor him. 

The Scriptures, both of the Old and New 
Testament, abound with exhortations to hear the 
word of God, to hearken to his counsel, to wait 
on him, to seek his favor, &c., all which imply 
saving faith. Hearken unto me, O ye children! 
for blessed are they that keep my ways. Hear 
instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not, BlesS" 
ed is the man that heareth me, watching daily 
at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors. 
For whoso findeth me, findeth life, and shall 
ohfain favor of the Lord. But he that sinneth 
against me, wrongeth his own soul. All they 
that hate me, love death. — How long, ye simple 
ones, will ye love simplicity ? and the scorners 
delight in their scorning, and fools hate knowU 
edge ? Turn you at my reproof: behold, I will 
pour out my Spirit unto you — I will make kno%on 
my words unto you. — Hear, ye deaf and look, 
ye blind, that ye may see. Hearken diligently 
unto me. Incline your ear, and come unto me: 
hear, and your soul shall live. — Seek ye the Lord 
while he may be found : call ye upon him while 
he is near. This is my beloved Son : hear him. 
— And it shall come to pass, that every soul 
which will not hear that prophet, shall be de- 
stroyed from among the people. Labor not for 
the meat that perisheth, but for that which endur- 
eth unto everlasting Ufe. Prov. viiL 35^—36 : i. 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 33 

5J3, 23. Isa. xlii. 18 : Iv. 2, 3, 6. Mark ix. 7. 
Acts iii. 23. Johiuvi. 27. 

It is a grievous misapplication of such language, 
to consider it as expressive of a mere attendance 
upon the means of grace, without any spiritual 
desire after God ; and to allow that unregenerate 
sinners comply with it. Nothing can be farther 
from the truth. The Scriptures abound in prom- 
ises of spiritual and eternal blessings to those 
who thus hearken, hear, and seek after God 
Such exercises, therefore, must, of necessity, be 
spiritual, and require to be understood as includ- 
ing faith in Christ The Scriptures exhort to 
no such exercises as may be complied with by a 
mind at enmity with God. The duties which 
they inculcate are all spiritual ; and no sinner, 
while unregenerate, is supposed to comply with 
them. So far from allowing that ungodly men seek 
after God, or do any good thing , they expressly 
declare the contrary. '* God looked down from 
heaven upon the children of men, to see if 
there were any that did understand, that did 
seek God, Every one of them is gone back. 
They are altogether become filthy : there is 
none that doeth good — no, not one." Psa. liii. 
2, 3. To reduce the exhortations of Scripture 
to the level of a carnal mind, is to betray the 
authority of God over the human heart ; and to 
allow that unconverted sinners comply with them, 
is to be aiding and abetting in their self-decep- 
tion. The unconverted who attend the means 
of grace, generally persuade themselves, and 
wish to persuade others, that they would gladly 
be converted, and be real Christians, if it were 



d by Google 



34 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

but in their power. They imagine themselves 
to be waiting at the pool for the moving of the 
water, and therefore feel no guilt on account of 
their present state of mind. Doubtless they are 
willing and desirous to escape the wrath to 
come, and, under certain convictions, would 
submit to relinquish many things, and to comply 
with other things, as the condition of it; but 
they have no direct desire after spiritual bless- 
ings. If they had, they would seek them in the 
name of Jesus, and, thus seeking, would find 
them. That preaching, therefore, which exhorts 
them to mere outward duties, and tells them that 
their only concern is in this manner to wait at 
the pool, helps forward their delusion, and, 
should they perish, will prove accessory to their 
destruction. 

Simon the sorcerer was admonished to repent, 
and pray to the Lord, if perhaps the thought of 
his heart might be forgiven him. From this 
express example, many, who are averse from the 
doctrine here defended, have been so far con- 
vinced as to acknowledge that it is the duty of 
the unconverted to pray, at least for temporal 
blessings ; but Simon was not admonished to 
pray for temporal blessings, but for the forgive-- 
ness of sin. Neither was he to pray in a carnal 
and heartless manner ; but to repent, and pray. 
And, being directed to repent, and pray for the 
forgiveness of sin, he was, in effect, directed to 
believe in Jesus; for in what other name could 
forgiveness be expected? Peter, afler having 
declared to the Jewish rulers that there toas none 
other name under heaven given among men wher^ 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCSPTATION. 35 

5y we must be scmed, cannot be supposed to have 
directed Simon to hope for forgiveness in any 
other way. 

To admonish any person to pray, or to seek 
the divine favor, in any other way than by fcdth 
in Jesus Christ, is the same thing as to admonish 
him to follow the example of Cain, and of the 
self-righteous Jews. Cain was not averse from 
worship. He brought his offering; but having 
no sense of the evil of sin, and of the need of a 
Savior, he had taken no notice of what had been 
revealed concerning the promised Seed, and paid 
no regard to the presenting of an expiatory sac- 
rifice. He thanked God for temporal blessings, 
and might pray for their continuance ; but this 
was not doing well. It was practically saying to 
his Maker, * I have done nothing to deserve be- 
ing made a sacrifice to thy displeasure, and I see 
no necessity for any sacrifice being offered up, 
either now or at the end of the world.' In short, 
it was claiming to approach God merely as a crear 
ture, and as though nothing had taken place which 
required an atonement. The self-righteous Jews 
did not live without religion ; they followed after 
the law of righteousness ; yet they did not attain 
it ; and wherefore 1 Because they sought it not by 
faith, but as it were by the works of the law; for 
they stumbled at that stumbling-stone. And shall 
we direct our hearers to follow this example, by 
exhorting them to pray, and seek the divine 
favor, in any other way than by faith in Jesus 
Christ ? If so, how can we deserve the name of 
Christian ministers ? 

The Scriptures exhort sinners to put their 



d by Google 



36 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

tru^ in the Lord, and censure them for placing 
it in an arm of flesh. Whether trusting in Christ 
for the salvation of our souls be distinguishable 
from believing in him or not, it certainly includes 
it. To trust in Christ is to believe in him. If, 
therefore, the one be required, the other must 
be. Those who loved vanity , and sought after 
lyingy are admonished to offer the sacrifices of 
riglUeousnesSy and to put their trust in the Lord, 
Psa. iv. 5 ; and a trust connected with the sacri- 
fices of righteousness must be spiritual. To 
rely on any other object is to ^rws^ in vanity, 
against which sinners are repeatedly warned. 
Trust not in oppression ; become not vain in rob' 
bery. — He that trusteth in his oion heart is a 
fool — Cursed be the man that trusteth in man, 
and maketh flesh his arm, and whose heart de^ 
parteth from the Lord. Psa. Ixii. 10. Prov. 
xxviii. 26. Jer. xvii. 5. 

Jt is allowed, that, if God had never sent his 
Son into the world to save sinners, or if the 
invitations of the Gospel were not addressed to 
sinners indefinitely, there would be no warrant 
for trust in the divine mercy ; and as it is, there 
is no warrant for trust beyond what God has 
promised in his word. He has not promised to 
save sinners indiscriminately; and therefore it 
would be presumption in sinners indiscriminately 
to trust that they shall be saved. But he has 
promised, and that in great variety of language, 
that whosoever, relinquishing every false ground 
of hope, shall come to Jesus as a perishing sinner, 
and rely on him alone for salvation, shaU not be 
disappointed. For such a reliance^ therefore^ 



d by Google 



09 ALL ACCEPTATION. 37 

there is a complete warrant These promises 
are true, and will be fulfilled, whether we trust 
in them or not ; and whoso still continues to 
trust in his own righteousness, or in the general 
mercy of his Creator, without respect to the 
atonement, refusing to build upon the foundation 
which God has laid in Zion, is guilty of the 
greatest of all sins ; and if God give him not 
repentance to the acknowledgment of the truth, 
the stone which he has refused will fall upon 
him, and grind him to powder. 

But " until a man, through the law, is dead to 
the law," says Mr. Brine, " he hath no warrant 
to receive Christ as a Savior, or to hope for sal- 
vation through him." * If, by receiving Christ, 
were meant the claiming an interest in the bless- 
ings of his salvation , this objection would be 
well founded. No man, while adhering to has 
own righteousness as the ground of acceptance 
with God, has any warrant to conclude himself 
interested in the righteousness of Jesus. The 
{Scriptures every where assure him of the con- 
trary. But the question is. Does he need any 
warrant to be decid to the law 1 or, which is the 
same thing, to relinquish his vain hopes of accept- 
ance by the works of it, and to choose that Rock 
for his foundation which is chosen of God and 
precious? To "receive*' Christ, in the sense 
of Scripture, stands opposed to rejecting him, or 
to such a non-reception of him as was practis- 
ed by the body of the Jewish nation. John i. 
11, 12. An interest in spiritual blessings, and, 

* Motives to ho^t and Uatty, pp. 88, 30. 
4 

Digitized by Google 



38 THE GOSPEL WOBTHY 

of course, a persuasion of it, is represented as 
foUomng the reception of Christ, and, conse- 
quently, is to be distinguished from it: To as 
many as received him, to them gave he power to 
become the sons of God,, even to them that believe 
on his name. The idea that is generally attached 
to the term, in various cases to which the recep- 
tion of Christ bears an allusion, corresponds with 
the above statement. To receive a gift, is not 
to believe it to be my own, though, after I have 
received it, it is so, but to have my pride so far 
abased as not to be above it, and my heart so 
much attracted as to be willing to relinquish 
every thing that stands in competition with it. 
To receive a guest, is not to believe him to be 
my particular friend, though such he may be, 
but to open my doors to him, and make him 
heartily welcome. To receive an instructor, is 
not to believe him to be my instructor any more 
than another's, but to embrace his instruction, 
and follow his counsel. For a town or city, 
after a long siege, to receive a king, is not to 
believe him to be their special friend, though 
such he may be, and, in the end, they may see 
it, but to lay down their arms, throw open their 
gates, and come under his government. These 
remarks are easily applied; and it is no less 
easy to perceive that every sinner has not only a 
warrant thus to receire Christ, but that it is his 
great sin if he receive him not. 

II. Every man is bound cordially to re- 
ceive AND APPROVE WHATEVER GoD REVEALS. 

It may foe presumed, that, if God reveal any 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 39 

tiling to men, it will be accompanied with such 
evidence of its being what it is, that no upright 
man can continue to doubt of it : He that is of 
God, heareth GocPs words. 

It will be allowed, by those with whom I am 
now reasoning, that no man is justifiable in dis- 
believing the truth of the Gospel, or in positively 
r-ejecting it; but then it is supposed that a belief 
of the Gospel is not saving faith, and that, though 
a positive rejection of divine truth is sinful, yet 
a spiritual reception of it is not a duty. I hope 
it has been made to appear, in the former part 
of this piece, that a real belief of the doctrine of 
Christ is saving faith, and includes such a cordial 
acquiescence in the way of salvation as has the 
promise of eternal life. But, be this as it may, 
whether the belief of the Gospel be allowed to 
include a cordial acquiescence in God's way of 
salvation or not, such an acquiescence will be 
allowed to include saving faith. If, therefore, it 
can be proved that a cordial approbation of 
God*s way of saving sinners is the duty of every 
one, it will amount to proving the same thing of 
saving faith. 

I allow there is a difficulty in this part of the 
work ; but it is that which attends the proof of a 
truth which is nearly self-evident. Ought we 
not, if we think of Christ at all, to think suitably 
of him 1 and are we justifiable in entertaining 
low and unsuitable thoughts of him ? Is it not 
a matter of complaint that the ungodly Jews saw 
no form nor comeliness in him, nor beauty, thai 
they should desire him 7 And with respect to a 
hearty choice of him, as God's appointed way of 



d by Google 



40 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

salvation, if it be not the duty of sinners to 
choose him, it is their duty to refuse him, or to 
desire to be accepted of God by the works of 
their hands, in preference to him. But how can 
we complain of sinners for their not choosing 
Christ, if they be under no obligation to do so I 
Is there no sin in the invention of the various 
false schemes of religion with which the Chris- 
tian world abounds, to the exclusion of Christ I 
Why, then, are heresies reckoned among the 
works of th£ jlesh ? Gal. v. 20. If we are not 
obliged to think suitably of Christ, and to choose 
him whom the Lord and all good men have 
chosen, there can be no evil in these things ; for 
where no law is, there is no transgression. 

A hearty choice of God's appointed way of 
salvation, is the same thing as falling in with its 
grand designs. Now, the grand designs of the 
salvation of Christ are, the glory of Ood, the 
abasement of the sinner ^ and the destruction of 
his sins. It is God's manifest purpose, in saving 
sinners, to save th/em in this way ; and can any 
sinner be excused from cordially acquiescing in 
it? If any man properly regard the character 
of God, he must be willing that he should be 
glorified : if he knew his own unworthiness as 
he ought to know it, he must also be willing to 
occupy that place which the Gospel way of sal- 
vation assigns him : and if he be not wickedly 
wedded to his lusts, he must be willing to sacri- 
fice them at the foot of the cross. He may be 
averse firom each of these, and, while an unbe- 
liever, is so ; but he will not be able to acquit 
himself of guilt; and it is to be lamented that any 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. 41 

wiio sustain the character of Christian ministers 
should be employed in laboring to acquit him. 

If a way of salvation were provided which dM 
not provide for the glory of God, which did not 
abase, but flatter the sinner, and which did ru^ 
require him to sacrifice his lusts, he would feel 
no want of power to embrace it. Nominal 
Christians, and mere professors, in all ages, have 
shown themselves able to believe any thing but 
the truth. Thus it was with the carnal Jews, 
and thus our Lord plainly told them : / am come 
in my Father's name, and ye receive me not : If 
another shall come in his own name, him ye will 
receive, — Because I tell you the truth, ye believe 
me not. Which of you convinceth me of sin 1 
And if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me? 
He that is of God, h^areth God!s words: ye, 
therefore^ hear them not, because ye are not of 
God, John v. 43 : viii. 45 — 47. This is the 
true source of the innumerable false schemes of 
religion in the world, and the true reason why 
the Gospel is not universally embraced. 

Unbelievers are described as disallowing him 
who is chosen of God, and precious, 1 Peter ii. 
4 — 7. Now, either to allow or disallow supposes 
a claim. Christ claims to be the whole founda- 
tion of a sinner's hope ; and God claims, on his 
behalf, that he be treated as the head of the cor- 
ner. But the heart of unbelievers cannot allow 
the claim. The Jewish builders set him at 
nought ; and every self-righteous heart follows 
their example. God, to express his displeasure 
at this conduct, assures them that their unbelief 
riiall aflfect none but themselves. It shall not 
4* 

Digitized by Google 



42 Ttt£ G06P£L WORTHY 

deprive the Savior of his honors ; for the stone 
which they refuse, notwithstanding their opposi- 
tion, shall become the head of the corner. What 
can be made of all this, but that they ought to 
have allowed him the place which he so justly 
claimed, and to have chosen him whom the Lord 
had chosen ? On no other ground ' could the 
Scripture censure them as it does, and on no 
other principle could they be characterized as 
disobedient; for all disobedience consists in a 
breach of duty. 

Believers, on the other hand, are described as 
thinking highly of Christ ; reckoning themselves 
unworthy to unloose the latchet of his shoes, or 
that he should come under their roof; treating his 
Gospel as worthy of all acceptation, and counting 
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowU 
edge of him. They are of the same mind with 
the blessed above, who sing his praise, saying 
with a loud voice. Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, 
and strength, and honor, and glory, and fflessing. 
In fine, they are of the same mind with God 
himself. Him whom God has chosen, they 
choose ; and he that is precious in his sight, is 
precious in theirs. Mark i. 7. 1 Tim. i. 15. 
Phil. iii. 8. Rev. v. 12. 1 Peter ii. 4—7. And 
do they over-estimate his character ? Is he not 
worthy of all the honor they ascribe to him ; of 
all the affection they exercise towards him ; and 
that, whether they actually receive it or not? If 
all the angels had been of the mind of Satan, and 
all the saints of th^ spirit of the unbelieving Isra- 
elites who were not gathered, yet would he have 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. 48 

been glorious in the eyes of the Lord, The belief 
or unbelief of creatures, makes no difference as 
to his worthiness, or their obligation to ascribe it 
to him. 

It is allowed by all, except the grossest Anti- 
nomians, that every man is obliged to love God 
with all his heart, soul, mind, and strength ; and 
this, notwithstanding the depravity of his nature. 
But to love God with all the heart, is to love him 
in every char(uter in which he has made himself 
hwwn, and more especially in those wherein his 
moral excellences appear with the brightest lustre. 
The same law that obliged Adam, in innocence, 
to love God in all his perfections, as displayed in 
the works of creation, obliged Moses and Israel 
to love him in all the glorious displays of himself 
in his wonderful works of providence of which 
they were witnesses. And the same law that 
obliged them to love him in those discoveries of 
himself, obliges us to love him in other discover- 
ies, by which he has since more gloriously sp" 
peared, as saving sinners through the death of his 
Son. To suppose that we are obliged to love God 
as manifesting himself in the works of creation 
and providence, but not in the work of redemp- 
tion, is to suppose that, in the highest and most 
glorious display of himself, he deserves no regard. 
The same perfections which appear in all his 
other works, and render him lovely, appear in 
this with a tenfold lustre. To be obliged to love 
him on account of the one, and not of the other, 
is not a little extraordinary. 

As these things cannot be separated in point 
of obligation, so neither can they tit fcu:t. He 



d by Google 



44 THE GOSPEL WORTHT 

that loves God for sny excellency, as manifested 
in one form, must, of necessity, love him for that 
excellency, let it be manifested in what form it 
may ; and the brighter the display, the stronger 
will be his love. This remark is verified in the 
holy angels. At first, they loved their Maker, 
for what they saw in his works of creation. 
They saw him lay the foundation of the earth, 
and they shouted for joy. In process of time, 
they witnessed the glorious displays of his moral 
character in the government of the world which 
he had made ; and now their love increases. On 
every new occasion, they cry. Holy, holy, holy 
IS THE Lord of Hosts : the whole earth is 
full of his glory. At length, they beheld an 
event, to the accomplishment of which all former 
events were subservient ; they saw the Messiah 
born in Bethlehem. And now their love rises still 
higher. As though heaven could not contain 
them on such an occasion, they resort to the 
place, and contemplate the good that should arise - 
to the moral system, bursting forth into a song : 
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth 
peace, good will towards men. All this was 
but the natural operation of love to God ; and, 
from the same principle, they took delight in 
attending the Redeemer through his life, strength- 
ening him in his sufferings, watching at his 
tomb, conducting him to glory, and looking into 
the mysteries of redemption. With a heart like 
theirs, is it possible to conceive, that we should 
continue impenitent or unbelieving? If, in our 
circumstances, we possessed that love to God by 
which they were influenced, it would melt us 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 45 

into holy lamentation for haying sinned against 
him. If the gospel-invitation to partake of the 
water of life once sounded in our ears, we should 
instantly imbibe it. Instead of making light of 
it, and preferring our /arms and our merchandise 
before it, we should embrace it with our whole 
heart. Let any creature be affected towards Qod 
as the holy angels are, and if he had a thousand 
souls to be saved, and the invitation extended to 
every one that is willing, he would not hesitate a 
moment, whether he should rely on his salvation. 
It is owing to a want of love to God, that any 
man continues impenitent or unbelieving. This 
was plainly intimated, by our Lord, to the Jews : 
I know youy that ye have not the love of God in 
you. I am come in my Father^ $ name, and ye 
receive me not, ' It is impossible to love God, and 
not to embrace the greatest friend of God that 
ever existed ; or to love his law, and not approve 
of a system which, above all things, tends to 
magnify and make it honorable. 

" The affections included in divine love," 
says an able writer, ** are founded on those truths 
for which there is the greatest evidence in the 
world. Every thing in the world, that proves the 
being of God, proves that his creatures should 
love him with all their hearts. The evidence for 
these things is, in itself very strong, and level to 
every capacity. Where it does not beget con- 
viction, it is not owing to the weakness of men's 
capacities, but the strength of their prejudices 
and prepossessions. Whatever proves that rea- 
sonable creatures are obliged to love God and his 
law, proves that sinner^ are obUged to suitable 



d by Google 



46 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

hatred of sin, and abasement for it. A sinner 
cannot have due prevalent love to God, and 
hatred of sin, without prevalent desire of obtain- 
ing deliverance from sin, and the enjoyment of 
God, A suitable desire of en<ds so important 
cannot be without proportionable desire of the 
necessary means. If a sinner, therefore, who 
hears the Gospel, has these suitable affections, of 
love to God, and hatred of sin, to which he is 
obliged by the laws of natural religion, these 
things cannot he separated from a real compla^ 
cency in that redemption and grace which are 
proposed in revealed religion. This does not 
suppose that natural religion can discover, or 
prove the peculiar things of the Gospel to be true ; 
but, when they are discovered, it proves them to 
be infinitely desirable. A book of laws that are 
enforced with awful sanctions, cannot prove that 
the sovereign has passed an act of grace, or 
indemnity, in favor of transgressors; but it 
proves, that such favor is, to them, the most 
desirable and the most necessary thing in the 
world. It proves, that the way of saving us from 
sin, which the Gospel reveals, is infinitely suitable 
to the honor of God, to the dignity of his law, 
and to the exigences of the consciences of 
sinners." * 

" If any man has a taste for moral excellence," 
says another, ** a heart to account God glorious 
for being what he is, he cannot but see the 
moral excellency of the law, and love it, and 
conform to it, because it is the image of God ; 

* M'Laurin's Essay on Grace, p. 342. 

Digitized by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 47 

and 80 he cannot but see the moral excellency of 
the Gospel, and believe it, and love it, and comply 
with it ; for it is also the image of God : he that 
can see the moral beauty in the original, cannot 
but see the moral beauty of the image drawn to 
life. He, therefore, that despises the Gospel, and 
is an enemy to the law, even he is at enmity 
against God himself Rom. viii. 7. Ignorance 
of the glory of God, and enmity against him, 
make men ignorant of the glory of the law and 
of the Gospel, and enemies to both. Did men 
know and love him that begat, they would love 
that which is begotten of him, 1 John v. 1. He 
that is of God heareth God^s words : ye therefore 
hear them not, because ye are not of God, John 
viii. 47." ♦ 

III. Though the gospel, strictly speaking, 

IS NOT A LAW, BUT A MESSAGE OF PURE GRACE, 
YET IT VIRTUALLY REQUIRES OBEDIENCE, AND 
SUCH AN OBEDIENCE AS INCLUDES SAVING FAITH. 

It is no uncommon thing to distinguish 
between a formal requisition, and that which 
affords the ground or reason of that requisition. 
The goodness of God, for instance, though it is 
not a law or formal precept, yet virtually requires 
a return of gratitude. It deserves it ; and the 
law of God formally requires it, on his behalf 
Thus it is with respect to the Gospel, which is 
the greatest overflow of divine goodness that 
was ever displayed. A return suitable to its 
nature is required virtually by the Gospel itself; 

* Bellamy'f True Religion Delineated, p. 332. 

Digitized by Google 



48 THE GOSP£]> WO&THT 

and formally by the divine precept, on its 
behalf. 

I suppose it might be taken for granted, that 
the Gospel possesses some degree of virtual 
authority ; as it is generally acknowledged, that, 
by reason of the dignity of its Author, and the 
importance of its subject matter, it deserves the 
audience and attention of all mankind ; yea, 
more — that all mankind, who have opportunity 
of hearing it, are obliged to believe it. The only 
question, therefore, is. Whether the faith which 
it requires be spiritual, or such as has the promise 
of salvation ? 

We may form some idea of the manner in 
which the Gospel ought to be received, from its 
being represented as an embassy. We are 
ambassadors for Christ, saith the apostle, as 
though God did beseech you by us : we pray you 
in Christ's steady be ye reconciled to God. 2 
Cor. V. 20. The object of an embassy, in all 
cases, is peace. Ambassadors are sometimes 
employed between friendly powers, for the ad- 
justment of their affairs ; but the allusion, in this 
case, is manifestly to a righteous prince, who 
should condescend to speak peaceably to his 
rebellious subjects, and, as it were, to entreat 
them, for their own sakes, to be reconciled. The 
language of the apostle supposes that the world 
is engaged in an unnatural and unprovoked 
rebellion against its Maker; that it is in his 
power utterly to destroy sinners ; that, if he were 
to deal with them according to their deserts, this 
must be their portion; but that, through the 
mediation of his Son, he had, as it were, sus- 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEFTATKnT. 49 

pended hostilities, had sent his servants with words 
•of peace, and commissioned them to persuade, 
<o entreat, and even to beseech them to be 
reconciled. But reconciliation to God includes 
-every thing that belongs to true conversion. It 
is the opposite of a state of alienation and 
enmity to him. Col. i. 21. It includes a justifi- 
cation of his government, a condemnation of 
their own unprovoked rebellion against him, and , 
a thankful reception of the message of peace ; 
which is the same, for substance, as to repent 
nnd believe the Gospel. To speak of an embassy 
from the God of heaven and earth to his rebel- 
lious creatures being entitled to nothing more 
than an audience, or a decent attention, must 
itself be highly offensive to the honor of his 
majesty ; and that such language should proceed 
from his professed friends, must render it still 
more so. 

" When the apostle beseecheth us to be recon^ 
died to God, I would know," says Dr. Owen, 
'" whether it be not a part of our duty to yield 
obedience ? If not, the exhortation is frivolous 
and vain.*' * If sinners are not obliged to be 
reconciled to God, both as a Lawgiver and a 
Savior, and that with all their hearts, it is no 
sin to be unreconciled. All the enmity of their 
hearts to God, his law, his Gospel, or his Son, 
must be guiltless. For therQ can be no neutral- 
ity in this case : not to be reconciled, is to be 
unreconciled ; not to fall in with the message of 
peace, is to fall out with it ; and not to lay 

* Display of Arminianism, chap. z. 
5 

Digitized by Google 



50 THE GOSPEL WOUTHT 

down arms, and submit to mercy, is to maintain 
the war. 

It is in perfect harmony with the foregoing 
ideas, that those who acquiesce in the way of 
salvation in this spiritual manner, are represented, 
in so doing, as exercising obedience ; as obeying 
the Gospel, obeying the truths and obeying Christ. 
Rom. X. 16: vi. 17. The very end of the Gospel 
being preached is said to be, for obedience to the 
faith among all nations, Rom. i. 5. But obedi- 
ence supposes previous obligation. If repentance 
towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus 
Christ, were not duties required of us, even prior 
to all consideration of their being blessings be- 
stowed upon us, it were incongruous to speak 
of them as exercises of obedience. Nor would 
it be less so, to speak of that impenitence and 
unbelief, which expose men to eternal destruction 
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory 
of his power, as consisting in their not obeying 
the Gospel 2 Thes. i. 8, 9. The passage on 
which the former part of this argument is found- 
ed, 2 Cor, V. 19, 20, has been thought inapplica- 
ble to the subject, because it is supposed to be 
an address to the members of the church at 
Corinth, who were considered by the apostle as 
believers. But let it be considered, whether the 
apostle be here immediately addressing the mem- 
bers of the church at Corinth, beseeching them, 
at that time, to be reconciled to God ; or, whether 
he be not rather rehearsing to them what had 
been his conduct, and that of his brethren in the 
ministry, in vindication of himself and them from 
the base insinuations of false teachers ; to whom 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 61 

the great evils that had crept into that church, 
had been principally owing. The methods they 
appear to have taken to supplant the apostles, 
were those of underhand insinuation. By Paul's 
answers, they appear to have suggested that he and 
his friends were either subtle men, who, by their 
soft and beseeching style, ingratiated themselves 
into the esteem of the simple, catching them, as 
it were, with guile, (2 Cor. i. 12 : xii. 16,) or 
weak-headed enthusiasts, beside themselves, (ch. 
T. 13,) going up and down, beseeching people to 
this and that, (ch. xi. 21 ;) and that, as to Paul 
himself, however great he might appear in his 
letters, he was nothing in company. His bodily 
presence, say they, is weak, and his speech con^ 
temptible, (ch. x. 10.) 

In the first epistle to this church, Paul gener- 
ously waived a defence of himself and his brethren, 
being more concerned for the recovery of those 
to Christ who were in danger of being drawn off 
from the truth as it is in Jesus, than respecting 
then: opinion of him. Yet, when the one was 
accomplished, he undertook the other ; not only 
as a justification of himself and his brethren, but 
as knowing that just sentiments of faithfiil minis- 
ters bore an intimate connection with the spirit- 
ual welfare of their hearers. It is thus that the 
apostle alludes to their various insinuations, ac- 
knowledging that they did indeed beseech, entreaty 
Kad persuade men, but affirming that such conduct 
arose not from the motives of which they were 
accused, but fi-om the love of Christ : If we are 
beside ourselves, it is for your sakes. 

If the words in ch. v. 19^ 20, be an immediate 



d by Google 



b2 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

address to the members of the church at Corinth, 
those which follow, in ch. vi. 1, must be an ad- 
dress to its ministers. But, if so, the apostle, in 
the continuation of that address, would not have 
said as he does, In all things approving our- 
selves as the ministers of God. His language 
would have been. In all things approving tour- 
selves, &c. Hence it is manifest that the whole 
is a vindication of their preaching and manner 
of life, against the insinuations of the Corinthian 
teachers. 

There are two things which may have contrib- 
uted to the misunderstanding of this passage of 
Scripture. One is, the supplement you, which 
is unnecessarily introduced three times over in 
ch. V. 20, and ch. vi. 1. If any supplement had 
been necessary, the word men, as it is in the text 
of ch. V. 11, might have better conveyed the 
i4[)ostle's meaning. The other is, the division of 
the fiiUi and sixth chapters in the midst of the 
argument. 

IV. The want op faith in Christ is ascrib* 
ED, IN the Scriptures, to men's depravity, 

AND IS ITSELP REPRESENTED AS A HEINOUS SIN. 

It is taken for granted, that whatever is not a 
sinner's duty, the omission of it cannot be charg- 
ed on him as a sin, nor imputed to any depravity 
in him. If faith were no more a duty than 
election or redemption, which are acts peculiar 
to God, the want of the one would be no more 
ascribed to the evil dispositions of the heart, than 
of the other. Or, if the inability of sinners to 
believe in Christ were of the same nature as that 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. 53 

of a dead body in a grave to rise up and walk, it 
were absurd to suppose that they would, on this 
account, fall under the divine censure. No man 
is reproved for not doing that which is naturally 
impossible ; but sinners are reproved for not b^ 
lieving, and given to understand that it is solely 
owing to their criminal ignorance, pride, dishon- 
esty of heart, and aversion from God. 

Voluntary ignorance is represented as a reason 
why sinners believe not. Being ignorant of 
Gods righteousness, and going (Aout to establish 
their own righteousness, they have not submit- 
ted THEMSELVES UNTO THE RIGHTEOUSNESS OF 

God. — If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that 
are lost : In whom the God of this world hath 

BLINDED THE MINDS OF THEM THAT BELIEVE NOT, 

lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, 
who is the image of God, should shine unto them. 
Rom. X. 3. 2 Cor. iv. 3, 4. To the same pur- 
pose, we are taught by our Lord, in the parable 
of the sower : When any one heareth the ward of 
the kingdom, and understandeth it not, then 
Cometh the wicked one, and catcheth away that 
which was sown in his heart ; and this, as Luke 
expresses it, lest they should believe, and be 
saved. Matt. xiii. 19. Luke viii. 12. 

If men, even though they were possessed of 
the same principles as our first father in paradise, 
would nevertheless be blind to the glory of the 
Gospel, with what propriety is their blindness 
attributed to the god of this world ? Is he ever 
represented as employing himself in hindering 
that which is naturally impossible, or in promote 
inir that which is innocent ? 

Digitized by Google 



54 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

Pride is another cause to which the want of 
saving faith is ascribed. # The wicked^ through 
the pride of his countenance, wiU not seek after 
God. God is not in all his thoughts. Psa. x. 4. 
We have seen already that seeking God is a spirit-^ 
ual exercise, which implies faith in the Mediator ; 
and the reason why ungodly men are strangers, 
to it is, the haughtiness of their spirits, which 
makes them scorn to take the place of suppli-^ 
cants before their offended Creator, and labor U> 
put far from their minds every thought of him. 
How can ye believe, said our Lord to the Jews, 
who receive honor one of another, and seek not 
the honor that cometh from God only ? John 
V. 44. 

If believing were here to be taken for any 
other faith than that which is spiritual or saving, 
the suggestion would not hold good ; for we are 
told of some who could and did believe in Christ, 
in some sense, but who did not confess him, for 
they loved the praise of men more than the praise 
of God. . John xii. 43. It was pride that blinded 
the minds of the wise and prudent of this world 
to the doctrines of Christ; and what is it but 
this same proud spirit, working in a way of self- 
conceit and self-righteousness, that still forms 
the grand objection to the doctrine of salvation 
by mere grace? 

Dishonesty of heart is that on account of which 
men receive not the word of God, so as to bring 
forth fruit. This is fully implied in the parable 
of the sower, recorded in the eighth chapter of 
Luke. The reason why those hearers rq>resent- 
ed by the good ground received the word, and 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCSPTATIOir. S5 

brought forth good fruit, rather than the others, 
was, they had good and honest hearts — ^plainly 
intimating that the reason why the others did not 
«o receive it, was, their hearts were not vpright 
before God. Indeed, such is the nature of divine 
truth, that every heart which is honest towards 
'God must receive it. An honest heart must 
needs approve of God's holy law, which requires 
us to love him with all our powers ; and this, 
because it is no more than giving him the glory 
jdue to his name. An honest heart will approve 
of being justified wholly for Christ's sake, and 
Jiot on account of any of its own works, whether 
legal or evangelical ; for it is no more than relin- 
'quishing a claim which is justly forfeited, and 
Jiccepting, as a free gifl, that which God was 
cinder no obligation to bestow. Further : an 
honest heart must rejoice in the way of salvation, 
as soon as he understands it ; because it provides 
■z. way in which mercy can be exercised consist- 
ently with righteousness. A right spirit would 
revolt at the idea of receiving mercy itself in a 
way that should leave a blot upon the divine 
character. It is the glory of Christ that he has 
not an honest man for an enemy. The upright 
love him. 

We are not ignorant who it is that must now 
give men honest hearts, and what is the source 
of every thing, in a fallen creature, that is truly 
good ; but this does not affect the argument 
However far sinners are from it, and whatever 
divine agency it may require to produce it, no 
man who is not disposed to deny the accounUi* 
bleness of creatures to the God that made them. 



d by Google 



56 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

will deny that, to be honest in heart, is their 
duty ; for if we are not obliged to be upright 
towards God, we are obliged to nothing ; and if 
obliged to nothing, we must be guiltless, and so 
stand in no need of salvation. 

Further: Aversion of heart is assigned as a 
reason why sinners do not believe. This truth is 
strongly expressed in that complaint of our Lord, 
in John v. 40 : Ye will not, or ye are not will- 
ing, to come unto me, that ye might have life. 
Proudly attached to their own righteousness, 
when Jesus' exhibited himself as the way, the 
truth, and the life, they were stumbled at it; and 
thousands, in the religious world, are the same 
to this day. They are willing to escape God's 
wrath, and to gain his favor — yea, and to relin- 
quish many an outward vice in order to it ; but 
to come to Jesus among the chief of sinners, and 
be indebted wholly to his sacrifice for life, they 
are not willing. Yet, can any man plead that 
this their unwillingness is innocent? 

There is no inconsistency between this account 
of things, and that which is given elsewhere, that 
no man can come to Christ, except the Father 
draw him, John vi. 44. No man ccm choose 
that from which his heart is averse. It is com- 
mon, both in Scripture and in conversation, to 
speak of a person who is under the influence of 
an evil bias of heart, as unable to do that which 
is inconsistent with it. They have eyes full of 
adultery, and cannot cease from sin. — The car^ 
nal mind is enmity against God ; for it is not 
subject to the law of God, neither indeed can he. 
So then they that are in the fiesh cannot pkast 
God. Rom. viii. 7, 8. 

Digitized by Google 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. 67 

On account of this different phraseology, some 
writers have affirmed that men are under both a 
moral and a natural inability of coming to Christ; 
or that they neither mil nor can come to him. 
But, if there be no other inability than what 
arises from aversion, this language is not accu- 
rate ; for it conveys the idea, that, if all aversion 
of heart were removed, there would still be a 
natural and insurmountable bar in the way. But 
no such idea as this is conveyed by our Lord's 
words. The only bar to which he refers, lies in 
that reluctance or aversion which the drawing of 
the Father implies and removes. Nor will such 
an idea comport with what he elsewhere teaches. 
And because I tell you the truth, ye beUeve me 
not. Which of you convinceth me of sin ? And 
if I say the truth, why do ye not believe me ? He 
that is of God heareth God!s words ; ye therefore 
hear them not, because ye are not of God, WJiy 
do ye not understand my speech 7 Because fb 
CANNOT HEAR MY WORD. These cuttiug interro- 
gations proceed on the supposition that they could 
have received the doctrine of Christ, if it Jiad been 
agreeable to their corrupt hearts ; and its being 
otherwise was the only reason why they could noi 
understand and beUeve it. If sinners were natu- 
rally and absolutely unable to believe in Christ, 
they would be equally unable to disbelieve ; ibr 
it requires the same powers to reject, as to em- 
brace. And in this case there would be no room 
for an inability of another kind. A dead body 
is equally unable to do evil as to do good ; and a 
man naturally and absolutely Mind could not be 
guilty of abutting his eyes against the light. " It 



d by Google 



58 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

is indwelling sin," as Dr. Owen says, " that both 
disenableth men unto, and hinders them from 
believing, and that alone. Blindness of mind, 
stubbornness of the will, sensuality of the affec- 
tions, all concur to keep poor perishing souls at 
a distance from Christ. Men are made blind by 
sin, and cannot see his excellency; obstinate, 
and will not lay hold of his righteousness ; sense- 
less, and take no notice of their eternal concern- 
ments." • 

A voluntary and judicial blindness, obstinacy, 
and hardness of heart, are represented as the bar 
to conversion. Acts xxviii. 27. But if that spirit 
which is exercised in conversion were essentially 
different from any thing which the subjects of it, 
in any state, possessed, or ought to have possess- 
ed, it were absurd to ascribe the want of it to 
such causes. 

Those who embraced the Gospel, an^ submit- 
ted to the government of the Messiah, were bap- 
tized with the baptism of John, and are said, in 
so doing, to have justified God. Their conduct 
was an acknowledgment of the justice of the law, 
and of the wisdom and love of the Gospel. On 
the other hand, those who did not thus submit, 
are said to have rejected the counsel of God against 
themselves. How, then, can this passage be un- 
derstood, but by supposing that they ought to 
have repented of their sins, embraced the Mes- 
siah, and submitted to his ordinances ? 

Finally. Unbelief is expressly declared to be a 
sin, of which the S^rit of truth has to convince 

* On Indwelling Sin, chap. zyi. 

Digitized by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 59 

the world, John xvi. 8, 9. But unbelief cannot 
be a sin, if faith were not a duty. I know of no 
answer to this argument, but what must be drawn 
from a distinction between believing the report 
of the Gospel, and saving faith; allowing the 
want of the one to be sinful, but not of the other. 
But it is not of gross unbelief only, or of an open 
rejection of Jesus as the Messiah, that the Holy 
Spirit has to convince the world ; nor is it to a 
bare conviction of this truth, like what prevails 
in all Christian countries, that men are brought 
by his teaching. When he, the Spirit of trpth, 
cometh, his operations are deeper than this 
amounts to. It is of an opposition of Iteart to 
the way of salvation that he convinces the sinner, 
and to a cordial acquiescence with it that he 
brings him. Those who are born in a Christian 
land, and who never were the subjects of gross 
infidelity, stand in no less need of being thus 
convinced than others. Nay, in some respects 
they need it more. Their unbelieving opposition 
to Christ is more subtile, refined, and out of sight, 
than that of open infidels. They are less apt, 
therefore, to suspect themselves of it, and, con- 
sequently, stand in greater need of the Holy 
Spirit to search them out, and show them to 
themselves. Amongst those who constantly sit 
under the Gospel, and who remain in an un- 
converted state, there are few who think them- 
selves the enemies of Christ. On the contrary, 
they flatter themselves that they are willing, at 
any time, to be converted, if God would but con- 
vert them; considering themselves as lying at 
the pool for the moving of the waters. But when 



d by Google 



60 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

he, the Spirit of truth, cometh, these coverings 
will be stripped from off the face, and these re^ 
uges of lies will fail.* 

V. God has threatened and inflicie» 

THE MOST AWFUL PUNISHMENTS ON SINNERS, FOR 
THEIR NOT BELIEVING ON THE LoRD JeSU» 

Christ. 

It is here taken for granted, that nothing but 
sin can be the cause of God's inflicting punish- 
ment; and nothing can be sin, which is not a. 
breach of duty. 

Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gos^ 
pel to every creature. He that helieveth, and is 
baptized, shall be saved; but he that believeth 
NOT, SHALL BE DAMNED. Mark xvi. 15, 16. Thi& 
awful passage appears to be a kind of ultimatum^ 
or last resolve. It is as if our Lord had said, 
" This is your message .... go and proclaim it 
to all nations: whosoever receives it, and sub* 
mits to my authority, assure him, from me, that 
eternal salvation awaits him ; but whosoever re- 
jects it, let him see to it ... . damnation shall be 
his portion ! " Believing and not believing, in 
this passage, serve to explain each other. It is 
saving faith, to which salvation is promised; 
and to the want of this it is, that damnation is 
threatened. 

It has been alleged, that, " as it is not infera- 
ble, from that declaration, that the faith of be- 
lievers is the procuring cause of their salvation, 

*See Charaock's excellent discourse, on Unbelief the 
Greatest Sin, vol. ii. of his Works. 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 61 

SO it is not to be inferred, from thence, that the 
want of that special faith in unbelievers is the 
procuring cause of their damnation. That dec- 
laration contains in it the descriptive characters 
of those who are saved, and of those who are 
damned; but it assigns not special faith to be 
the procuring cause of the salvation of the for- 
mer, nor the want of it to be the procuring cause 
of the damnation of the latter." ♦ 

But if this mode of reasoning were admitted, 
we should find it very difficult, if not impossible, 
to prove any thing to be evil, from the threaten- 
ings of God against it. A multitude of plain 
texts of Scripture, wherein sin, as any common 
reader would suppose, is threatened with punish- 
ment, might, in this manner, be made to teach 
nothing with regard to its being the procuring 
cause of it. For example. Psalm xxxvii. 18. 20. 
The Lord knoweth the days of the upright ; and 
their inheritance shall be for ever. But the wick" 
ed shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall 
be as the fat of lambs : they shall consume; into 
smoke shall they consume away. But it might 
be said, as the uprightness of the upright is not 
the procuring cause of his enjoying an everlast- 
ing inheritance, so neither will this prove that 
the wickedness of the wicked, or the enmity of 
the Lord's enemies, is the procuring cause of 
their being consumed. Again, Psalm cxlvii. 6. 
The Lord lifteth up the meek : he casteth the 
wicked down to the ground. But it might be al- 
leged, that, as the meekness of the former is not 

*Mr. Brine's Motives to Love and Unity, pp. 31, 32. 
6 

Digitized by Google 



62 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

the procuring cause of his being lifted up, so it 
cannot be, from hence, inferred, that the wicked- 
ness of the latter is the procuring cause of his 
being cast down. Again, Psalm cxlv. 20. The 
Lord preserveth all them that love him ; hut all 
the wicked will he destroy. But it might be said, 
as the love of the one is not the procuring cause 
of his preservation, so it cannot be proved from 
hence, that the wickedness of the other is the 
procuring cause of his destruction; and that 
these declarations contain only the descriptive 
charcu^ters of those who are saved, and of those 
who perish. 

In this manner, almost all the threatenings in 
the book of God might be made to say nothing 
as threatenings ; for the mode in which they are 
delivered is the same as that in the passage in 
question. For example, What shall he given 
unto thee 7 or tohat shall he done unto thee, thou 
false tongue ? Sharp arrows of the mighty, with 
coeds of juniper. — He that showcth no mercy, 
shall have judgment without mercy. — Whorc' 
mongers and adulterers God will judge. — Be not 
deceived; neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor 
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of them- 
selves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, 
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall 
inherit the kingdom of God. — Behold, the day 
Cometh that shall burn like an oven, and all the 
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be 
stubble. — Bring hither those mine enemies, which 
would not that I should reign over them, and slay 
them before me. — The fearful, and unbelieving, 
and abominable, and murderers, and whoremon- 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 63 

gers^ and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, 
shall have their portion in the lake which bumeth 
withjire and brimstone ; which is the second death. 
But none of these awful threatenings declare that 
the respective crimes, which are mentioned, are 
the procuring cause of the evils denounced. 
Though it is said, concerning the false tongue, 
that sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of 
juniper, shall he given him, yet it does not say 
that these shall be given him because ofhisfahc' 
hood; and so on, of the rest. And thus they 
may be only descriptive characters of those who 
shall be damned ; and all these things may, for 
aught these denunciations prove, be blameless. 
If this reasoning be just, it cannot be inferred, 
from the laws of England declaring that a mur- 
derer shall be put to death, that it is on account 
of his being a murderer. Neither could our first 
parents justly infer, from its being told them. 
The day ye eat thereof ye shall surety die, that it 
should be on that account. 

The truth is, though eternal life be the gift 
of God, yet eternal death is the proper wages 
of sin : and though faith is not represented, in 
the above passage, as the procuring cause of sal- 
vation, yet unbelief is of damnation. It is com- 
mon for the Scriptures to describe those that 
shall be saved, by something which is pleasing to 
God, and by which they are made meet for glory ; 
and those that shall be lost, by something which 
is displeasing to God, and by which they are fitted 
for destruction. 

John iii. 18. He that helieveth on him, is not 
condemned: but he that beUeveth not, is condemned 



d by Google 



64 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

already, because he hath not believed in the name 
of the only begotten Son of God. Two things 
are here observable. First: Believing is ex- 
pressive of saving faith, seeing it exempts from 
condemnation. Second : The want of this faith 
is a sin, on account of which the unbeliever 
stands condemned. It is true, that unbelief is an 
evidence of our being under the condemnation of 
God's righteous law for all our other sins ; but 
this is not all; unbelief is itself a sin, which 
greatly aggravates our guilt, and which, if per- 
sisted in, gives the finishing stroke to our de- 
struction. That this idea is taught by the 
evangelist appears, partly from his dwelling upon 
the dignity of the character offended, the only 
begotten Son of God; and partly from his ex- 
pressly adding. This is the condemnation, that 
light is come into the world, and men loved dark- 
ness rather than light, because their deeds were 
evil, 

Luke xix. 27. But those mine enemies, which 
toould not that I should reign over them, bring 
hither, and slay them before me. If Christ, as 
wearing his mediatorial crown, has not a right 
to unreserved submission and hearty obedience, 
he has no right to be angry; and still less to 
punish men as his enemies, for not being willing 
that he should reign over them. He has no 
right to reign over them, at least not over their 
hearts, if it be not their duty to obey him from 
their hearts. The whole controversy, indeed, 
might be reduced to an issue on this argument. 
£very sinner ought to be Christ's friend, or his 
enemy, or to stand by as neutral. To say he 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 65 

ought to be his enemy, is too gross to be defend* 
ed. To plead for his being neutral, is pleading 
for what our Lord declares to he impossible : he 
that is not with me, is against me. There is, 
therefore, no room for any other position, than 
that he ought to be his cordial friend ; and this 
is the plain implication of the passage. 

2 Thess. ii. 9 — 12. Whose coming is — loith 
all deceivahleness of unrighteousness in them that 
perish r because they received not the love of the 
truth, that they might be saved. And for this 
cause God shall send them strong delusion, that 
they should believe a lie ; that they all might be 
damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleas- 
ure in unrighteousness. From hence, we may 
remark two things. First: That faith is here 
called a receiving the love of the truth ; and that 
it means saving faith, is manifest, seeing it is 
added, that they might be saved. Secondly: 
That their not receiving the love of the truth, 
or, which is the same thing, not believing with 
such a faith as that to which salvation is prom- 
ised, was the cause of their being given up of 
God, and carried away with all deceivahleness 
of unrighteousness. The loose and cold-hearted 
manner in which merely nominal Christians held 
the truth, would occasion the introduction of the 
grand papal apostasy, by which great numbers 
of them would be swept away. And this, as- 
suredly, ought to afford a lesson to nominal 
Christians of the present day, who, owing to the 
same cause, are fast approaching to infidelity. 
But, unless we suppose that these professors of 
religion ought to have received the love of the 
6* 

Digitized by Google 



66 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

truthy there is no accounting for the awful judg- 
ments of God upon them for the contrary. 

VI. Other spiritual exercises, which 

SUSTAIN AN INSEPARABLE CONNECTION WITH 

FAITH IN Christ, are represented as the 

DUTY OF MEN IN GENERAL. 

Though this controversy has been mostly car- 
ried on with respect to the duty of faith ^ yet it, 
in reality, extends to the whole of spiritual re- 
ligion. Those who deny that sinners are obliged 
to believe in Christ for salvation, will not allow 
that it is their duty to do any thing truly and 
spiritually good. It is a kind of maxim with 
such persons, that *' none can be obliged to act 
spiritually, but spiritual men." Spiritual exer- 
cises appear to me to mean the same as hofy 
exercises; for the new man, which is created 
after God, is said to be created in righteousness, 
and TRUE HOLINESS ; and as to two kinds of true 
holiness, the Scriptures, I believe, are silent. 
But as some writers affix different ideas to the 
term spiritual ; to prevent all disputes about it, 
I shall proceed on a ground which they will not 
refuse. Whatever has the promise of spiritual 
hlessing^s, is considered as a spiritual exercise. 
With this criterion of spirituality in view, let the 
following passages of Scripture be carefully con- 
sidered : How long, ye simple ones, will ye love 
simplicity, and the scorners delight in their scorn- 
ing, and fools hate knowledge 1 Turn you at my 
reproof: behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto 
you, I will make known my words unto you, — 
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of knowU 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 67 

edge ; hut fools despise wisdom and instruction, — 
Wisdom crieth at the gates, at the entry of the 
city, at the coming in at the doors. Unto you, O 
men, I call ; and my voice is to the sons of man. 
O ye simple, understand wisdom ; and ye fools, 
he ye of an understanding heart. Hear, for I 
will speak of excellent things ; and the opening 
of my lips shall be right things. — Receive my 
instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather 
than choice gold. — Hearken unto me, O ye chil- 
dren; for blessed are they that keep my ways. 
Hear instruction, and be wise, and refuse it not. 
Blessed is the man that heareth me, watching 
daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my 
doors. For whoso fndeth me, fndeth life, and 
shall obtain favor of the Lord. But he that 
sinneth against me, wrongeth his own soul: all 
they that hate me, love death, — And now, Israel, 
what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but 
to FEAR the Lord thy God, to walk in all his 
ways, and to loye him, and to serve the Lord 
thy God vnth all thy heart, and with all 
THY SOUL ? — Circumcise, therefore, the foreskin 
of your heart, and be no more stiff-necked. — 
Rend your heart, and not your garments, and 
turn unto the Lord your God. — Repent ye : for 
the kingdom of heaven is at hand. — Repent ye, 
therefore, and be converted, that your sins may 
he blotted out, when the times of refreshing shaU 
come from the presence of the Lord. Prov. i. 22, 
23. 7. viii. 3—6. 10. 82—36. Deut. x. 12. 16, 
Joel ii. 13. Matt. iii. 2, Acts iii. 19. 

We may remark on these passages, First: 
The persons addressed were unconverted sinners. 



d by Google 



68 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

as appears by their characters ; fools — scomers 
— haters of knowledge — uncircumcised in heart 
— impenitent. Second : The things to which 
they were exhorted were things spiritually good. 
This appears, in part, from the names by which 
the exercises themselves are denominated ; name- 
ly, such understanding as originates in the fear 
of the Lord— fearing — loving — serving God 
with all the heart, and with all the soul — circum- 
cision of the heart — repentance — conversion ; and, 
partly, from the blessings of salvation being 
promised to them : these are expressed by the 
terms blessedness — life— favor of the Lord — 
the blotting out of sin. 

More particularly : The love of God is a spir- 
itual exercise ; for it has the promise of spiritual 
blessings. All things work together for good ta 
them that love God. — He that dwelleth in love, 
dwelleth in God, and God in him. — Eye hath not 
seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the 
heart of man, the things which God hath pre- 
pared for them that love him. Rom. viii. 28. 
1 John iv. 16. 1 Cor. ii. 9. But the love of 
God is required of men without distinction. The 
people of Israel, like all other people, were com- 
posed of good and bad men ; but they were all 
required to love Jehovah, and to cleave to him, 
and that with all their heart, and soul, and mind, 
and strength. Deut. vi. 5. xxx. 20. The moral 
part of those precepts which God gave to them 
on tables of stone, were binding on all mankind. 
Even those who had no other means of knowing 
God than were aflTorded by the works of nature, 
with, perhaps, a portion of tradition, were r^ 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 69 

quired to glorify him as God, and to be 

THANKFUL. RoiD. i. 21. 

The love of God, as is here intimated, is either 
a holy thankfulness for the innumerable instances 
of his goodness, or a cordial approbation of his 
glorious character. It is true, there are favors 
for which the regenerate are obliged to love 
Him, which are not common to the unregen- 
erate: but every one has shared a sufficient 
portion of his bounty to have incurred a debt of 
gratitude. It is generally allowed, indeed, that 
God ought to be loved as our Creator and Bene- 
factor ; but this, they suppose, is not a spiritual 
exercise. There is a kind of gratitude, it is 
granted, which is not spiritual, but merely the 
effect of natural self-love, and in which God is 
no othervnse regarded, than as subservient to 
our happiness. But this does not always respect 
the bestowing of temporal mercies : the same 
feelings which possessed the carnal Israelites, 
when they felt themselves delivered from Phara- 
oh's yoke, and saw their oppressors sinking in 
the sea, are still the feelings of many professors 
of religion, under a groundless persuasion of 
their being elected of God, and having their sins 
forgiven them. Gratitude of this sort has noth- 
ing spiritual in it: but then, neither is it any 
part of duty. God no where requires it, either 
of saints or sinners. That which God requires 
is a spiritual exercise : whether it be on account 
of temporal or ^iritual mercies, is immaterial ; 
the object makes no difference as to the nature 
of the act: that thanksgiving with which the 
common mercies of life are received by the god- 



d by Google 



70 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

ly, and by which they are sanctified to them, 
(1 Tim. iv. 3, 4,) is no less of a spiritual nature, 
and is no less connected with eternal life, than 
gratitude for the forgiveness of sin. This thank- 
ful spirit, instead of being an operation of self- 
love, or regarding God merely in subserviency 
to our own happiness, greatly consists in self- 
abasement, or in a sense of our own unworthi- 
ness. Its language is, Who am /, O Lord God? 
and what is my house, that thou hast brought me 
hitherto 7 — What shall I render unto the Lord 
for all his benefits ? This is holy gratitude ; and 
to be destitute of it, is to be unthankful, unholy. 

With respect to a cardial approbation of the 
divine character, or glorifying God as God, and 
which enters into the essence of holy love, there 
can be no reasonable doubt whether it be obliga- 
tory on sinners. Such is the glory of God's name, 
that nothing but the most inexcusable and deep- 
rooted depravity could render any intelligent 
creature insensible to it. Those parts of Scrip- 
ture which describe the devout feelings of godly 
men, particularly the Psalms of David, abound 
in expressions of affection to the name of the 
Lord. How excellent is thy name in all the 
earth ! — Not unto «s, O Lotd, not unto us, but 
unto thy name give glory. — O magnify the Lord 
with me ; and let us exalt his name together, — 
Sing unto God, sing praises to his name : let 
them that love thy name say continually. The 
Lord be magnified. — Blessed be his glorious 
name forever, and let the whole earth be filled 
with his glory. Amen, and Amen, 

This affection to the natne of the Lord, as it is 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 71 

revealed in his word and works, and particularly 
in the work of redemption, lies at the foundation 
of all true desire after an interest in his mercy. 
If we seek mercy of any one whose character we 
disesteem, it is merely for our own sakes ; and 
if he be acquainted with our motives, we cannot 
hope to succeed. This it is that leads us to 
mourn for sin as sin, and not merely for the in- 
convenience to which it exposes us. This it is 
which renders salvation through the atonement 
of Christ so acceptable. He that loves only 
himself, provided he might be saved, would care 
little or nothing for the honor of the divine 
character : but he that loves God, will be con- 
cerned for* his glory. Heaven itself would be no 
enjoyment to him, if his admission must be at 
the expense of righteousness. 

"God is to be loved/' says Dr. Gill, " for him- 
self; because of his own nature, and the perfec- 
tions of it, which render him amiable and lovely, 
and worthy of our strongest love and affection ; 
as these are displayed in the works of creation 
and providence, and especially of grace, redemp- 
tion, and salvation ; to all which the Psalmist 
has respect, when he says, O Lord, our Lord, 
how excellent is ^% name, nature, and perfections, 
in all the earth I Psalm viii. 1. As God is great 
in himself, and greatly to be praised ; great, and 
greatly to be feared ; so, great, and greatly to be 
loved, for what he is in himself. And this is the 
purest and most perfect love of a creature 
towards God ; for, if we love him only for his 
goodness towards us, it is loving ourselves rather 
Sian him^ at least, a loving him for ourselves, and 



d by Google 



72 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

SO a loving ourselves more than him." But this 
" most pure and perfect love " is manifestly the 
duty of all mankind, however far they are from 
a compliance with it. Grive unto the Lord, yt 
kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory 
and strength. Give unto the Lord the glory due 
unto his name: bring an offering, and come 
before him : worship the Lord in the beauty of 
holiness. — Make a joyful noise unto the Lotd, all 
ye lands. — Kings of the earth, and all people ; 
princes, and all judges of the earth ; both young 
men, and maidens ; old men, and children : let 
them praise the name of the Lord ; for his name 
ALONE IS EXCELLENT ! his glory is abovc the 
earth, and heaven. — Let the people praise thee, O 
God : let all the people praise thee ! 1 Chron. 
xvi. 28, 29. Psa. c. 1. cxlviii. 11—13. Ixvii. 3. 

That Icwe to Christ is a spiritual exercise, may, 
I suppose, be taken for granted. The grace, or 
favor of God, is with all who possess it in sincere 
ity. Eph. vi. 24. But love to Christ is the duty 
of every one to whom the Gospel is preached. 
On no other principles could the apostle have 
written as he did : If any man love not our Lord 
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran-atha ! 
It is worthy of notice, that this awful sentence 
is not denounced against sinners, as positively 
hating Christ, but as not loving him ; plainly 
implying his worthiness of a place in our best 
affections, and that, were it possible for us to be 
indifferent towards him, even that indifference 
would deserve the heavy curse of the Almighty 
at the last judgment. Paul appears to have felt 
as a soldier would feel towards the best of princes, 



d by Google 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. 73 

or commanders. If, after David's return from 
his engagement with Goliath, when the women of 
Israel were praising him in their songs, any of 
the sons of Belial had spoken of him in the 
language of detraction, it would have been 
natural, for one of a patriotic spirit, deeply im- 
pressed with an idea of the hero's worth, and of 
the service he had rendered to his country, thus 
to have expressed himself: " If any man love not 
the son of Jesse, let him be banished from among 
the tribes of Israel." Of this kind were the 
feelings of the apostle. He had served under his 
Lord and Savior for many years: and now, 
sensible in a high degree of the glory of his 
character, he scruples not to pronounce that man 
who loves him not, accursed! 

The fear of God is a spiritual exercise ; for it 
has the promise of spiritual blessings. Psalm 
xxxiv. 7. 9. ciii. 11. 13. 17. But it is also a duty 
required of men, and that without the distinction 
of regenerate or unregenerate. O that there 
were such an heart in them, that they would fear 
mCj and keep all my commandments always ! — 
Fear before him, all the earth. Let all that he 
round about him^ bring presents unto him that 

OUGHT TO BE FEARED. Who WOUld UOt FEAR 

thee, O King of nations ? — Fear thou God. — 
Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this 
is the whole duty of man, — Gather the people 
together, men, and women, and children, and thy 
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may 
hear, and that they may learn, and fear the Lord 
your God: — and that their children, which have 
not known any thing, may hear, and learn to 
7 

Digitized by Google 



74 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

FEAR the Lord your God. — Serve the Lord with 
FEAR, and rejoice with trembling, — And I saw 
another angel fly in the midst of heaven, having 
the everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that 
dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and 
kindred, and tongue, and people, saying, — Fear 
God, and give glory to him ; for the hour of his 
judgment is come : and worship him that made 
heaven and earth ! — Who shall not fear thee, O 
Lord, and glorify thy name 7 for thou only art 
holy, Deut. v. 29. 1 Chron. xvi. 30. Psalm Ixxvi. 
11. Jer. X. 7. Eccles. V. 7. xii. 13. Deut. xxxi. 12, 
13. Psalm ii. 11. Rev. xiv. 6, 7. xv. 4. To say 
of men, they have no fear of God before their 
eyes, (Rom. iii. 18,) is to represent them as under 
the dominion of depravity. 

It niay be objected, that the Scriptures dis- 
tinguish between that holy fear of offending God 
which is peculiar to his children, and a mere 
dread of the misery threatened against sin, which 
is found in the wicked. True ; there is a fear of 
God which is not spiritual : such was that of the 
slothful servant ; and the same is found in hypo- 
crites and devils, (Luke xix. 21. James ii. 19. '.\ 
this, however, is no part of duty, but rather of 
punishment. God does not require this, either of 
saints or sinners. That which he requires, is of 
a holy nature, such as is expressed in the pas^ 
sages before quoted ; which is spiritual, and has 
the promise of spiritual blessings. It resembles 
that of a dutiful child to his father, and is there- 
fore properly called ^/ta/; and though none are 
possessed of it but the children of God, yet 
that is because none else are possessed of a right 
spirit ^ 

Digitized by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 75 

Repentancty or a godly sorrow for sin, is a 
spiritual exercise ; for it abounds with promises 
of spiritual blessings. But repentance is a duty 
required of every sinner. Repent ye, for the 
kingdom of heaven is at hand, — Repent ye, there' 
fore, and be converted, that your sins may he 
blotted out, — Cleanse your hands, ye sinners ; and 
purify your hearts, ye double minded. Be 
afflicted, and mourn, and weep ; let your laughter 
be turned to mourning, and your joy to heaviness. 
Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and 
he shall lift you up. Matt. iii. 2. Acts iii. 19. 
James iv. 8---10. The hardness of heart which 
our Lord found in the Jews, and which is the 
opposite of repentance, grieved him : which it 
would not, had it not been their sin, Mark iii. 5. 
Finally : A hard and impenitent heart treasures 
up wrath against the day of wrath : but impeni- 
tence could be no sin, if penitence were not a 
<iuty. Rom. ii. 5. 

Repentance, it is allowed, like all other ^irit- 
ual exercises, has its counterfeit, and which is 
not spiritual ; but neither is it that which God 
requires at the hands of either saints or sinners. 
What is called natural, and sometimes legal 
repentance, is merely a sorrow on account of 
consequences. Such was the repentance of Saul 
and Judas. 

In order to evade the argument arising from 
the addresses of John the Baptist, of Christ and 
his apostles, who called upon the Jewish people 
to repent, and believe the Gospel, it has been 
alleged, that it was only an outward repentance 
and acknowledgment of the truth to which they 



d by Google 



76 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

were exhorted, and not that which is spiritual^ 
or which has the promise of spiritual blessings. 
But it will be difficult, if not impossible, to prove 
that such repentance and faith are any where 
required of sinners, or that it is consistent with 
the divine perfections to require them. An out- 
ward repentance and reformation of manners, as 
distinguished from that which consists in godly 
sorrow, is only repentance in appearance. What- 
ever sorrow there is in it, it is not on account of 
sin, but its consequences ; and to suppose that 
Christ, or his servants, required this, would be 
doing them infinite dishonor. It is no other than 
supposing them to have betrayed the authority of 
God over the human heart ; to have sanctioned 
hypocrisy ; and to have given counsels to sinners, 
which, if taken, would leave them still exposed 
to everlasting destruction. 

The case of the Ninevites has been alleged as 
furnishing an example of that repentance which 
is the duty of men in general, and which Christ 
and his apostles required of the Jews. I do not 
know that the repentance of the Ninevites was 
genuine, or connected with spiritual blessings ; 
neither does any one know that it was not. 
Probably, the repentance of some of them was 
genuine, while that of the greater part might be 
only put on in conformity to the orders of govern- 
ment ; or, at most, merely as the effect of terror. 
But, whatever it was, even though none of it 
were genuine, the object professed was godly 
gorrowfor sin ; and if God treated them upon 
the supposition of their being sincere, and it 
repented him of the evil which he had threatened. 



d by Google ^ 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. 77 

it is no more than he did to Pharaoh, Abijah, 
Ahab, and others. Exod. viii. 8, 9. 2 Chron. xiiL 
with 1 Kings xv. 1 Kings xxi. 27. 29. It is a 
very unjust conclusion to draw from his conduct, 
that their repentance was such as he approved, 
and the whole which he required at their hands. 
So far from it, there might be nothing in any of 
them which could approve itself to him as the 
Searcher of hearts ; and though, for wise reasons, 
he might think it proper, in those instances, to 
overlook their hypocrisy, and to treat them on 
the supposition of their repentance being what 
they professed it to be, yet he might still reserve 
to himself the power of judging them at the last 
day according to their works. 

The object of John the Baptist was not to 
effect a mere outward reformation of manners, 
but to turn the hearts of the fathers to the chiU 
dren, and the disobedient to the toisdom of the just ^ 
to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. 
Luke i. 17. Such was the effect actually pro- 
duced by his ministry, and by that of Christ and 
the apostles. The repentance which they called 
upon sinners to exercise, was such as had the 
promise of the remission of sins, Mark i. 4. 
Acts li. 38. 

It is plainly intimated, by the apostle Paul, 
tiiat all repentance, except that which worketh in 
a way of godly sorrow, and which he calls rc- 
pentance to salvation, needs to be repented 
OF. It is the mere sorrow of the world, which 
worketh death, 2 Cor. vii. 10. But that which 
requires to be repented of, cannot be commanded 
of God, or constitute any part of a sinner's duty^ 
7* 

Digitized by Google 



76 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

The duty of every transgressor is to be iorry at 
heart for having sinned. 

Humility, or lowliness of mind, is a spiritual 
disposition, and has the promise of spiritual bless- 
ings. Though the Lord be high, yet hath he 
respect unto the lowly. — He giveth grace unto the 
humble, — Blessed are the poor in spirit; for 
theirs is the kingdom of heaven, (Psalm cxxxviii. 
6. James iv. 6. Matt. v. 3 :) yet this disposition is 
required as the duty of all. Cleanse your hands, 
ye sinners; and purify your hearts, ye double 
minded. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep ; let 
your laughter be turned to mourning, and your 
joy to heaviness. Humble yourselves in the sight 
of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, James iv. 
8 — 10. Humility does not consist in thinking 
less or more meanly of ourselves than is true. 
The diflference between one that is lowly, and 
one that is proud, lies in this — ^the one thinks 
justly of himself, and the other unjustly. The 
most humble Christian only thinks of himself 
soberly, as he ought to think, Rom. xii. 3. All 
the instances of humility recorded of the godly, 
in the Scriptures, are but so many examples of a 
right spirit, a spirit brought down to their situa- 
tion. Carry back the ark of God into the city, 
says David : If I shall Jind favor in the eyes of 
the Lord, he will bring me again, and show me 
• both it and his habitation : but if he thus say, 1 
have no delight in thee, behold, here am I; let him 
do to me as seemeth good unto him. This was 
very different from the spirit of his predecessor, 
when he was given to expect the loss of the 
kingdom ; yet it was no more than was the duty 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION* 79 

of Saul, as well as of David ; and all his proud 
and rebellious opposition served only to increase 
his guilt and misery. The spirit of the publican 
was no more than was becoming a sinner, and 
would have been becoming the Pharisee himself. 

Finally : If whatever has the promise of spirit- 
ual blessings be a spiritual exercise, every thing 
that is right f or which accords with the divine 
precept^ must be so ; for the Scriptures uniformly 
promise eternal life to every such exercise. They 
that do good shall come forth to the resurrection 
of life. He that doeth righteousness is righteous. 
The giving of a cup of cold water to a disciple 
of Christ, because he belongs to him, will be 
followed with a disciple's reward. Nay, a blesS' 
ing is pronounced upon those who are not 
offended in him. But, though these things are 
spiritual, and are characteristic of the godly, 
yet, who will say they are not binding on the 
ungodly t Are they excused from good, from 
doing right y from bestowing a cup of water on a 
disciple of Jesus, because he belongs to him? 
At least, are they allowed to be offended in him ? 

If God's law be spiritual, and remain in full 
force as a standard of obligation ; if men, while 
unconverted, have no real conformity to it; if 
regeneration be the writing of it upon the heart, 
or the renewal of the mind to a right spirit ; all 
these things are clear and consistent: This is 
for the same thing, in different respects, to be 
" man's duty, and God's gift ;" a position which 
Dr. Owen has fully established ; * and somewhere 

* Display of Anmnianifm, chap. z. 

Digitized by Google 



80 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

remarks, that he who is ignorant of it has yet to 
learn one of the first principles of religion. In 
short, this is rendering the work of the Spirit 
what the Scriptures denominate it — ^leading us 

BY THE WAY THAT WE SHOULD GO. Isa. xlviii. 

17. But, if that which is bestowed by the Holy 
Spirit be something different in its nature from 
that which is required in the divine precepts, I 
see not what is to be made of the Scriptures, nor 
how it is, that righteousness, goodness, or any 
thing else which is required of men, should be 
accompanied, as it is, with the promise of 
eternal life. 



d by Google 



i 



ACCEPTATION. 81 



m REFLECTIONS. 



First : Though faith be a duty, the require 
ment of it is not to be considered as a mere exer^ 

Cise of AUTHORITY, but of INFINITE GOODNESS ; 

binding us to pursue our best interest. If a mes- 
sage of peace were sent to a company of rebels, 
who had been conquered, and lay at the mercy 
of their injured sovereign, they must, of course, 
be required to repent, and embrace it, ere they 
could be interested in it; yet such a require- 
ment would not be considered, by impartial men, 
as a mere exercise of authority. It is true, the 
authority of the sovereign would accompany it, 
and the proceeding would be so conducted as 
that the honor of his government should be pre- 
served ; but the grand character of the message 
would be mercy. Neither would the goodness 
of it be diminished by the authority which at^ 
tended it, nor by the malignant disposition of the 
parties. Should some of them even prove in- 
corrigible, and be executed as hardened traitors, 
the mercy of the sovereign in sending the mes- 
sage, would be just the same. They might 
possibly object, that the government which they 
had resisted was hard and rigid ; that their par- 
ents before them had always disliked it, and had 
taught them from their childhood to despise it ; 
that to require them to embrace with all their 
hearts a message, the very import of which was, 
that they had transgressed without cause, and de^ 
served to die, was too humiliating for flesh and 

Digitized by V^OOQ IC 



82 THE GOSPEL WORTHT 

blood to bear ; and that, if he would not pardon 
them without their cordially subscribing such an 
instrument, he had better have left them to die 
as they were ; for, instead of its being good news 
to them, it would prove the means of aggravat- 
ing their misery. Every loyal subject, however, 
would easily perceive that it was good news, and 
a great instance of mercy, however they might 
treat it, and of whatever evil, through their per- 
verseness, it might be the occasion. 

If faith in Christ be the duty of the ungodly, 
it must, of course, follow, that every sinner, 
whatever be his character, is completely war- 
. ranted to trust in the Lord Jesus Christ for the 
salvation of his soul. In other words, he has 
every possible encouragement to relinquish his 
former attachment and confidences, and to com- 
mit his soul into the hands of Jesus to be saved. 
If believing in Christ be a privilege belonging 
only to the regenerate, and no sinner, while un- 
regenerate, be warranted to exercise it, it will 
follow, either that a sinner may know himself to 
be regenerate before he believes, or that the first 
exercise of faith is an act of presumption. That 
the bias of the heart requires to be turned to 
God antecedently to believing, has been admit- 
ted ; because the nature of believing is such, that 
it cannot be exercised while the soul is under the 
dominion of wilful blindness, hardness, and aver- 
sion. These dispositions are represented in the 
Scriptures, as a bar in the way of faith, as being 
inconsistent with itj* and which, consequently, 
require to be taken out of the way. But, what- 

* See Propoeition IV. p. 52. 

Digitized by Google 



OP ALL ACCEPTATION. Od 

ever necessity there may be for a change of heart 
in order to believing, it is neither necessary nor 
possible that the party should be conscious of it 
till he has believed. It is necessary that the eyes 
of a blind man should be opened, before he can 
see ; but it is neither necessary nor possible for 
him to know that his eyes are open till he does 
see. It is only by surrounding objects appearing 
to his view, that he knows the obstructing film 
to be removed. But, if regeneration be necessa- 
ry to warrant believing, and yet it be impossible 
to obtain a consciousness of it till we have be- 
lieved, it follows, that the first exercise of faith 
is without foundation; that is, it is not faith, but 
presumption. 

If believing be the duty of every sinner to 
whom the Gospel is preached, there can be no 
doubt as to a warrant for it, whatever be his 
character; and to maintain the latter, without 
admitting the former, would be reducing it to a 
mere matter of discretion. It might be inexpe- 
dient to reject the way of salvation, but it could 
not be unlawful. 

Second : Though believing in Christ is a com- 
pliance with a duty, yet it is not as a duty, or 
by way of reward for a virtuous act, that we are 
said to be justified hy it. It is true, God does 
reward the services of his people, as the Scrip- 
tures abundantly teach ; but this follows upon 
justification. We must stand accepted in the 
ieloved, before our services can be acceptable 
or rewardable. Moreover, if we were justified 
by faith 05 a duty, justification hy faith could 
not be, as it is, opposed to justification hy works : 



d by Google 



84 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

To him that worketh is the reward not reckoned 
of grace f hut of debt But to him that worketh 
not, but believeth on him that justifeth the un^ 
godly, his faith is counted for righteousness, 
Rom. iv. 2---5. The Scripture doctrine of jms- 
tif cation by faith, in opposition to the works of 
the law, appears to me as follows : — By believing 
in Jesus Christ, the sinner becomes vitally united 
to him, or, as the Scriptures express it, joined to 
the Lord, and is of one spirit with him, (1 Cor. 
vi. 17 :) and this union, according to the divine 
constitution, as revealed in the Gospel, is the 
ground of an interest in his righteousness. Agree- 
able to this is the following language : — There is 
now, therefore, no condemnation to them that 
are in Christ Jesus. — Of him are ye in Christ 
Jesus, who of God is made unto us righteous- 
ness, S^c. — That I may be found in him, not 
having mine own righteousness which is of the 
law, but that which is through the faith of Christ, 
As the union which, in the order of nature, pre- 
cedes a revealed interest in Christ's righteous- 
ness, is spoken of in allusion to that of marriage, 
the one may serve to illustrate the other. A 
rich and generous character, walking in the fields, 
espies a forlorn female infant, deserted by some 
unfeeling parent in the day that it was born, and 
left to perish. He sees its helpless condition, 
and resolves to save it. Under his kind patron- 
age, the child grows up to maturity. He now 
resolves to make her his wife, and marries her in 
legal form, and she becomes his wife. She is 
now, according to the public statutes of the 
realm, interested in all his possessions. Great ia 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATIOir* W 

the transition ! Ask her, in the height of her 
glory, how she became possessed of all this 
wealth ; and, if she retain a proper i^irit, she 
will answer in some such manner as this : " It 
was not mine, but my deliverer's — ^his who res- 
cued me from death. It is no reward of any 
good deeds on my part. It b by marriage. It 
is of grace.** 

It is easy to perceive, in this case, that it was 
necessary she should be voluntarily married to 
her husband, before she could, according to the 
public statutes of the realm, be interested in his 
possessions, and that she now enjoys those pos- 
sessions hy marriage ; yet who would think of 
asserting that her consenting to be his wife was 
a meritorious act, and that all his possessions 
were given her as the reward of it ? 

Third : From the foregoing view of things, 
we may perceive the alarming situation of unbe' 
lievers. By unbelievers, I mean not only avowed 
infidels, but all persons who hear, or have oppor- 
tunity to hear, the Gospel, or to come at the 
knowledge of what is taught in the Holy Scrip- 
tures, and do not cordially embrace it. It is an 
alarming thought to be a sinner against the 
greatest and best of Beings ; but to be an unbe' 
lieving sinner is much more so. There is deliv- 
erance from the curse of the law, through Him 
who was m(K[e a curse for us. But if, like the 
barren fig-tree, we stand, from year to year, un- 
der Gospel culture, and bear no fruit, we may 
expect to fall under the curse of the Savior ; 
and who is to deliver us from this 1 If the 
word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every 
8 

Digitized by Google 



bo THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

transgression and disobedience received a just 
recompense of reward, how shall we escape, if we 
neglect so great salvation ? 

We are in the habit of pitying heathens, who 
are inthralled by abominable superstition, and 
immersed in the immoralities which accompany 
it ; but to live in the midst of Gospel light, and 
reject it, or even disregard it, is abundantly more 
criminal, and will be followed with a heavier 
punishment. We feel for the condition of prof- 
ligate characters — for swearers, and drunkards, 
and fornicators, and liars, and thieves, and mur- 
derers ; but these crimes become tenfold more 
heinous, in being committed under the light of 
revelation, and in contempt of all the warnings 
and gracious invitations of the Gospel. The 
most profligate character, who never possessed 
these advantages, may be far less criminal in the 
sight of God than the most sober and decent, 
who possesses, and disregards them. It was on 
this principle that such a heavy woe was de- 
nounced against Chorazin and Bethsaida, and 
that their sin was represented as exceeding that 
of Sodom. 

The Gospel wears an aspect of mercy towards 
sinners ; but towards unbelieving sinners, the 
Scriptures deal wholly in the language of threat- 
ening. / am come, saith our Savior, a light into 
the world, that whosoever believeth on me should 
not abide in darkness. If any man hear my 
WORDS, AND BELIEVE NOT, Ijudgc Mm not, [that 
is, not at present ;] for I came not to judge the 
world, but to save the world. He that rgecteth 
me, and receiveth not my words, hath one that 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 87 

judgeth him : the word that I have spoken, the 
same shall judge him in the last day. John xii. 
46 — 48. It will be of but small acccfunt, in that 
day, that we have escaped a few of the lusts of 
the flesh, if we have been led captive by those of 
the mind. If the greatest gift of Heaven be set 
at nought by us, through the pride of science, or 
a vain conceit of our own righteousness, how 
shall we stand when He appeareth ? 

It will then be found that a price was in our 
hands to get wisdom, but that we had no heart 
to it ; and that herein consists our sin, and from 
hence proceeds our ruin. God called, and we 
would not hearken ; he stretched out his hand, 
and no man regarded : therefore he will laugh at 
our calamity, and mock when our fear cometh. 
It is intimated, both in the Old and New Testa- 
ment, that the recollection of the means of sal- 
vation having been within our reach, will be a 
bitter aggravation to our punishment They 
come unto thee, saith the Lord to Ezekiel, 05 the 
people come, and they sit before thee as my people, 
and they hear thy words, hut they will not do 
them. — And when this cometh to pass, {lo, it wiU 
come!) then shall thet know that a prophet 
HATH been among THEM. Ezek. xxxiii. 31 — 33. 
To the same purpose, our Savior speaks of those 
who should reject the doctrine of his apostles. 
Into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive 
you not, go your ways out into the streets of the 
same, and say, Even the very dust of your city, 
which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against you. 
Notwithstanding, be ye sure of this, that 

THE KINGDOM OF GOD IS COME NIOH UNTO TOU. 

Lukex. 10, 11. 

Digitized by Google 



88 THE GOSPSL WOBTHT 

Great as is the sin of unbelief, however, it is 
not unpardonable. It becomes such only by per- 
sisting in it till death. Saul of Tarsus was an 
unbeliever; yet he obtained mercy. And his 
being an unbeliever, rather than a presumptuous 
opposer of Christ against conviction, placed him 
within the pale of forgiveness, and is, therefore, 
assigned as a reason of it. 1 Tim. i. 13. 

This consideration affords a hope even to un- 
believers. O ye self-righteous despisers of a free 
salvation through a Mediator, be it known to you 
that there is no other name given under heaven, 
or among men, by which you can be saved. To 
him whom you have disregarded and despised, 
you must, either voluntarily or involuntarily, sub- 
mit : To him every knee shall bow. You cannot 
go back into a state of non-existence, however 
desirable it might be to many of you ; for God 
hath stamped immortality upon your natures. 
You cannot turn to the right hand, nor to the 
left, with any advantage. Whether you give a 
loose to your inclination, or put a force upon it 
by an assumed devotion, each will lead to the 
same issue. Neither can you stand still. Like 
a vessel in a tempestuous ocean, you must go 
this way or that ; and, go which way you will, if 
it be not to Jesus, as utterly unworthy, you are 
only heaping up wrath against the day of wrath. 
Whether you sing, or pray, or hear, or preach, or 
feed the poor, or till the soil, if self be your 
object, and Christ be disregarded, all is sin, 
(Prov. XV. 8,9: xxviii. 9: xxi. 4,) and will all 
issue in disappointment : The root is rottenness^ 
and the blossom shall go up as the dust. Whither 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 89 

will you go ? Jesus invites you to come to him. 
His servants beseech you, in his name, to be 
reconciled to God. The Spirit saith. Come; 
and the bride saith, Come ; and whosoever will, 
let him come, and take of the water of life freely. 
An eternal heaven is before you, in one direc- 
tion, and an eternal hell in the other. Your 
answer is required. Be one thing or another. 
Choose you, this day, whom ye will serve. For 
our parts, we will abide by our Lord and Savior. 
If you continue to reject him, so it must be. 
Nevertheless, be ye sure of this, that the kingdom 
of God has come nigh unto you. 

Finally : I^om what Aa5 been advanced, we 
^oy form a judgment of our duty, as ministers 
of the word, in dealing with the unconverted. 
The work of the Christian ministry, it has been 
said, is to preach the Gospel, or to hold up the 
free grace of God through Jesus Christ, as the 
only way of a sinner's salvation. This is, doubt- 
less, true ; and if this be not the leading theme 
of our ministrations, we had better be any thing 
than preachers. Woe unto us, if we preach not 
the Gospel I The minister who, under a pre- 
tence of pressing the practice of religion, neg- 
lects its all-important principles, labors in the 
fire. He may enforce duty till duty freezes upon 
his lips. Neither his auditors nor himself will 
greatly regard it. But, on the contrary, if, by 
preaching the Gospel, be meant the insisting 
solely upon the blessings and privileges of reli- 
gion, to the neglect of exhortations, calls, and 
warnings, it is sufficient to say that such was not 
the practice of Christ and his apostles. It will 

Digitized by Google 



90 THE GOSPEL WORTHT 

not be dented that they preached the Gospel ;^ 
yet they warned, admonished, and entreated sin- 
ners to repent and believe ; to believe while they 
had the Ught ; to labor not for the meat that 
perishethj but for that which endureth unto ever- 
lasting life; to repent, and be converted, that 
their sins might be blotted out ; to come to the 
marriage supper, for that all things were ready r 
in fine, to be reconciled unto God. 

If the inability of sinners to perform things 
spiritually good were natural, or such as existed 
independent of their present choice, it would be 
absurd and cruel to address them in such lan- 
guage. No one in his senses would think of 
calling the blind to look, the deaf to hear, or the 
dead to rise up and walk, and of threatening 
them with punishment in case of their refusal. 
But, if the blindness arise from the love of dark- 
ness rather than light ; if the deafness resemble 
that of the adder, which stoppeth her ear, and 
will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm 
he never so wisely ; and if the death consist in 
alienation of heart from God, and the absence 
of all desire after him ; there is no absurdity or 
cruelty in such addresses. 

' But enforcing the duties of religion, either on 
sinners or saints, is, by some, called preaching 
the law. If it were so, it is enough for ns that 
such was the preaching of Christ and his apos- 
tles. It is folly and presumption to affect to be 
more evangelical than they were. All practical 
preaching, however, is not preaching the law. 
That, oi3y, *I apprehend, ought to be censured 
as preaching the law^ in which our acceptance 



d by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. 91 

math God is, in some way or other, placed to the 
account of our obedience to its precepts. When 
^eternal life is represented as the reward of re- 
pentance, faith, and sincere obedience, (as it too 
frequently is, and that under the complaisant 
form of being * through the merits of Christ,') 
this is preaching the law, and not the Gospel. 
But the precepts of the law may be illustrated 
and enforced for evangelical purposes ; as tend- 
ing to vindicate the divine character and govern- 
ment ; to convince of sin ; to show the necessity 
of a Savior, with the freeness of salvation ; to 
ascertain the nature of true religion ; and to 
point out the rule of Christian conduct. Such a 
way of introducing the divine law, in subservi- 
ence to the Gospel, is, properly speaking, preach- 
ing the Gospel ; for the end denominates the 
action. 

If the foregoing principles be just, it is the 
duty of ministers not only to exhort their carnal 
auditors to believe in Jesus Christ for the salva- 
tion of their souls ; but it is at our peril to 

EXHORT THEM TO ANY THING SHORT OF IT, OR 
WHICH DOES NOT INVOLVE OR IMPLY IT. I am 

aware that such an idea may startle many of my 
readers, and some who are engaged in the Chris- 
tian ministry. We have sunk into such a com- 
promising way of dealing with the unconverted, 
as to have well nigh lost the spirit of the primi- 
tive preachers ; and hence it is that sinners of 
every description can sit so quietly as they do, 
year after year, in our places of worship. It was 
not so with the hearers of Peter and Paul. They 
were either pricked in the heart in one way, or 



d by Google 



92 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

cut to the heart in another. Their preaching 
commended itself to every man's conscience in tJte 
sight of God. How shall we account for this 
difference ? Is there not some important error 
or defect in our ministrations ? I have no refer- 
ence to the preaching of those who disown the 
divinity or atonement of Christ, on the one hand, 
whose sermons are little more than harangues 
on morality; nor to that of gross Antinomians, 
on the other, whose chief business it is to feed 
the vanity and malignity of one part of their 
audience, and the sin-extenuating principles of 
the other. These are errors, the folly of which 
is manifest to all men who pay any serious regard 
to the religion of the New Testament. I refer 
to those who are commonly reputed evangelical, 
and who approve of addresses to the unconverted. 
I hope no apology is necessary for an attempt to 
exhibit the Scriptural manner of preaching. If 
it affects the labors of some of my brethren, I 
cannot deny but that it may also affect my own. 
I conceive there is scarcely a minister amongst 
us, whose preaching has not been more or less 
influenced by the lethargic systems of the age. 

Christ and his apostles, without any hesitation, 
called on sinners to repent, and believe the Gos- 
pel; but we, considering them as poor, impotent, 
and depraved creatures, have been disposed to 
drop this part of the Christian ministry. Some 
may have felt afraid of being accounted legal ; 
others have really thought it inconsistent. Con- 
sidering such things as beyond the power of their 
hearers, they seem to have contented themselves 
with pressing on them things which they could 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 93 

perform, still continuing the enemies of Christ — 
such as behaving decently in society, reading the 
Scriptures, and attending the means of grace. 
Thus it is that hearers of this description sit at 
ease in our congregations. Having done their 
duty, the minister has nothing more to say to 
them — nothing, however, unless it be to tell 
them occasionally that something more is neceS' 
sary to salvation. But as this implies no guilt 
on their part, they sit unconcerned, conceiving 
that all that is required of them is, *^ to lie in the 
way, and to wait the Lord's time." But is this 
the religion of the Scriptures ? Where does it 
appear that the prophets or apostles ever treated 
that kind of inability which is merely the effect 
of reigning aversion, as affording any excuse? 
And where have they descended in their exhor- 
tations to things which' might be done, and the 
parties still continue the enemies of God ? In- 
stead of leaving out every thing of a spiritual 
nature, because their hearers could not find in 
their hearts to comply with it, it may safely be 
affirmed, they exhorted to nothing else — treating 
such inability not only as of no account^ with 
regard to the lessening of obligation, but as ren- 
4ering the subjects of it worthy of the severest 
rebuke. To whom shall I speak, and give wam" 
ingy that they may hear? Behold, their ear is 
uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken : behold, 
the word of the Lord is unto them a reproach, and 
they have no delight in it. What then? Did 
the prophet desist from his work, and exhort 
them to something to which, in their present 
state of mind, they could hearken ? Far from it. 



d by Google 



94 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

He delivers his message, whether they would 
hear, or whether they would forbear : Thus saith 
the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask 
for the old paths, where is the good way, and 
walk therein, and ye shall Jind rest for your souls. 
But they said, We will not walk therein. And 
did this induce him to desist ? No. He pro- 
ceeds to read their doom, and calls the world to 
witness its justice : Hear, O earth ! Behold, I 
will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of 
their thoughts, because they have not hearkened 
unto my words, nor to my law, but rgected it, 
Jer. vi. 10 — 19. Many of those who attended 
the ministry of Christ, were of the same spirit. 
Their eyes were blinded, and their hearts harden^ 
ed, so that they could not believe ; yet, paying 
no manner of regard to this kind of inability, he 
exhorted them to believe in the light while they 
had the Kght. And when they had heard, and 
believed not, he proceeded, Without hesitation, to 
declare, He that reject eth me, and receiveth not 
my words, hath one that judgeth him ; the word 
that I have spoken, the same shall judge him in 
the last day, John xii. 36—48. 

Such, also, were many of Paul's hearers at 
Rome. They believed not. But did Paul, seeing 
they could not receive the Gospel, recommend to 
them something which they could receive ? No. 
He gave them one word at parting : Well spake 
the Holy Ghost, by Esaias the prophet, unto our 
fathers, saying. Go unto this people, and say, 
Hearing, ye shall hear, and shall not understand; 
and seeing, ye shall see, and not perceive. For 
the heart of this people is waxed gross, and their 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 95 

tars are dull of hearing y and their eyes have thty 
closed^ lest they should see with their eyes, arid 
hear with their ears, and understand with their 
heart, and should he converted, and I should heal 
tliem. Be it knoum, therefore, unto you, that the 
salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and 
that they will hear it. Acts xxviii. 24 — ^28. 

When did Jesus, or his apostles, go about 
merely to form the manners of men ? Where do 
they exhort to duties which a man may comply 
with, and yet miss of the kingdom of heaven? If 
a man kept their sayings, he was assured that he 
should never see death. In addressing the un- 
converted, they began by admonishing them 
to repent, and believe the Gospel; and, in the 
course of their labors, exhorted to all manner of 
duties. But all were to be done spiritually, or 
they would not have acknowledged them to have 
been done at all. Carnal duties, or duties to be 
performed otherwise than to the glory of God, 
had no place in their system. 

The answer of our Lord to those carnal Jews 
who inquired of him what they must do to work 
the works of God, is worthy of special notice. Did 
Jesus give them to understand, that, as to believing 
in him, however willing they might be, it was a 
matter entirely beyond their power ? that all the 
directions he had to give were, that they should 
attend the means, and wait for the moving of the 
waters? No. Jesus answered. This is the work 
of God, that ye believe on him whom he hath sent. 
jfohn vi. 29. This was the gate at the head of 
the way, as the author of The Pilgrim* s Prog- 
ress has admirably represented it, to which sin- 



d by Google 



96 THE €M)SPEL WOBTHT 

ners must be directed. A worldly-wise instructor 
may inculcate other duties; but the true evan^ 
gelist, after the example of his Lord, will point 
to this as the first concern, and as that upon 
which every thing else depends. 

There is another i^ecies of preaching, which 
proceeds upon much the same principle. Re- 
pentance towards God, and faith towards our 
Lord Jesus Christ, are allowed to be duties, but 
not immediate duties. The sinner is considered 
as unable to comply with them, and therefore 
they are not urged upon him ; but, instead of 
them, he is directed to p^ray for the Holy Spirit^ 
to enable him to repent and believe; and this, it 
seems, he can do, notwithstanding the aversion 
of his heart from every thing of the kind. But, 
if any man be required to pray for the Holy 
Spirit, it must be either sincerely, and in the 
name of Jesus, or insincerely, and in some other 
way. The latter, I suppose, will be allowed to 
be an abomination in the sight of God. He 
cannot, therefore, be required to do this; and, 
as to the former, it is just as difficult, and as 
opposite to the carnal heart, as repentance and 
faith themselves. Indeed, it amounts to the 
same thing ; for a sincere desire afier a spiritual 
blessing, presented in the name of Jesus, is no 
other than the prayer of faith, 

Peter exhorted Simon to pray, not with an im- 
penitent heart, that he might obtain repentance, 
but with a penitent one, that he might obtain 
forgiveness ; and this, no doubt, in the (mly way 
in which it was to be obtained, through Jesus 
Christ. Repent, saith he, and pray to God, if 



d by Google 



OlS* ALL ACCEPTATION. 97 

perhaps the thought of thine heart may he for' 
given thee. Our Savior directed his disciples 
to pray for the Holy Spirit ; but surely the pray- 
er which they were encouraged to offer was to 
be sincere^ and with an eye to the Savior ; that 
is, it was the prayer offaith^ and therefore could 
not be a duty directed to be performed antece- 
dently, and in order to the obtaining of it. 

The mischief arising from this way of preach- 
ing is considerable. First : It gives up a very 
important question to the sinner, even that ques- 
tion which is at issue between God and con- 
science, on the one hand, and a self-righteous 
heart, on the other, namely. Whether he be 
obliged immediately to repent, and believe the 
Gospel. ''I could find nothing in the Scrip- 
tures," says he, " that would give me any com- 
fort in my present condition — nothing short of 
repent, and believe, which are things I cannot 
comply with; but I have gained it from my good 
minister. Now my heart is at ease. I am not 
obliged immediately to repent, and sue for mercy 
in the name of Jesus. It is not, therefore, my 
sin that I do not. All I am obliged to is, to 
pray God to help me to do so; and that I do." 
Thus, after a bitter conflict with Scripture and 
conscience, which have pursued him through all 
his windings, and pressed upon him the call of 
the Gospel, he finds a shelter in the house of 
God I Such counsel, instead of aiding the sin- 
ner's convictions, (which, as laborers with God, 
is our proper business,) has many a time been 
equal to a victory over them, or, at least, to the 
purchase of an armistice. Second : It deceives 
9 

Digitized by Google 



98 THE GOSPEL WOBTHT 

th6 soul. He understands it as a compromise, 
and so acts upon it. For, though he be, in fact, 
as far from sincerely praying for repentance, as 
from repenting, and just as unable to desire faith 
in Christ, as to exercise it, yet he does not think 
so. He reckons himself very desirous of these 
things. The reason is, he takes that indirect 
desire after them, which consists in wishing to 
be converted, (or any thing, however disagreea- 
ble in itself,) that he may escape the wrath to 
come, to be the desire of grace; and, being con- 
scious of possessing this, he considers himself in 
a fair way, at least, of being converted. Thus 
he deceives his soul ; and thus he is helped for- 
ward in his delusion ! Nor is this all. He feels 
himself set at liberty from the hard requirement 
of returning immediately to God, hy Jesus Christy 
as utterly unworthy ; and being told to pray that 
he may be enabled to do so, he supposes that 
such prayer will avail him, or that God will give 
him the power of repenting and believing, in 
answer to his prayers — sprayers, be it observed, 
which must necessarily be offered up with an 
impenitent, unbelieving heart. This just suits 
his self-righteous spirit ; but, alas ! all is delusion. 
** You have no relief, then," say some, " for 
the sinner?" I answer, If the Gospel, or any of 
its blessings, will relieve him, there is no want 
of relief But, if there be nothing in Christ, or 
grace, or heaven, that will suit his inclination, it 
is not for me to furnish him with any thing else, 
or to encourage him to hope that things will 
come to a good issue. The only possible way 
of relieving a sinner, while his heart is averse 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 99 

firom God, is by lowering the requirements of 
Heaven to meet his inclination, or in some way 
to model the Gospel to his mind. But to relieve 
him in this manner, is at my peril ! If I were 
commissioned to address a company of men who 
had engaged in an unprovoked rebellion against 
their king and country, what ought I to say to 
them? I might make use of authority or entrea- 
ty, as occasion might require ; I might caution^ 
warn, threaten, or persuade them ; but there 
would be a point from which I must not depart : 
JBe ye reconciled to your rightful sovereign ; lay 
down arms, and submit to mercy ! To this I 
must inviolably adhere. They might allege that 
they could not comply with such hard terms. 
Should I admit their plea, and direct them only 
to such conduct as might consist with a rebellious 
spirit, instead of recovering them from rebellion, 
I should go far towards denominating myself a 
rebel. 

And, as Christ and his apostles never appear 
to have exhorted the unconverted to any thing 
which did not include or imply repentance and 
faith, so, in all their explications of the divine 
law, €md preaching against particular sins, their 
object was to bring the sinner to this issue. 
Though they directed them to no means, in 
order to get a penitent and believing heart, but 
to repentance and faith themselves, yet they used 
means with them for that purpose. Thus, our 
Lord expounded the law in his sermon on the 
mount, and concluded by enforcing such a hear- 
ing of his sayings f and doing them, as should be 
equal to digging deep^ and building one*$ house 



d by Google 



100 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

upon a rock. And thus the apostle Peter, having 
charged his countrymen with the murder of the 
Lord of glory, presently brings it to this issue : 
Repent yc, therefore, and be converted, that your 
sins may he blotted out. Matt. v. vi. vii. Acts iii. 
14—19. 

Some years ago, I met with a passage in Dr. 
Owen on this subject, which, at that time, sunk 
deep into my heart ; and the more observation I 
have since made, the more just his remarks ap- 
pear. "It is the duty of ministers," says he, 
" to plead with men about thSir sins, but always 
remember that it be done with that which is the 
proper end of law and Gospel ; that is, that they 
make use of the sin they speak against to the 
discovery of the state and condition wherein the 
sinner is. Otherwise, haply, they may work men 
to formality^ and hypocrisy, and but little of the 
true end of preaching the Gospel will be brought 
about. It will not avail to beat a man off from 
his drunkenness into a sober formality. A skil- 
ful master of the assemblies lays his axe at the 
root — drives still at the heart. To inveigh 
against particular sins of ignorant, un regenerate 
persons, such as the land is full of, is a good 
work; but yet, though it may be done with great 
efficacy, vigor, and success, if this be all the 
effect of it, that they are set upon the most sedu- 
lous endeavors of mortifying their sins preached 
down, all that is done is but like the beating of 
an enemy in an open field, and driving him into 
an impregnable castle, not to be prevailed against. 
Get you, at any time, a sinner at the advantage 
on the account of any one sin whatever ; have 



d by Google 



OF ALL ACCEPTATION. 101 

you any thing to take hold of him by, bring it to 
his state and condition ; drive it up to the head, 
and there deal with him. To break men off 
from particular sins, and not to break their 
hearts, is to deprive ourselves of advantages of 
dealing with them." * 

When a sinner is first seized with conviction, 
it is natural to suppose that he will abstain from 
many of his outward vices, though it be only for 
the quiet of his own mind. But it is not for us 
to administer comfort to him on this ground, as 
though, because he had broken off a few of his 
sins, he must needs have broken them off by 
righteousness, and either be in the road to life, 
or, at least, in a fair way of getting into it. It 
is one of the devices of Satan to alarm the sin- 
ner, and fill him with anxiety for the healing of 
outward eruptions of sin, while the inward part 
is overlooked, though it be nothing but sin. But 
we must not be aiding and abetting in these de- 
ceptions, nor administer any other relief than 
that which is held out in the Gospel to sinners, 
as sinners. And when we see such characters 
violating their promises, and falling anew into 
their old sins, (which is frequently the case,) 
instead of joining with them in lamenting the 
event, and assisting them in healing the wound 
by renewed efforts of watchfulness, it becomes 
us, rather, to probe the wound, to make use of 
that which has appeared, for the detecting of 
that which has not appeared, and so to point 
them to the blood that cleanses from all sin. 



On the Mortification of Sin. chap. vii. 
9* 



d by Google 



102 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

** Poor soul ! " says the eminent writer just quot- 
ed, "it is not thy sore finger, but thy hectic 
fever, from whence thy life is in danger ! " If 
the cause be removed, the effects will cease. If 
the spring be purified, the waters will be healed, 
and the barren ground become productive. 

I conclude with a few remarks on the order 
of addressing exhortations to the unconverted. 
There being an established order in the work- 
ings of the human mind, it has been made a 
question, whether the same ought not to be pre- 
served in addressing it. As for instance : we 
cannot be convinced of sin, without previous 
ideas of God and moral government ; nor of the 
need of a Savior, without being convinced of 
sin ; nor of the importance of salvation, without 
suitable conceptions of its evil nature. Hence, 
it may be supposed we ought not to teach any 
one of these truths till the preceding one is well 
understood ; or, at least, that we ought not to 
preach the Gospel without prefacing it by repre- 
senting the just requirements of the law, our 
state as sinners, and the impossibility of being 
justified by the works of our hands. Doubtless 
such representations are proper and necessary ; 
but not so necessary as to render it improper, on 
any occasion, to introduce the doctrine of the 
Gospel without them, and much less to refrain 
from teaching it till they are understood and felt. 
In this case, a minister must be reduced to the 
greatest perplexity, never knowing when it was 
safe to introduce the salvation of Christ, lest 
some of his hearers should not be sufficiently 
prepared to receive it. The truth is^ it is never 



Digitized by Google 



or ALL ACCEPTATION. 103 

unsafe to introduce this doctrine. There is such 
a connection in divine truth, that, if any one part 
of it reach the mind, and find a place in the 
heart, all others which may precede it in the 
order of things, will come in along with it. In 
receiving a doctrine, we receive not only what is 
expressed, but what is implied by it; and thus 
the doctrine of the cross may itsdfhe the means 
of convincing us of the evil of sin. An example 
of this lately occurred in the experience of a 
child of eleven years of age. Her minister, visit- 
ing her under a threatening affliction, and per- 
ceiving her to be unaffected with her sinful 
condition, suggested that ^* it was no small mat- 
ter that brought down the Lord of glory into 
this world, to suffer and die; there must be 
something very offensive in the nature of sin 
against a holy God.'' This remark appears to 
have sunk into her heart, and to have issued 
in a saving change.* Divine truths are like 
chaiuHshot : they go together, and we need not 
perplex ourselves which should enter first. If 
any one enter, it will draw the rest after it. 

Remarks nearly similar may be made concern- 
ing duties. Though the Scriptures know nothing 
of duties to be performed without faith, or which 
do not include or imply it, yet they do not wait 
for the sinner's being possessed of faith, before 
they exhort him to other spiritual exercises, such 
as seeking the Lord, loving him, serving him, 
&/C. ; nor need we lay any such restraints upon 

* Dying Exercises of Susannah Wright, of Weekly, 
oear Kettering. » 

Digitized by Google 



104 THE GOSPEL WORTHY 

ourselves. Such is the connection of the duties 
as well as the truths of religion, that, if one be 
truly complied with, we need not fear that the 
others will be wanting. If God be sought, loved, 
or served, we may be sure that Jesus is em- 
braced ; and, if Jesus be embraced, that sin is 
abhorred. Or, should things first occur to the 
mind in another order — ^should sin be the imme- 
diate object of our thoughts, — ^if this be abhorred, 
the God against whom it is committed must, at 
the same instant, be loved ; and the Savior, who 
was made a sacrifice to deliver us from it, embrac- 
ed. Let any part of truth or holiness but find 
place in the heart, and the rest will be with it. 
Those parts which, in the order of things, are 
required to precede it, will come in by way of 
implication; and those which follow it, will be 
produced by it. Thus the primitive preachers 
seem to have had none of that scrupulosity which 
appears in the discourses and writings of some 
modern preachers. Sometimes, they exhorted 
sinners to believe in Jesus ; but it was such belief 
as implied repentance for sin; sometimes, to 
repent, and be converted ; but it was such repent- 
ance and conversion as included believing ; and, 
sometimes, to labor for the meat that endureth 
unto everlasting life ; but it was such laboring as 
comprehended both repentance and faith. 

Some have inferred from the doctrine of justi- 
fication by faith, in opposition to the works of 
the law, that sinners ought not to be exhorted to 
any thing which comprises obedience to the law, 
either in heart or life, except we should preach 
the law to them for the purpose of conviction; 



d by Google 



. OF AUi ACCEPTATIOK. 105 

and this, lest we should be found directing them 
to the works of their own hands, as the ground 
of acceptance with God. From the same princi- 
ple, it has been concluded, that faith itself cannot 
include any holy disposition of the heart, because 
all holy dispositions contain obedience to the law. 
If this reasoning be just, all exhorting of sinners 
to things expressive of a holy exercise of heart, 
is either improper, or requires to be understood 
as merely preaching the law for the purpose of 
conviction ; as our Savior directed the young 
ruler to keep the commandments if he would enter 
into Hfe. Yet the Scriptures abound with such 
exhortations. Sinners are exhorted to seek God, 
to serve him with fear and joy, to forsake their 
wicked way, and return to him, to repent, and he 
converted. These are manifestly exercises of the 
heart, and addressed to the unconverted. Nei- 
ther are they to be understood as the requirements 
of a covenant of works. That covenant neither 
requires repentance, nor promises forgiveness. 
But sinners are directed to these things under a 
promise of mercy and abundant pardon. There 
is a wide difference between these addresses and 
the address of our Lord to the young ruler : that 
to which he was directed was the producing of a 
righteousness adequate to the demands of the law, 
which was naturally impossible; and our Lord's 
design was to show its impossibility, and thereby 
to convince him of the need of Gospel mercy : 
but that to which the above directions point, is 
not to any natural impossibility, but to the very 
way of mercy. The manner in which the primi- 
tive preachers guarded against self-righteousnesB 



d by Google 



106 THE GOSPEL WORTHT, &C. 

was very different from this. They were not 
afraid of exhorting either saints or sinners to holy 
exercises of heart, nor of connecting with them 
the promises of mercy. But, though they exhib- 
ited the promises of eternal life to any and every 
spiritual exercise, yet they never taught that it 
was on account of it; but of mere grace, 
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. 
The ground on which they took their stand was, 
Cursed is every one who continueth not in all things 
written in the book of the law to do them. From 
hence they inferred the impossibility of a sinner 
being justified, in any other way than for the 
sake of him who was made a curse for us; and, 
from hence, it clearly follows, that, whatever 
holiness any sinner may possess, before, in, or 
after believing, it is of no account whatever, as a 
ground of acceptance with God. If we incul- 
cate this doctrine, we need not fear exhorting 
sinners to holy exercises of heart, nor holding up 
the promises of mercy to all who thus return to 
God bv Jesus Christ 



THE END. 



d by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 



Digitized by Google 









Digitized by Google 







■Jjc^O', 



a "''-?>'o.. 



