I 


III  111: 


illll 

LIBRARY  OF  THE  THEOLOGICAL  SEMINARY 

PRINCETON,   N.  J. 

Presented  by 

Division.JD^.Zll  | 
Section\..S^..\.-^  ^ 

V/.2. 


Cbe  JItitiotated  Bible 


Cbe  Roly  Scriptures  Analysed 
and  Jinnotated 


BY 


A.    C.    GAEBELEIN 
Editor  of  "Our  Hope" 


Uoiume  11 
niosbua  to  Cbronicles 


PUBLICATION  OFFICE  "OUR  HOPE" 
456  Fourth  Avenue,  New  York 


PICKERING  &  INGLIS 

11  Both  well  Circus 
Glasgow,  Scotland 


NORTHWESTERN  BIBLE 

AND  TRACT  DEPOT 
Winnipeg,  Manitoba 


Copyright  1915,  by  A.  C.  Caehelein. 


JOSHUA 


CONTENTS 

,  Page 

Introduction j 

Division  of  Joshua g 

Analysis  and  Annotations 10 

Appendix gg 


The  Book  of  Joshua* 


Introduction. 

The  Book  of  Joshua  heads  in  the  Hebrew  arrangement 
of  the  Old  Testament  Scriptures,  that  division  which  is 
called  "the  former  Prophets,"  It  is  the  first  book  in  the 
Bible,  which  bears  in  its  title  the  name  of  a  person. 

Joshua  means  "Jehovah  is  Saviour";  the  Greek  name  for 
Joshua  is  Jesus.  In  our  study  of  the  previous  books,  begin- 
ning with  Exodus,  we  have  met  his  name  at  different  times 
and  have  learned  much  of  this  great  man  of  God.  He  was 
the  Son  of  Nun,  an  Ephraimite  (Num.  xiii:8),  grandson  of 
Elishama  (1  Chron.  vii:26-27).  In  Exodus  we  saw  him 
as  the  leader  of  Israel  against  Amalek.  He  is  mentioned 
as  Moses'  servant  and  attendant  (Ex.  xxiv:13;  xxxii:17-18); 
as  the  servant  of  Moses,  he  did  not  depart  out  of  the  taber- 
nacle (Ex.  xxxiiirll).  He  went  with  Moses,  up  into  the 
mount  of  God. 

We  meet  him  again  in  Num.  xi:27-29.  In  Num.  xiii:9, 
17  we  find  him  as  one  of  the  spies  sent  to  Canaan.  With 
Caleb  he  had  confidence  in  God  and  His  promises, and  bravely 
exhorted  the  people  to  trust  the  Lord  and  go  forward.  His 
name,  however,  is  not  given  at  all  during  the  thirty-eight 
years'  wandering  in  the  wilderness.  In  Deuteronomy  he  is 
divinely  pointed  out  as  Moses'  successor.  Moses  and  Joshua 
presented  themselves  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation, 
and  after  the  Lord  had  announced  the  approaching  death 
of  Moses,  Joshua  hears  the  charge  from  the  lips  of  the  passing 
leader  of  God's  people.  "Be  strong  and  of  a  good  courage; 
for  thou  shalt  bring  the  children  of  Israel  into  the  land, 
which  I  sware  unto  them;  and  I  will  be  with  thee"  (Deut. 
xxxi:23).  In  the  analysis  and  annotations  of  the  book 
itself  we  shall  have  abundant  occasion  to  study  the  character 
of  Joshua  more  fully. 


2  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

The  Authorship  of  the  Book. 

Jewish  tradition  makes  Joshua  the  author  of  the  book 
which  bears  his  name.  There  is  no  reason  why  this  should 
be  denied.  No  other  person  was  more  fitted  to  write  down 
the  great  events,  connected  with  the  entrance  of  Israel  into 
the  land,  than  Joshua.  As  Moses  by  inspiration  wrote  the 
account  of  how  the  Lord  brought  out  His  people  from 
Egypt,  so  Joshua  is  the  instrument,  divinely  chosen  and 
equipped,  to  give  the  story  of  how  the  Lord  brought  them 
in.  That  another  person  should  be  the  author  of  the  book 
of  Joshua  appears  unreasonable. 

The  modern  critics,  however,  deny  that  Joshua  had 
anything  whatever  to  do  with  the  book  as  we  possess  it. 
These  wise  men  have  discovered  what  equally  learned  and 
pious  men  of  passed  generations,  seemingly,  did  not  know. 
They  tell  us  that  the  date  of  the  composition  of  Joshua 
is  very  late  and  that  it  is  not  the  work  of  one  man  at 
all,  but  a  compilation  from  the  same  sources  that  have 
been  utilized  in  the  Pentateuch.  These  are  termed  Jeho- 
vist*  (J.);  Elohist  (E.);  Priestly  Code  (P.);  Deuteronom- 
ist  (D.)  and  still  another  Deuteronomist,  termed  D^.  This 
so-called  "Sciejice,"  higher  Criticism,  tries  to  show  which 
is  which.  And  to  these  must  be  added  a  number  of 
redactors,  revisors  and  editors,  who  all  had  a  hand  in  putting 
the  book  of  Joshua  into  the  shape  in  which  we  have  it  now. 
Well  has  it  been  said: 

"One  is  tempted  to  say  of  this  complicated  but  confidently 
maintained  scheme,  that  it  it  just  too  complete,  too  wonder- 
fully finished,  too  clever  by  half.  Allowing  most  cordially 
the  remarkable  ability  and  ingenuity  of  its  authors,  we  can 
hardly  be  expected  to  concede  to  them  the  power  of  taking 
to  pieces  a  book  of  such  vast  antiquity,  putting  it  in  a  modern 
mincing   machine,   dividing  it   among   so   many   supposed 


*The  letters  behind  the  names  are  used  by  the  Critic  to  indicate  these 
different  sources.  W.  H.  Bennett  in  1895  published  Joshua  in  a 
number  of  colors,  indicating  the  various  documents. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  3 

writers,   and   settling    the  exact    parts    of    it    written    by 
each!" 

And  now  we  must  mention  in  connection  with  the  author- 
ship of  the  Book  of  Joshua,  the  Hexateuch  theory. 

The  Hexateuch  Theory. 

The  word  "Hexateuch"  means  "six-fold  book."  The  five 
books  written  by  Moses,  Genesis  to  Deuteronomy,  are  called 
"Pentateuch,"  that  is,  "five-fold  book."  The  critics  claim 
that  the  book  of  Joshua  belongs  properly  to  the  five  books 
of  the  law,  thereby  adding  a  sixth  book.  This  combination 
they  call  the  Hexateuch.  In  itself  this  appears  harmless. 
However,  a  closer  examination  reveals  that  this  invention 
is  the  offspring  of  unbelief.  They  call  attention  to  the  fact 
that  throughout  the  Pentateuch  the  land  of  Canaan  and  its 
final  conquest  and  inheritance  by  Israel  is  mentioned  and 
presupposed.  The  following  passages  are  generally  pointed 
out:  Gen.  xiii:14-17;  xv:13-16;  xxvi:  3;  xxviii:13-15; 
Ex.  iii:8,  17;  xxxii:13;  xxxiii:l-3;  Num.  xiii:17;  xxvii:18-!23; 
Deut.  i:38;  iii:21;  xxxi:3-6.  Upon  those  passages  pre- 
dicting the  future  occupation  and  possession  of  Canaan, 
the  critics  base  the  claim  that  the  same  person  or  persons 
who  wrote  the  Pentateuch  must  have  also  written  the  book 
of  Joshua.  We  quote  the  exact  words  of  one  of  the  leading 
critics.  "It  is  self-evident  that  a  writer  who  has  commenced 
his  narrative  by  the  brilliant  promises  made  to  the  patri- 
archs, is  bound  to  conclude  it  by  showing  us  their  accom- 
plishment; to  say  the  least,  it  would  be  impossible  for  him 
to  pass  that  accomplishment  in  silence." 

Such  a  claim  involves  the  denial  of  the  possibility  of  pre- 
diction of  future  events.  This  denial  is  in  very  fact  the 
whole  foundation  of  the  destructive  criticism  of  the  Bible; 
and  such  a  denial  is  unbelief.  To  explain,  in  a  scientific 
way,  as  it  is  termed,  the  predictions  found  in  the  Bible, 
all  kinds  of  theories  have  been  invented.  These  theories 
attempt  to  explain  away  the  supernatural  in  the  Word  of 
God.    Thus  different  Isaiahs  have  been  invented,  because 


4  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

the  one  Isaiah,  who  wrote  the  book  which  bears  his  name, 
must  be  denied  an  account  of  such  a  marvellous  prediction 
as  the  mention  of  Cyrus,  the  King  unborn,  when  Isaiah 
lived.  Daniel  is  rejected  as  the  author  of  the  book  of  Daniel 
and  a  "pious  Jew"  (without  a  definite  name)  living  hundreds 
of  years  after  Daniel,  has  to  pose  as  the  author  of  that 
prophetic  book,  because,  according  to  the  critics,  Daniel 
could  not  have  foretold  the  events  recorded  in  his  prophecies. 
And  the  book  of  Joshua,  for  the  same  reason,  must  have  been 
composed  by  the  same  author  or  authors,  compiler  or  com- 
pilers of  the  Pentateuch.  Of  course  the  critics  deny  that 
Moses  had  anything  to  do  with  the  writing  of  the  first  five 
books  of  the  Bible.  If  they  were  to  assign  the  composition 
of  the  book  of  Joshua  to  Joshua,  and  the  Pentateuch  to 
Moses,  the  denial,  that  there  can  be  no  genuine  prediction, 
cx)uld  not  be  sustained.  And  this  supposed  "Rexateuch," 
the  six-fold  book,  is  relegated  to  a  very  late  period. 

But  all  this  Hexateuchal  invention  is  easily  disproven. 
The  Hebrews  always  reverenced  the  five  books,  universally 
ascribed  to  Moses.  They  look  upon  them,  and  rightly  so, 
as  standing  by  themselves  in  solitary  grandeur.  The 
Hebrew  Old  Testament  has  three  parts,  Thora  (Pentateuch), 
Neviim  (Joshua,  Judges,  Samuel,  Kings,  Isaiah  to  Malachi, 
except  Daniel)  and  Kethubim  (Psalms,  Proverbs,  Job,  Song 
of  Solomon,  Ruth,  Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes,  Esther, 
Daniel,  Ezra,  Nehemiah  and  Chronicles).  To  link  Joshua 
with  the  fi  t^e  books  of  Moses  is  a  thing  unknown  among  the 
Hebrews.  The  book  of  Joshua  was  never  bound  together 
with  the  Law.  No  manuscript  has  ever  been  found  which 
links  Joshua  with  the  Pentateuch.  The  Pentateuch  always 
stood  alone  by  itself  and  was  jealously  guarded  by  the 
Hebrews.  The  Critics  are  unable  to  furnish  any  proof  that 
originally  the  Pentateuch  and  Joshua  were  combined. 

We  state  another  fact,  which  overthrows  the  Hexateuch 
theory.  The  Pentateuch  is  the  model  of  the  entire  Bible. 
The  five-fold  division  can  be  traced  in  both  Testaments. 
The  Book  of  Psalms,  for  instance,  in  the  Hebrew  Bible  has 
five  divisions.     The  ancient  Hebrews  called  therefore  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  5 

Psalms  "the  Pentateuch  of  David."  Each  division  corre- 
sponds in  a  remarkable  degree  with  the  character  of  the 
different  books  written  by  Moses.  The  New  Testament 
also  has  five  parts  which  correspond  to  the  Pentateuch.* 
All  this  shows  that  the  Hexateuch  is  a  man-made  theory 
pure  and  simple.  It  is  invented  by  such,  who  refuse  to 
accept  the  supernatural  in  the  Bible. 

We  cannot  follow  the  different  other  objections  made 
against  the  book  of  Joshua,  as  being  written  by  Joshua. 
These  objections  are  easily  answered  and  we  need  not  to 
burden  our  readers  with  these  controversial  matters  which 
are  of  no  value  at  all.  We  shall,  however,  in  our  annota- 
tions, call  attention  to  some  questions  raised  by  the  Critics. 
The  study  of  the  book  itself  will  furnish  continued  evidence, 
that  it  is  written  by  inspiration. 

The  Historical  Events  and  their  Typical  Meaning. 

The  Book  of  Joshua  records  the  entrance  of  the  people 
Israel  into  the  promised  land,  how  this  entrance  was  effected 
by  the  power  of  God,  the  conflicts  which  arose  when  they 
came  into  the  land,  the  partial  conquest  and  the  division 
of  the  land  among  the  tribes.  All  this  is  fully  given  in 
our  analysis  and  followed  in  the  annotations  of  the  different 
chapters. 

There  is  no  other  historical  book  in  the  Bible  so  rich  in 
typical  foreshadowings  as  the  book  of  Joshua.  It  is  inex- 
haustible and  full  of  blessed  meaning  and  encouragement  to 
every  child  of  God,  because  these  historical  events  typify 
Christian  position.  Christian  experience  and  Christian  con- 
flict. We  shall  find  that  a  part  of  Joshua  illustrates  for  us 
in  a  typical  way  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  We  point 
out  a  few  of  the  leading  types;  the  annotations  will  give  the 
details  and  touch  upon  others  as  well. 

Joshua   is,    of    course,    a    type  of    Him   whose    earthly 


*Gospels    (Genesis);    Acts    (Exodus);    Pauline    Epistles    (Leviticus); 
General   Epistles   (Numbers);  Revelation   (Deuteronomy).^ 


6  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Name  he  bears.  He  is  the  first  one  in  the  Word  of  God 
who  bears  that  ever  blessed  Name.  As  already  stated 
Joshua  is  the  same  as  "Jesus,"  the  Greek  form  for  Joshua. 
Joshua  therefore  typifies  Christ.  The  earthly  people 
Israel  typifyies  the  heavenly  peoples  and  the  earthly  posses- 
sion promised  and  given  to  Israel  is  the  type  of  the  heavenly 
possession  given  to  His  heavenly  people.  However,  Canaan 
is  not  the  type  of  heaven,  the  place  into  which  the  believer 
enters  in  the  future.  Canaan  could  not  be  the  type  of  heaven 
for  two  reasons.  The  first  is,  Israel's  conflict  when  they 
came  into  the  land.  They  had  to  fight  their  way  through 
the  land.  Their  battles,  so  to  speak,  began  after  they  had 
crossed  Jordan.  They  got  into  the  land  without  even  lift- 
ing a  single  sword  or  spear.  But  no  sooner  were  they  in 
the  land,  their  fighting  began.  This  can  never  be  said 
of  heaven.  When  we  reach  the  Father's  house  all  conflicts 
will  be  forever  ended  and  Satan  will  be  completely  bruised 
under  our  feet. 

The  second  reason,  why  Canaan  cannot  mean  heaven  is, 
because  Israel  could  be  driven  out  of  the  land.  This  is  not 
possible  with  heaven.  It  is  impossible  that  the  place  into 
which  God's  Grace  brings  us  could  ever  be  lost  to  a  child  of 
God.  Canaan  is  the  type  of  the  heavenly  position  and 
possession  which  the  believer  has  in  Christ  Jesus.  It  corre- 
sponds to  that  which  in  Ephesians  is  called  "in  heavenly 
places,"  or  as  better  rendered  "in  the  heavenly."  It  is  the 
heavenly  sphere,  the  heavenly,  spiritual  blessings  given  to 
us  in  Christ  Jesus. 

Jordan  is  not  the  type  of  the  death  of  the  believer,  but 
Jordan  typifies  in  Joshua  the  death  of  Christ,  by  which 
we  are  separated  unto  this  blessed  heavenly  possession. 
We  are  brought  into  it  by  the  death  of  Christ,  as  Israel  was 
brought  into  Canaan  through  the  passage  of  Jordan. 

The  passage  of  Jordan,  the  erection  of  the  memorial 
stones,  the  events  at  Gilgal,  all  find  a  most  blessed  typical 
application,  illustrating  our  redemption  in  Christ  as  well 
as  our  privileges  and  responsibilities. 

The  enemies  of  Israel,  the  Canaanites,    were    usurpers 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  7 

of  a  land  which  did  not  belong  to  them.  They  were  steeped 
in  wickedness.  Immoralities  of  the  most  abominable  nature 
were  connected  with  their  idolatries.  They  practised 
sorcery,  divinations;  they  asked  the  dead  and  had  familiar 
spirits.  Satan  and  his  demons  had  complete  control  over 
them.  They  are  the  types  of  the  "wicked  spirits"  with 
which  a  heavenly  people  wage  their  warfare.  See  Ephesians 
vi:10-13.  All  these  typical  applications  we  shall  make  in 
the  annotations. 

The  division  of  the  land  among  the  tribes  has  its  many 
typical  lessons  for  us,  who  are  called  to  possess  and  enjoy 
our  heavenly  possession. 

The  Dispensational  Aspect. 

The  Book  of  Joshua  has  also  a  marked  dispensational 
aspect.  Israel  is  yet  to  possess  the  promised  land  in  the 
dimensions  in  which  they  never  possessed  it.  God  brought 
them  in  under  Joshua,  the  second  One.  The  first  One, 
Moses,  could  not  bring  them  in.  When  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  appears  the  second  time,  He  will  gather  His  people 
from  the  wilderness  of  the  nations  and  will  give  them  the 
land  and  they  shall  occupy  their  full  inheritance. 

The  fall  of  Jericho,  the  overthrow  of  Israel's  enemies, 
the  battle  at  Gibeon,  the  division  of  the  land,  the  rest, 
which  followed,  all  have  their  striking  and  most  interesting 
dispensational  meaning. 

May  it  please  God  to  make  the  study  of  the  Book  of  Joshua 
a  blessing  to  the  hearts  of  His  people. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


The  Division  of  the  Book  of  Joshua. 

The  division  of  the  Book  of  Joshua  is  not  difficult  to  make. 
The  opening  chapters  are  taken  up  with  a  description  of 
the  entrance  of  the  people  into  the  promised  land  and  the 
conflicts  with  the  enemies.  This  is  followed  by  the  record 
of  the  division  of  the  land  among  the  tribes.  The  book 
closes  with  the  last  words  of  Joshua,  as  Deuteronomy 
closed  with  the  final  words  of  Moses.  The  death  and 
burial  of  Joshua  and  a  few  other  historical  statements  are 
added  to  the  book.  These,  of  course,  were  not  written 
by  Joshua. 

I.  THE  ENTRANCE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  INTO  CANAAN 
AND  THE  CONFLICTS.     Chapters  i-xii. 

L  The  Entrance  Commanded  and  Success  Promised* 
Chapter  i. 

2.  The  Spies  and  Rahab's  Faith.    Chapter  ii. 

3.  The  Passage  of  Jordan.    Chapter  iii. 

4.  The  Memorial  Stones.    Chapter  iv. 

5.  At  Gilgal.     Chapter  v. 

6.  The  Fall  of  Jericho.    Chapter  vi. 

7.  Achan's  Sin  and  Israel's  Defeat.    Chapter  vii. 

8.  The  Overthrow  of  Ai.     Chapter  \'iii. 

9.  The  Gibeonites  and  their  Victory.    Chapter  ix. 
10.  The  Victorious  Conquest.    Chapters  x-xii. 

n.  THE  DIVISION  OF  THE  LAND.    Chapters  xiii-xxi. 

1 .  Instructions  Given ;  the  Two  and  a  Half  Tribes.  Chap;^ 
ter  xiii. 

2.  Caleb's  Request  and  Inheritance.    Chapter  xiv. 

3.  The  Portion  of  Judab.    Chapter  xv. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  9 

4.  The  Portion  of  Ephraim.    Chapter  xvi. 

5.  The  Portion  of  Manasseh.    Chapter  xvii. 

6.  The  Portion  of  the  Rest  of  the  Tribes.    Chapters  xviii- 
xix. 

7.  The  Cities  of  Refuge.    Chapter  xx. 

8.  The  Portion  of  the  Levites.    Chapter  xxi. 

III.  THE   FINAL   WORDS   OF    JOSHUA.     THE    EPI- 
LOGUE. 

1.  The  Two  and  a  Half  Tribes.    Chapter  xxii. 

2.  Joshua's  Two  Addresses.    Chapter  xxiii-xxiv:28. 

3.  The  Epilogue,     Chapter  xxiv:29-33. 


10  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 


Analysis  and  Annotations* 

I.    The  Entrance  of  the  People  into  Can- 
aan; the  Conflicts. 

Chapters  i-xii 

1.  The    Entrance    Commanded    and    Success    Promised. 

CHAPTER  I. 

1.  The  Lord  Speaks  to  Joshua.     Vs.  1-9. 

2.  Joshua  Speaks  to  the  People.     Vs.  10-15. 
S.     The   Answer  of  the  People.     Vs.    16- 18. 

The  little  word  "now"  with  which  this  book  begins  is 
in  the  Hebrew  "and."  It  links  the  book  with  Deuteronomy 
and  the  other  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  It  also  shows  that 
the  previous  books  were  in  existence,  for  the  mention  of 
Moses,  his  death,  and  Joshua,  the  minister  of  Moses,  pre- 
supposes that  the  reader  knows  all  about  them.  But  there 
is  a  stronger  evidence  in  the  eighth  verse  of  the  chapter,  that 
the  Pentateuch  was  then  completely  written.  The  term 
"This  book  of  the  law"  applies  to  the  five  books  written 
by  Moses. 

Joshua  begins  with  the  statement  of  Moses'  death  and 
ends  with  the  record  of  Joshua's  death.  The  book  which 
follows,  the  book  of  Judges,  begins  with  the  statement 
of  Joshua's  death,  Moses  and  Joshua  are  closely  linked 
together.  Both  are  beautiful  types  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Moses,  the  servant,  is  the  type  of  Christ,  the 
perfect  servant  of  God.  Joshua  typifies  Christ  in  and 
among  His  people  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  11 

He  leads  His  people  victoriously  into  the  promised  pos- 
session. Moses'  death  also  typifies  Christ.  The  people 
could  not  enter  the  land  as  long  as  this  servant  of  God  was 
living.  After  his  death  the  land  could  be  possessed.  So 
after  the  death  of  Christ  the  heavenly  inheritance  is  thrown 
open. 

The  Lord  mentions  once  more  the  death  of  His  servant. 
"Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of  His  Saints" 
(Ps.  cxvi:12).  After  that  the  command  to  enter  the  land 
is  given.  The  land  promised  to  the  seed  of  Abraham  is 
God's  gift.  "The  land  which  I  do  give  unto  them."  They 
beheld  that  land  across  the  river  with  its  beautiful  hills  and 
mountains  and  its  fertile  valleys.  The  third  verse  contains 
a  condition.  "Every  place  that  the  sole  of  your  feet  shall 
tread  upon,  that  have  I  given  unto  you,  as  I  said  unto 
Moses."  They  had  to  appropriate  what  God  had  given 
and  as  they  appropriated  it,  they  would  possess  and  enjoy 
the  land.  If  they  made  it  their  own  by  putting  their  feet 
upon  the  land,  whether  mountain  or  valley,  it  became 
theirs  in  reality.  This  required  energy.  As  stated  in  our 
introduction,  Canaan  typifies  the  heavenly  places  mentioned 
in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians.  We  are  blessed  in  Christ 
with  every  spiritual  blessing  in  the  heavenly  places  (Ephes. 
i:3).  All  is  the  gift  of  the  Grace  of  God.  Unsearchable 
riches,  far  greater  than  that  land,  even  in  its  widest  di- 
mensions, belong  to  us.  The  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ 
are  by  the  death  of  Christ  put  on  our  side.  We  must  take 
possession  in  the  energy  of  faith,  as  Israel  had  to  plant  their 
feet  upon  the  territory  and  conquer  it.  If  we  are  appre- 
hended of  Jesus  Christ,  we  also  must  apprehend.  "I  follow 
after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  I  am  also 
apprehended  of  Jesus  Christ"  (Phil.  iii:12).  Israel  failed  in 
the  wilderness  and  Israel  failed  in  the  possession  of  the 
land.  And  greater  still  is  our  failure  in  not  claiming  in 
faith  our  possessions  in  Christ. 

The  words  the  Lord  addressed  to  Joshua  are  extremely 
precious.  "I  will  be  with  thee,"  stands  first.  He  was  with 
Joshua  and  gave  him  the  promise  "There  shall  not  any  man 


12  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

be  able  to  stand  before  thee  all  the  days  of  thy  life."  And 
this  is  true  of  us.  He  is  with  us,  indwelling  us;  His  Spirit 
is  with  us  and  His  power  on  our  side.  God  is  for  us;  who  can 
be  against  us?  "I  will  not  fail  thee,  nor  forsake  thee."  He 
never  fails  His  people.  Divine  strength  and  power  are  on 
our  side.  In  the  midst  of  the  conflict  He  will  never  forsake 
His  people. 

After  these  assuring  and  encouraging  words  come  the 
exhortations  to  obedience.  "Be  strong  and  very  coura- 
geous," Notice  the  courage  is  linked  with  the  law  (the  Word 
of  God)  and  obedience  to  it,  as  well  as  meditation  in  it  day 
and  night.  Joshua  was  put  in  dependence  on  the  written 
Word.  So  are  we.  Spiritual  growth  and  enjoyment  are 
impossible  apart  from  meditation  in  the  Word  and  obedience 
to  it.  The  Word  and  obedience  to  it,  separates  us,  and  keeps 
us  separated.  And  we  need  courage  to  obey.  It  requires 
courage  in  an  ungodly  age,  a  bhnded  world  with  its  ej'e- 
blinding  god  (Satan)  "to  observe  to  do  according  to  all  that 
is  written,"  It  becomes  more  difficult  as  the  present  age 
draws  to  its  close,  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  to  appro- 
priate in  faith  the  spiritual  blessings,  to  stand  and  withstand 
the  wiles  of  the  devil.  But  if  we  are  obedient  His  strength 
will  sustain  us  and  give  us  victory.  We  constantly  need  the 
courage  of  faith,  which  looks  to  God  and  which  is  expressed 
by  obedience  to  His  Word.  "God's  strength  is  employed 
in  helping  us  in  the  paths  of  God's  will,  not  out  of  it. 
Then  no  matter  where  we  go,  what  the  difficulties 
are,  how  long  the  journey  seems,  He  makes  our  way  pros- 
perous." 

Joshua  addressed  the  officers  of  the  people  and  especially 
the  Reubenites,  Gadites  and  half  the  tribe  of  Manasseh. 
They  had  made  their  choice  and  had  found  rest  on  this 
side  of  Jordan.  But  they  were  not  to  be  exempt  from  the 
approaching  warfare;  they  are  commanded  to  help  their 
brethren  by  passing  with  them  over  Jordan.  Then  after 
their  brethren  had  found  rest,  they  were  to  return  to  their 
rest.  They  could  not  escape  the  conflict,  though  they 
had  no  reward  in  the  land  itself. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA  13 

2.  The  Spies  and  Rahab's  Faith. 

CHAPTER  II. 

1.  The  Spies  Sent  Forth.     Vs.  1. 

2.  Rahab's  Faith  and  Works.     Vs.  2-14. 

3.  The  Escape  of  the  Spies  and  Assurance  Given.     Vs.  15-21. 

4.  The  Return  of  the  Spies.     Vs.  22-24. 

The  historical  account  needs  not  to  be  re-stated.  Joshua, 
who  was  one  of  the  spies  sent  out  by  Moses,  now  sends 
two  spies  to  view  the  land,  even  Jericho.  Jericho  was  the 
great  stronghold  of  the  enemy,  surrounded  by  high  walls. 
Jericho*  means  "fragrance"  and  is  a  type  of  the  world.  It 
is  situated  near  Jordan,  the  river  which  typifies  death  and 
judgment.  The  King  of  Jericho  is  the  type  of  Satan,  the 
god  of  this  age.  The  city  was  grossly  immoral,  so  that  it 
is  not  strange  that  the  spies  came  to  the  house  of  an  harlot. 
Some  have  tried  to  change  her  character  by  making  her  to 
be  an  inn-keeper.  But  it  cannot  be  done  on  account  of  the 
word  used  in  the  record  here  and  also  in  the  New  Testament. 
Why  should  even  such  an  attempt  be  made?  Rahab,  the 
harlot,  is  a  beautiful  type  of  the  power  of  the  Gospel  of  Grace. 
"By  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  perished  not  with  them  that 
believed  not,  when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  peace" 
(Heb.  xi:31).  Her  faith  she  witnessed  to  by  works.  "Like- 
wise also  was  not  Rahab  the  harlot  justified  by  works,  when 
she  had  received  the  messengers,  and  had  sent  them  out 
another  way?"  (James  ii:25),  Rahab  belonged  to  the 
doomed  race,  the  race  against  which  the  curse  had  been 
pronounced.  In  the  doomed  city  she  practised  her  vile 
occupation.  But  she  heard  the  report  and  she  believed. 
She  confessed  her  faith  in  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  heaven 
above  and  of  tlie  earth  beneath.     She  had  a  reason  for  this 


*It  is  interesting  to  note  that  in  the  Hebrew  Jericho  differs  in  its 
spelling  in  Joshua  from  that  in  Numbers.  This  proves  certainly  a 
different  authorship. 


14  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

faith,  for  she  said,  "We  have  heard  how  the  Lord  dried 
up  the  water  of  the  Red  Sea  for  you,  when  ye  came  out 
of  Egypt"  (Verse  10).  She  prayed  for  mercy  for  herself 
and  her  father's  house.  She  knew  judgment  would  overtake 
Jericho,  that  she  was  a  sinner  and  needed  salvation.  She 
believed  in  Jehovah  and  believed,  that  while  He  is  a  holy  God, 
who  had  dealt  in  judgment  with  Egypt,  that  He  is  also  merci- 
ful. She  trusted  in  that  mercy  and  appealed  to  it  in  her 
prayer.  She  claims  assurance  of  salvation  and  that  of 
her  house  and  she  received  it  in  positive  terms. 

The  scarlet-line  by  which  the  spies  escaped  is  bound  by 
herself  in  the  window.  It  was  a  token  to  her  and  a  sign 
to  the  coming  executioners  of  judgment,  when  Jericho  fell. 
They  saw  that  scarlet -line;  but  she  was  not  told  to  look  upon 
it.  How  scarlet  speaks  of  the  blood  needs  hardly  to  be 
mentioned.  It  is  the  type  of  being  sheltered  by  the  blood. 
"When  I  shall  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you,"  was 
spoken  to  Israel,  behind  the  blood-sprinkled  door  posts. 
The  scarlet-line  has  the  same  meaning.  And  we  must  not 
forget  that  two  living  witnesses  gave  her  the  assurance  of 
Salvation.  Thus  we  have  our  assurance  in  Him,  who  died 
for  our  sins  and  who  was  raised  on  account  of  our  justification. 

By  hiding  the  spies  and  lying  to  the  King  of  Jericho,  she 
shows  her  faith  and  the  weakness  of  it.  To  her  was  also 
given  a  place  of  honor  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment as  one  of  the  ancestors  of  Him  who,  according  to  the 
flesh,  is  the  Son  of  David. 

Dispensationally  the  application  is  equally  interesting. 
When  Israel  is  about  to  be  restored  to  their  land,  a 
witness  is  sounded  forth  once  more,  the  preaching  of  the 
Gospel  of  the  Kingdom  '  (Matt.  xxiv:14).  Before  the 
judgments  of  the  Lord  are  executed  in  the  world,  those 
will  be  saved  during  the  end  of  the  age  who,  like 
Rahab,  hear  and  believe  this  last  Kingdom  message. 
They  will  do  good  to  the  Jewish  messengers  of  this  final 
testimony,  before  the  coming  of  the  Lord  in  power  and  in 
glory,  as  Rahab  did  good  to  the  spies,  the  messengers  of 
Joshua.     They  are  those  to  whom  the  Lord  will  say,  "What 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  15 

ye  have  done  to  the  least  of  these,  my  brethren,  that 
have  ye  done  unto  me."  Rahab  was  saved  and  remained 
in  the  land  to  enjoy  the  earthly  blessings  with  Israel.  So 
the  Gentiles,  who  hear  and  believe  the  last  message,  who 
have  done  good  to  the  messengers  of  the  King,  the  Lord's 
brethren,  will  be  saved  from  the  wrath  to  come.  For  a 
more  complete  unfolding  of  this  interesting  theme,  we 
refer  the  reader  to  the  exposition  of  the  Olivet  discourse  in 
the  Gospel  of  Matthew.* 


3.  The  Passage  of  Jordan. 

CHAPTER  III. 

1.  The  Ark  of  Jehovah  Going  Before.     Vs.  1-6. 

2.  Jehovah's  Words  to  Joshua.     Vs.  7-8. 

3.  Joshua's  Words  to  the  People.     Vs.  9-13. 

4.  The  Passage  Accomplished.     Vs.  14-17. 

The  River  Jordan  divided  the  people  from  the  promised 
land.  To  be  in  the  land  Jordan  had  to  be  crossed.  Jordan, 
overflowing  all  its  banks  at  that  time  (verse  15),  rolled  its 
dark  waters  between  them  and  their  God-given  possession. 
Only  the  power  of  God  could  bring  them  through  those  dark 
waters.  It  was  a  miracle  which  took  place,  when  a  way 
was  opened  and  "the  waters  which  came  down  from  above 
stood  and  rose  up  upon  an  heap  .  .  .  and  those  that 
came  down  toward  the  sea  of  the  plain,  even  the  salt-sea, 
failed  and  were  cut  off"  (verse  16).  Unbelief  has  always 
branded  this  miracle  as  a  legend.  The  destructive  Criticism 
has  done  the  same.  This  is  the  second  time  the  Lord  made 
a  way  for  His  people  through  the  waters.  He  made  first  a 
way  for  them  through  the  Red  Sea,  by  which  Israel  was 
separated  from  Egypt  and  from  their  enemies.     The  passage 


*Gospei  of  Matthew,  An  Exposition.     Two  volumes  in  one.     Price 
$1.50. 


16  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

of  Jordan  separated  them  from  the  wilderness  and  brought 
them  into  the  land.* 

Both,  the  Red  Sea  and  Jordan,  are  types  of  the  death  of 
Christ  in  its  blessed  results  for  His  people.  The  Red  Sea 
experience  typifies  the  fact  that  the  believer,  through  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  is  dead  to 
^  sin  and  dead  to  the  law.  The  passage  through  Jordan  is 
Hhe  type  of  the  fact,  that  the  death  and  resurrection  of 
Christ  brings  us  into  the  heavenly  places;  we  are  seated 
together  in  Christ  in  heavenly  places. 

And  how  was  the  passage  accomplished?  We  read  now 
nothing  more  of  the  movement  of  the  pillar  of  cloud  and 
of  fire,  so  prominent  at  the  Red  Sea  and  during  the 
wilderness  journey.  The  ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord 
appears  in  the  foreground  to  lead  the  way  and  make  a  way 
through  the  overflowing  waters.  Taken  up  by  the  priests, 
carried  towards  the  river,  as  soon  as  the  priests  touched 
the  brim  of  it,  the  waters  were  stemmed  back,  till  all  the 
people  had  passed  over  on  dry  ground.  The  ark  with  the 
blood-sprinkled  mercy-seat  is  the  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  It  is  the  type  of  our  Lord  going  into  the  deep 
waters  of  death  to  make  a  way  through  them  for  His  people. 

(The  distance  between  the  ark  and  the  people  was  to  be  two 
thousand  cubits.  It  illustrates  the  fact  that  our  Lord  had 
|to  do  this  work  alone.  Peter  declared  that  he  would  go 
Svith  Hira  into  death,  but  the  Lord  told  him,  "Thou  canst 
not  follow  Me  now,  but  thou  shalt  follow  Me  hereafter." 
There  was  none  with  Him,  when  He  made  the  way,  but  He 
takes  all  His  people  through  death  into  resurrection  life 
and  glory. 

In  the  midst  of  Jordan,  the  mighty  waters  standing  as  a 
heap  above,  the  priests  that  bare  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 
the  Lord  stood  firm  on  dry  ground,  until  all  the  people  were 
passed  clean  over  Jordan.    It  was  a  dry  way,  not  a  drop 


*Some  day  the  Lord  will  make  a  way  for  His  people  through  the  air 
to  leave  this  world  behind  aud  enter  into  His  own  Presence  (1  Thess. 
iv:17). 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  17 

of  the  dark,  muddy  waters  were  left.  It  shows  the  truth, 
that  the  power  of  death  (typified  by  the  waters  of  Jordan) 
is  completely  gone;  nothing  is  left  of  it.  The  work  is  accom- 
plished for  all  His  people.  Not  one  is  left  behind;  the 
weakest  and  the  smallest  pass  over.  What  effect  it  must 
have  had  upon  the  enemies,  and  especially  upon  Jericho! 
Jericho  was  but  five  miles  away.  No  doubt  they  watched 
the  hosts  of  Israel  before  the  passage.  They  felt  secure 
on  account  of  the  mighty  waters  of  Jordan,  which  seemed 
to  bar  the  Israelitish  invasion.  How  panic-stricken  they 
must  have  become  when  they  saw  or  heard  of  the  great 
miracle  and  that  God's  people  had  reached  the  other  shore! 
But  one  person  was  calm  in  Jericho.  One  enjoyed  peace 
and  rest  and  did  not  fear.  The  one  from  whose  window 
there  streamed  the  scarlet-line. 


4.  The  Memorial  Stones. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  The  First  Memorial.     Vs.  1-8. 

2.  The  Second  Memorial.     Vs.  9. 

3.  The  Return  of  the  Priests  with  the  Ark.     Vs.  10-18, 

4.  The  Encampment  at  Gilgal.     Vs.  19-24. 

Jehovah  commanded  that  the  great  event  should  be 
remembered  by  a  memorial.  From  the  river-bed,  where 
the  priest's  feet  stood  firm,  twelve  men,  one  from  each  tribe, 
were  to  carry  twelve  stones  and  leave  them  at  the  first 
lodging  place  in  the  land,  that  is,  at  Gilgal.  These  memorial 
stones  were  to  tell  subsequent  generations  the  story  of 
God's  faithfulness  and  power  in  bringing  His  people  through 
Jordan  into  the  land.  Another  memorial  of  twelve  stones 
was  set  up  by  Joshua  in  the  midst  of  the  river,  where  the 
priests  stood  with  the  ark.  This  whole  record  has  been 
much  questioned  by  the  Critics;  it  has  been  charged 
that  there  are  two  different  accounts.  Prof.  George  Adam 
Smith  states:    "For  instance,  in  the  story  of  the  crossing  of 


18  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Jordan,  as  told  in  Joshua  iii  and  iv,  there  are  two  accounts 
of  the  monument  set  up  to  commemorate  the  passage.  One 
of  them  builds  it  at  Gilgal  on  the  west  bank  with  stones 
taken  from  the  river-bed  by  the  people;  the  other  builds 
it  in  the  bed  of  the  river  with  twelve  stones  set  there  by 
Joshua.*"  Such  criticism  reveals  the  astonishing  weakness 
of  that  entire  school.  Why  should  the  ninth  verse  of  the 
fourth  chapter  be  looked  upon  as  an  interpolation,  or  as 
another  account  of  one  transaction?  There  is  nothing  in 
the  text  to  warrant  such  a  statement.  The  fact  is  there  are 
two  transactions.  The  one  by  the  twelve  men,  who  take 
the  twelve  stones  and  set  them  up  at  Gilgal.  The  other 
by  Joshua,  who  puts  twelve  stones  in  the  river-bed. 

But  if  these  Critics  but  knew  a  little  more  of  the  spiritual 
and  typical  significance  of  all  these  events  and  transactions, 
they  would  soon  learn  better.  What  do  these  two  memorials 
mean?  They  tell  out  the  story  what  God  has  done  for 
His  people.  In  the  midst  of  Jordan  the  children  of  Israel 
could  see  the  pile  of  twelve  stones  Joshua  had  put  there  as  a 
memorial.  As  they  looked  upon  them  and  the  waters 
rushing  about  them,  they  remembered  that  where  these 
stones  are,  there  the  ark  halted  and  the  waters  were  cut  off 
and  His  people  passed  over. 

The  typical  application  is  not  hard  to  make.  The  twelve 
stones  in  the  river-bed  tell  out  the  story  of  the  death  of 
Christ  and  our  death  with  Him.  We  are  dead  to  sin  and 
to  the  law  as  well  as  crucified  unto  the  world.  We  must, 
therefore,  reckon  ourselves  dead  unto  sin. 

The  other  memorial  was  erected  at  Gilgal.  As  they 
looked  upon  these  stones  and  their  children  asked  them, 
"What  mean  these  stones?"  they  could  point  to  them  and 
say,  as  these  stones  were  taken  out  of  Jordan  on  the  dry 
land,  so  had  they  been  brought  out  of  Jordan  into  this  land 
of  promise.  This  memorial  is  the  type  of  the  fact  "that  we 
are  alive  unto  God  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."    We  are  a  new 


*The  same  view  is  held  by  Friedrich  Bleek;  no  doubt  Prof.  G.  A. 
Smith  has  it  from  him. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  19 

creation  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  old  things  are  passed  away, 
behold  all  things  are  become  new.  It  is  the  memorial 
which  tells  us,  that  we  are  raised  up  and  seated  in  Christ 
in  the  heavenly  places.  These  two  great  truths  seen  in 
this  double  memorial  must  ever  be  remembered  by  God's 
people,  as  Israel  was  charged  to  remember  the  passing  over 
Jordan  and  the  bringing  into  the  land. 

5.  At  Gilgal. 

CHAPTER  V. 

1.  The  Terrified  Enemies.     V,  1. 

2.  Circumcision  Commanded  and  Executed.     Vs.  2-9. 
S.     The  Passover  Kept.     V.  10.   • 

4.  The  Old  Corn  of  the  Land.     Vs.  11-12. 

5.  The  Captain  of  Jehovah's  Host.     Vs.  13-15. 

The  events  at  Gilgal  are  of  much  interest.  Jehovah 
had  brought  His  people  over  Jordan.  All  His  promises  were 
kept.  He  had  promised  to  deliver  them  out  of  Egypt  and 
to  bring  them  into  the  land  of  Canaan.  All  is  now  accom- 
plished. The  wilderness  is  behind  them  and  they  face 
the  marvellous  land  with  its  riches  and  resources,  the  land 
flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  The  advance  and  the  con- 
quest is  next  in  order.  At  the  Red  Sea  their  enemies  were 
slain  by  the  power  of  God,  but  now,  after  the  power  of  God 
had  brought  them  into  the  land,  the  real  conflict  begins. 

Gilgal,  the  new  ground  gained  and  occupied  by  the  people 
brought  over  Jordan,  is  the  type  of  the  resurrection-ground 
upon  which  our  feet  have  been  planted.  That  we  are  risen 
with  Christ  and  seated  in  Him  in  the  heavenly  places  must  be 
constantly  remembered,  as  Israel  could  never  forget  at 
Gilgal  that  they  had  been  brought  over  Jordan  into  the 
land.     The  memorial  stones  served  as  a  constant  reminder. 

But  before  they  could  advance  a  number  of  things  took 
place.  First  we  read  of  the  fear  which  took  hold  on  the 
Kings  of  the  Canaanites.  Their  hearts  melted.  They 
'vcre  the  instruments  of  Satan  under  whose  control  they 


20  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

were;  their  fear  denotes  Satan's  fear.  He  knew  the  power 
of  Jehovah,  which  had  brought  them  into  the  land.  The 
enemy  is  defeated  by  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  Lord. 
Through  death  He  has  annulled  him,  who  has  the  power  of 
death,  that  is  the  devil.  Being  in  Christ,  risen  with  Christ 
and  seated  in  Him  in  the  heavenly  places,  we  can  look  upon 
the  enemy  as  conquered.  Yet  it  is  only  in  the  Lord  and  in 
the  power  of  His  might  that  we  are  strong.  Apart  from 
Him  we  become  the  easy  prey  of  our  enemy.  What  an 
encouragement  to  Israel  it  must  have  been,  when  they 
learned,  as  no  doubt  they  did,  that  the  mighty  enemies,  who 
had  inspired  such  terror  to  their  fathers  over  thirty-eight 
years  ago,  were  now  trembling.  Israel's  fear  was  gone, 
because  God's  power  was  on  their  side.  What  confidence 
we  should  have  when  we  remember  that  "we  are  translated 
from  the  power  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of 
His  love!"  Victory  is  on  our  side.  All  we  need  to  do  is  to 
put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  to  resist  the  devil  and  he  will 
flee  from  us. 

Circumcision  is  next  commajided  by  Jehovah.  "At  that 
time  the  Lord  said  unto  Joshua,  Make  thee  sharp  knives 
and  circumcise  again  the  children  of  Israel  the  second  time." 
This  command  was  carried  out  at  once  and  the  reproach  of 
Egypt  was  rolled  away.  Therefore  the  place  was  called 
Gilgal,  which  means  "Rolling."  The  circumcision  was 
carried  out  on  all  the  males,  who  were  born  in  the  wilderness 
(verses  5  and  7).  The  rite  of  such  deep  meaning  had  been 
neglected.  No  doubt  they  had  plenty  of  excuses  for  that 
during  the  wilderness  journey.  No  command  was  given 
to  circumcise  during  the  thirty-eight  years'  wandering. 
It  was  suspended;  it  may  have  been  a  punishment  for  their 
unbelief.  But  now  all  is  changed.  They  arc  in  the  land. 
The  Passover,  the  great  memorial  feast,  was  about  to  be 
kept.  The  uncircumcised  could  not  eat  the  passover.  The 
reproach  of  Egypt,  for  as  uncircumcised  they  were  the  same 
as  in  bondage  in  Egypt,  in  no  covenant  with  Jehovah,  is 
rolled  away.  The  visible  token  of  belonging  to  Jehovah  was 
now  borne  by  every  male  in  the  camp. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  ^  21 

Joshua  exhibited  the  courage  of  faith  in  circumcising 
the  thousands  of  IsraeHtes  at  that  time.  His  action  has 
been  called  "most  unmilitary."  He  put  the  vast  majority 
of  his  fighting  men  into  an  unfit  condition.  What  if  these 
Canaanites  should  have  fallen  upon  the  settlers  in  their 
territory?  May  Joshua  not  have  remembered  the  bastardly 
crime  of  the  sons  of  Jacob?  See  Genesis  xxxiv:24-26. 
He  knew  no  fear;  his  first  concern  was  to  yield  obedience  to 
God.     They  tarried  for  several  weeks  at  Gilgal. 

What  are  the  typical  lessons  of  all  this?  Circumcision 
stands  for  the  carrying  out  of  the  sentence  of  death  to  the 
flesh.  The  death  of  Christ  is  for  His  people  a  circumcision. 
"In  whom  also  ye  are  circumcised  with  the  circumcision 
made  without  hands,  in  putting  off  the  body  of  the  flesh  by 
the  circumcision  of  Christ"  (Col.  ii:ll).  But  this  fact  that 
we  are  dead  to  sin  by  the  circumcision,  the  death  of  Christ 
must  be  carried  out  practically.  The  sharp  knife  has  to 
be  applied  to  the  flesh  and  the  things  of  the  flesh.  The 
members,  which  are  on  earth,  must  be  mortified,  which 
means,  put  into  the  place  of  death,  where  the  death  of 
Christ  has  put  them.  If  it  is  not  done  the  reproach  of 
Egypt  will  rest  upon  His  people  and  they  are  unfit  to  enjoy 
their  heavenly  possession,  and  unable  to  advance  in  the 
things  of  Christ. 

Gilgal,  therefore,  stands  for  the  judgment  of  self.  This 
is  the  place  of  our  strength  and  power.  Israel  had  always 
to  return  to  Gilgal;  when  they  did  not  they  were  defeated. 
Defeat,  failure  in  our  walk,  always  drives  us  back  to  self- 
judgment  and  humiliation.  Victory  and  blessing  may  keep 
us  from  it;  and  that  is  our  real  spiritual  danger. 

Passover  is  kept  next.  See  Numbers  ix  and  our  annota- 
tions there.  What  blessed  memories  must  have  come  to 
them?  They  remembered  that  fearful  night  in  Egypt  and 
how  Jehovah  had  passed  over  them,  when  He  saw  the  blood 
of  the  lamb.  Notice  the  difference  between  these  two 
Passovers.  The  first  they  kept  as  guilty;  they  needed 
protection.  But  now  they  keep  it  as  delivered  and  brought 
into  the  land.     And  we  have  a  feast  of  remembrance  like- 


22  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

wise,  the  Lord's  table.  "Do  this  in  remembrance  of  Me.'* 
It  must  be  kept  by  us  on  resurrection-ground,  realizing  that 
we  are  dead  with  Christ  and  risen  with  Him;  self -judgment 
is  needed  as  well. 

"The  remembrance  of  the  past  is  often  an  excellent 
preparation  for  the  trials  of  the  future,  and  as  often  it  proves 
a  remarkable  support  under  them.  It  was  the  very  nature  of 
the  Passover  to  look  back  to  the  past,  and  to  recall  God's 
first  great  interposition  on  behaK  of  His  people.  It  was  a 
precious  encouragement  both  to  faith  and  hope.  So  also  is 
our  Christian  Passover.  It  is  a  connecting  link  between 
the  first  and  second  comings  of  our  Lord.  The  first  coming 
lends  support  to  faith,  the  second  to  hope.  No  exercise  of 
soul  can  be  more  profitable  than  to  go  back  to  that  memorable 
day  when  Christ  our  Passover  was  sacrificed  for  us.  For 
then  the  price  of  redemption  was  paid  in  full,  and  the  door 
of  salvation  flung  wide  open.  Then  the  Son  sealed  His 
love  by  giving  Himself  for  us.  What  blessing,  whether  for 
this  life  or  the  life  to  come,  was  not  purchased  by  that 
transaction?  Life  may  be  dark  and  stormy,  but  hope 
foresees  a  bright  to-morrow.  "When  Christ,  who  is  our 
life,  shall  appear,  then  shall  ye  also  appear  with  Him  in 
glory."* 

Then  the  Manna  ceased  and  they  ate  the  old  corn  of  the 
land.  Both  foods  are  typical  of  Christ,  the  food  God  has 
given  to  His  people.  The  Manna  is  the  type  of  Christ  on 
earth,  in  humiliation.  The  old  corn  is  Christ  in  Glory, 
May  we  constantly  feed  on  both. 

Then  Joshua  meets  before  Jericho  the  man  with  the  drawn 
sword.  What  a  courageous  man  Joshua  was!  He  meets 
the  stranger  alone.  INIost  likely  he  had  no  sword,  while  the 
man  had  his  sword  drawn.  He  soon  hears  who  the  stranger 
is.  It  is  the  same  One  who  appeared  to  Moses  in  the 
burning  bush,  to  Abraham  at  Mamre,  to  Jacob  at  Pniel  and 
to  others  afterward.  It  is  Jehovah  in  visible  form.  These 
theophanies  were  surely  not  incarnations,  yet  they  fore- 


*Prof.  W.  G.  Blaikie. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  ^3 

shadowed  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God.  Here  Jehovah, 
Who  in  the  fuhiess  of  time  became  Man,  appears  as  a  Man 
of  war,  as  Captain  of  the  host  of  the  Lord.  The  host  are 
Israel.     And  He  is  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 

The  Book  of  Joshua  is  the  book  of  conflicts  and  conquests. 
The  sword  is  freely  used  in  carrying  out  the  divine  judg- 
ments upon  the  ungodly  tenants  of  the  land.  Yet  the 
first  drawn  sword,  mentioned  in  the  book,  is  in  the  hand 
of  the  Lord  as  He  appeared  unto  Joshua.  He  fights  for 
His  people.  He  will  yet  execute  the  righteous  judgments  in 
the  earth.    It  will  be  when  He  appears  the  second  time. 


6.  The  Fall  of  Jericho. 
CHAPTER  VI. 

1.  The  Divine  Instructions.     Vs.  1-5. 

2.  The  Instructions  Followed.     Vs.  6-19. 

3.  The  Fall  of  .Jericho.     Vs.  20-21. 

4.  Rahab  Remembered.     Vs.  22-25. 

5.  The  Curse  upon  Jericho.     Vs.  26-27. 

We  do  not  enlarge  upon  the  history  of  the  chapter,  which 
needs  no  comment.  The  fall  of  Jericho  by  the  power  of 
God,  as  described  in  this  chapter,  has  also  been  ridiculed  by 
infidels.  Others  have  tried  to  explain  the  occurrence  in  a 
natural  way.  It  has  been  said  that  the  marching  Israelites, 
by  tramping  around  the  city  for  seven  days,  weakened  the 
walls,  and  the  trumpet  blasts  and  shouting  of  the  people 
brought  about  their  collapse.  How  utterly  ridiculous! 
But  what  are  the  typical  and  dispensational  lessons  of  this 
interesting  chapter? 

Jericho  is  the  type  of  the  world,  as  already  stated  in 
the  annotations  of  the  second  chapter.  As  Jericho  falls 
and  is  laid  in  ruins  as  soon  as  Israel  is  in  the  land,  so  the 
world  is  laid  in  ruins  for  the  believer  who  apprehends  his 
position  in  Christ.  Our  faith  is  the  victory  which  overcometh 
the  world.     It  was  faith  which  obtained  the  victory  over 


24  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA, 

Jericho.  A  faith  which  trusted  in  the  Lord;  a  faith  which 
acted  in  obedience  to  the  divinely  given  instructions.  "By 
faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down,  after  they  were  com- 
passed about  seven  days"  (Heb.  xi:30).*  And  we  must 
nralk  in  faith  and  in  the  power  of  His  Spirit,  as  crucified  unto 
the  world  and  the  world  crucified  unto  us.  The  world  must 
remain  in  ruins  for  the  believer  who  walks  in  the  Spirit,  as 
Jericho  was  not  to  be  rebuilt. 

We  must  also  think  here  of  the  walls,  the  hindrances,  the 
obstacles  in  our  lives  as  believers,  as  we  pass  through  the 
world.  The  enemy  often  tries  to  terrify  us  by  these,  as  he 
discouraged  Israel  at  !^adesh  by  the  walled  cities.  Alas! 
we  often  do  what  Joshua  did  not  do  before  Jericho.  We 
measure  the  walls,  we  study  the  difficulties,  we  are  occupied 
with  our  perplexities  and  trials.  We  reckon  with  the  walls, 
instead  of  reckoning  with  the  Lord  and  His  power.  By 
faith  walls  still  fall  down. 

Richer  is  the  meaning  of  the  fall  of  Jericho  viewed  in 
the  light  of  prophecy.  Jericho  is  the  type  of  the  world 
ri'pe  for  judgment.  The  high  walls  are  types  of  the  walls  of 
unbelief,  apostasy,  wickedness  and  self-security.  Seven 
days  Israel  had  to  march  around  the  walls.  Seven  priests 
with  seven  trumpets  were  there.  On  the  seventh  day  they 
had  to  march  around  seven  times  and  blow  the  seven  trumpets. 
Note  the  number  "seven."  It  stands  for  Divine  completion. 
How  it  all  reminds  us  of  the  last  book  of  the  Bible  with  its 
seven  seals,  seven  trumpets  and  seven  vials.  The  trumpets, 
however,  in  Joshua  are  the  trumpets  of  Jubilee.  The  great 
Jubilee,  the  time  of  blessing  for  this  earth  comes,  when 


*It  is  a  remarkable  circumstance,  in  various  aspects,  that  Jericho, 
the  first  and  the  strongest  city  of  the  land,  is  taken  in  this  peculiar 
manner,  without  a  single  stroke  of  the  sword.  This  result  was  intended, 
on  the  one  hand,  to  furnish  the  faith  of  the  Israelites  with  unquestion- 
able evidence  of  the  success  of  their  future  warlike  movements,  which 
now  commenced,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  to  secure  them  in  advance, 
from  a  carnal  reliance  on  their  own  strength,  and  from  all  vainglorious 
tendencies  to  ascribe  their  success  to  their  own  courage,  their  own 
intelligence,  and  their  own  power. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  25 

judgment  is  executed.  As  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell,  so  comes 
the  day,  when  all  the  high  and  exalted  things  will  be  laid 
low  (Isaiah  ii:10-22).  The  stone  will  fall  out  of  heaven 
(Christ  in  His  second  Coming)  smiting  the  image,  repre- 
senting the  world-power.  Complete  ruins  will  be  the  result, 
never  to  be  built  again;  but  the  smiting  stone  becomes  a 
mountain,  filling  the  earth.  It  is  the  prophetic  picture  of 
the  coming  Kingdom. 

"The  details  of  the  fall  of  Jericho  seem  not,  however,  to 
be  facts  of  present  experience,  but  prophetic  of  actual  judg- 
ment when  it  comes;  and  this  is  quite  as  we  might  expect. 
We  see  by  them,  however,  that  the  people  of  God  have  to 
maintain  the  testimony  as  to  these  things:  compassing  the 
city  and  blowing  the  trumpets  until  the  city  falls;  although 
it  be  only  in  the  meantime  to  awaken  the  scorn  of  the  men 
of  the  world,  as  they  hear  the  frequent  alarm  of  that  which 
seems  never  to  come.  But  it  comes,  comes  steadily  nearer, 
is  surely  even  now  at  the  door,  and  how  urgent  should  be  our 
testimony,  which,  if  of  no  effect  upon  the  mass,  yet  helps  to 
fill  Rahab's  house,  where  the  true  scarlet-line,  as  despicable 
in  men's  eyes  as  that  of  old,  shields  with  the  power  of  the 
Almighty  the  prisoners  of  hope."* 

How  blessedly  the  promise  was  kept  to  Rahab  and  her 
house!  No  doubt  that  scarlet-line  was  the  object  of  ridicule 
in  Jericho.  She  alone  and  her  house  escaped  the  dread- 
ful judgment.  The  entire  walls  fell;  but  one  small  por- 
tion was  kept  standing,  the  portion  upon  which  her  house 
stood. 

Jericho  was  built  three  times  and  three  times  razed  to 
the  ground.  It  was  first  destroyed  under  Joshua.  Then 
Hiel,  the  Beth-elite  rebuilt  it  in  Ahab's  reign  (822-790). 
He  experienced  the  curse  of  Joshua.  Compare  Joshua  vi  :26 
with  1  Kings  xvi:34.  Kiel's  city  was  destroyed  by  the 
Herodians  in  the  3  B.  C.  The  next  year  Archelaus  built 
Jericho  again,  the  Jericho  standing  in  the  days  of  our  Lord. 
This  was  destroyed  by  Vespassian  68  A.  D. 

*F.   W.   Grant  on  "Joshua." 


26  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

7.  Achan's  Sin  and  Israel's  Defeat. 
CHAPTER  Vn. 

1.  The  Defeat  of  Israel,     Vs.  1-5. 

2.  The  Source  of  the  Defeat  Revealed.     Vs.  6-15. 

3.  The  Transgressor  Found  Out.     Vs.  16-23. 

4.  The  Judgment  of  Achan     Vs.  24-26. 

The  insignificant  place  AI  brings  defeat.  Joshua  sent 
men  to  view  Ai.  What  authority  was  given  to  him  to  do 
so?  There  was  no  need  to  send  spies  once  more,  for  the  Lord 
had  said,  that  the  whole  land  was  given  to  them.  They 
report  Ai  a  place  without  walls  and  recommend  that  only 
two  or  three  thousand  men  be  sent  up.     Defeat  follows. 

Ai  means  "ruins."  It  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in 
Genesis  xii.  Abraham  built  his  altar  between  Bethel  (House 
of  God)  and  Ai.  Ai  is  another  type  of  the  world.  But 
the  source  of  the  defeat  was  Achan's  sin.  The  shekels  of 
silver  and  of  gold,  the  Babylonian  garment,  had  blinded  his 
eyes.  These  things  were  to  be  "accursed,"  which  literally 
means  devoted;  devoted  to  the  treasury  of  the  Lord  (vi:19). 
Joshua  had  given  the  command  that  such  should  be  the 
case,  and  also  announced,  that  disobedience  would  bring 
trouble  upon  Israel.  Achan's  sin  was  responsible  for  the 
defeat  of  the  people.  He  confesses,  "I  saw — I  coveted — I 
took."  The  same  old  story,  first  enacted  in  the  garden  of 
Eden.  The  evil  in  the  midst  of  the  people  of  God,  unjudged, 
becomes  the  most  powerful  agent  against  Israel  and 
withholds  God's  power  and  blessing.  It  is  so  still.  As 
soon  as  we  cling  to  the  things  of  the  world,  the  enemy 
gets  an  advantage  over  us,  and  we  have  little  power  and 
cannot  advance  in  the  things  of  Christ.  Ah!  the  Achans 
in  our  lives!  Judge  self;  bring  the  evil  thing  into  the  light 
and  victory  and  blessing  will  follow.  Joshua's  prayer  and 
Jehovah's  answer;  Achan's  sin  discovered  and  forced  confes- 
sion; the  judgment  which  falls  upon  him  and  his  house;  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  27 

heap  of  stones  raised  over  him — all  is  of  interest  and  instruc- 
tion, which  our  limited  space  forbids  to  follow  in  detail. 

The  valley  of  Achor  is  mentioned  in  Hosea  ii:15  as  a  door 
of  hope.  The  place  and  door  of  hope  is  in  Him,  who  died 
not  for  his  sins,  but  who  took  the  sin  and  guilt  of  the  nation 
upon  Himself.* 


8.  The  Overthrow  of  Ai. 
CHAPTER  vni. 

1.  The  Advance  Commanded.     Vs.  1-2. 

2.  The  Strategy  of  Joshua.     Vs.  3-13. 

3.  Ai's  Defeat.     Vs.  14-29. 

4.  Joshua's  Obedience.     Vs.  30-35. 

Sin  confessed,  judged  and  put  away  restored  communion 
with  the  Lord.  If  any  burden  remained  upon  the  mind 
of  Joshua,  it  was  removed  by  the  repeated  words  of  comfort 
and  cheer.  "Fear  not,  neither  be  thou  dismayed."  The 
failure  is  no  longer  mentioned,  but  instead,  comfort  and 
assurance  is  given  and  victory  promised.  He  deals  in  the 
same  gracious  way  with  us,  whenever  we  have  failed  and 


*"The  valley  of  Achor  was  not  only  the  place  of  national  repentance, 
and  of  a  national  repudiation  of  sin,  but  it  was  also  the  place  of  a  great 
and  tragic  national  expiation.  Israel  had  sinned,  and  so  Israel  had 
suffered,  but  it  was  the  sin  of  one  man  that  had  brought  judgment  on 
the  camp.  Now,  observe,  the  sin  of  a  single  man  was  imputed  to 
Israel,  and  became  Israel's  sin,  and  because  of  that  imputation  of  sin, 
the  wrath  of  God  fell  on  the  whole  nation.  But  when  the  sin  of  that 
one  man  was  discovered,  and  when  it  was  confessed  before  God,  then 
the  sin  imputed  to  the  congregation  reverted  on  to  the  head  of  the  one 
criminal.  Thus  the  penalty  due  to  a  national  sin  was  actually  carried 
out  upon  him  whose  guilt  had  involved  the  nation  in  judgment;  and  as 
the  deadly  stones  were  hurled  upon  him,  that  man  in  his  death  was  not 
only  reaping  the  reward  of  his  disobedience,  but  the  sin  of  the  nation 
was  being  expiated  in  the  death  of  the  individual;  and  thus  was  opened 
*a  door  of  hope'  through  'the  valley  of  trouble,'  whereby  Israel 
might  enter  the  land  of  promise,  and  find  her  vineyards  from  thence." — 
Aitken. 


28  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

humbled  ourselves  before  Him  in  self-judgment.  However, 
their  former  presumption  is  not  overlooked  by  Jehovah. 
The  capture  of  Ai  is  hard  work  for  them.  They  had  to 
learn  the  lesson.  Their  pride  and  self-reliance  was  dealt 
with  by  Jehovah,  who  ever  wants  His  people  in  the  place 
of  lowliness  and  weakness.  Instead  of  3,000  men,  ten 
times  as  many  had  to  go  up  and  engage  in  the  warfare. 

The  Lord  commanded  Joshua  to  stretch  out  the  spear 
toward  Ai.  This  corresponds  to  the  uplifted  hands  of 
Moses  in  the  warfare  against  Amalek  in  Exodus  xvii.  It 
was  a  token  of  the  presence  of  divine  power  in  securing  the 
complete  victory.  We  read  nothing  of  Joshua's  arm  with 
the  spear  becoming  weak,  as  it  was  with  the  uplifted  hands 
of  Moses.  "For  Joshua  drew  not  his  hand  back  wherewith 
he  stretched  out  the  spear,  until  he  had  utterly  destroyed 
all  the  inhabitants  of  Ai"  (Verse  26).  It  was  an  act  of 
faith,  and   divine  power  supported   the  outstretched   arm. 

Then,  after  the  victory,  Joshua  built  an  altar  unto  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  in  Mount  Ebal.  He  is  doing  this  in 
obedience  to  the  previously  given  command.  See  Deuter- 
onomy xxvii:2-8.  What  an  impressive  scene  it  must  have 
been  when  "he  read  all  the  words  of  the  law,  the  blessings 
and  the  cursings,  according  to  all  that  is  written  in  the  book 
of  the  law." 

"Both  mounts  belong  to  the  range  of  Mount  Ephraim; 
the  elevated  valley  of  Shechem  lies  between  them.  The 
transaction  probably  took  place  in  the  following  manner. 
Six  tribes  occupied  each  mount;  the  priests,  standing  below 
in  the  valley  with  the  ark  of  the  covenant  in  their  midst, 
turned  toward  Mount  Gerizim  as  they  solemnly  pronounced 
the  words  of  blessing,  and  then,  looking  towards  Mount 
Ebal,  repeated  the  words  of  cursing;  all  the  people  responded 
to  each  of  the  words,  and  said:  'Amen!'  — Ebal,  the  Mount 
of  cursing,  is  naked  and  bald ;  Gerizim,  the  mount  of  blessing, 
is  green  and  fertile.  The  circumstance  that  the  mount 
of  cursing  was  assigned  for  the  writing  of  the  law,  the  erec- 
tion of  the  altar,  and  the  offering  of  sacrifice,  is  highly 
significant;  the  cause  lies  in  the  intimate  relations  existins 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  29 

between  the  curse,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  Law  and  Sacri- 
fice, on  the  other — the  former  brings  a  curse,  or  gives  a 
sharp  point  to  it,  tlie  latter  abolishes  it.*" 

9.  The  Gibeonites. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  The  Confederacy  of  the  Enemies.     Vs.  1-2. 

2.  The  Deception  of  the  Gibeonites.     Vs.   3-13. 

3.  The  Failure.     Vs.  14-15. 

4.  The    Deception    Discovered.     Vs.    lG-27. 

Israel  now  comes  face  to  face  with  the  other  inhabitants  of 
the  land.  These  enemies,  which  Israel  encountered,  are  the 
types  of  our  enemies,  and  the  conjflict  of  God's  earthly  people 
is  typical  of  our  conflict.  There  is,  however,  a  difference. 
Israel's  enemies  were  flesh  and  blood;  ours  are  not. 
Israel's  conflict  was  in  the  land;  ours  is  with  the  wicked 
spirits  in  the  heavenly  places.  Israel  was  asked  to  drive 
them  out;  we  are  not  asked  to  do  this,  but  to  resist  the 
devil.  Israel's  land  rested  from  the  conflict;  we  shall  not 
rest  till  we  are  with  Him,  when  Satan  will  be  bruised  under 
our  feet.     Read  Ephesians  vi:10-17. 

The  Canaanites  are  the  types  of  the  evil  powers,  with 
whom  we  have  to  wage  our  warfare.  As  the  Canaanites 
opposed  the  possession  and  enjoyment  of  the  land,  so  the  aim 
of  the  wicked  spirits  is  to  keep  us  back,  to  hinder  us  in 
possessing  and  enjoying  our  spiritual  blessings  in  Christ 
Jesus. 

The  Gibeonites  were  Ilivites.  They  came  with  decep- 
tions, knowing  well  what  was  their  lot.  The  deceptions 
were  inspired  by  the  father  of  lies. 

In  Ephesians  vi,  we  are  especially  warned  against  the 
wiles  of  the  devil.  We  are  to  stand  against  the  wiles  of  the 
devil.  Elsewhere  we  read  that  he  transforms  himself 
into  an  angel  of  light.  The  Gibeonites  illustrate  these 
wiles  of  the  devil.     Not  alone  had  they  their  mouldy  bread 

*J.  H.  Kurtz. 


30  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

and  old  wineskins,  as  a  kind  of  credential  to  back  up  their 
lies,  but  they  talked  very  piously.  What  are  these  wiles 
of  the  devil?  We  have  to  turn  to  the  so-called  "religious 
world"  to  find  them.  The  "religious  world,"  which  speaks 
piously  of  God  and  Christ,  is  at  best  hypocricy,  pharisee- 
ism.  Ritualism,  Galatianism,  man-made  ordinances,  be- 
long to  the  wiles  of  the  devil.  Philosophies,  traditions 
of  men,  delusive  doctrines,  cunningly  devised  fables, 
all  these  belong  to  the  wiles  of  the  devil  (Col.  ii).  Such 
systems  as  Christian  Science,  Spiritism,  Russellism,*  Baha- 
ism.  Higher  Criticism,  Theosophy  and  others  belong  to  the 
wiles  of  the  devil.  So  does  "social-reform."  These  world 
reformers,  "Christian"  socialists,  talk  piously  like  the  Gibe- 
onites,  but  the  devil's  wiles  are  underneath. 

And  these  wiles  of  the  devil  are  multiplying.  Satan, 
knowing  that  his  time  is  short,  does  all  he  can  to  keep 
God's  people  from  enjoying  their  blessings  and  from  ad- 
vancing in  spiritual  things. 

The  Gibeonites,  with  their  pious  talk,  were  received 
into  the  congregation  of  Israel,  just  as  the  professing  church 
is  receiving  the  world  into  the  church.  The  failure  was 
with  Israel.  They  asked  not  counsel  of  the  Lord.  Had 
Joshua  gone  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  He  would  soon 
have  exposed  the  deceptions  of  the  Gibeonites.  Here  is 
where  our  failure  comes  in  likewise.  Never  can  Satan, 
with  his  superior  knowledge  and  his  wiles,  get  an  advantage 
over  us,  if  we  hold  closely  to  the  Word  of  God,  the  Sword 
of  the  Spirit,  and  if  we  ask  counsel  of  the  Lord  through  His 
Word  and  in  prayer.  The  covenant  made  had  to  stand. 
It  would  have  been  unrighteousness,  if  Israel  had  acted 
differently.  How  many  unequal  yokes  there  are  among 
God's  people,  entered  into  without  having  asked  counsel 
of  the  Lord! 

And  there  is  generally  no  escape,  but  suffering  in  conse- 
quence.    Israel  had  to  stand  much  on  account  of  the  unholy 

*Once  known  by  the  name  of  "Millennial  Dawnism,"  but  now  it  goes 
under  the  name  of  "International  Bible  Student  Associations."  No 
doubt  this  chameleon  of  the  devil  will  soon  take  on  another  name. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  31 

alliance  with  the  Gibeonites.     What  a  man  sows  that  he 
will  reap.     Read  !^  Samuel  xxi:l-6. 

10.  The  Victorious  Conquest.    Chapters   X-XII. 

CHAPTER  X. 

1.  Adoni-zedec  and  his  Confederacy.    Vs.  1-6. 

2.  The  War.     Vs.  7-11. 

3.  The  Miracle.     Vs.  12-15. 

4.  The  Victory  Won.     Vs.  16-21. 

5.  The  Five  Kings  Slain.     Vs.  22-27. 

6.  Further  Conquests.     Vs.  28-43. 

The  name  Jerusalem*  is  mentioned  here  for  the  first 
time  in  the  Bible.  It  is  in  connection  with  war,  and  the 
next  time  we  find  Jerusalem  on  fire  (Judg.  i:8).  This  may 
be  taken  as  a  prophecy  of  the  history  of  that  city.  Yet 
something  better  is  in  store  for  Jerusalem.  Adoni-zedec 
is  here  the  King  of  Jerusalem.  His  name  means  "lord  of 
righteousness."  He  represents  the  counterfeit  king  in  oppo- 
sition to  Him  who  is  Jerusalem's  true  King,  the  true  Melchi- 
zedec,  King  of  righteousness  and  King  of  peace.  He  is  a 
type  of  Anti-christ.  On  account  of  Gibeon  having  gone  over 
to  Israel,  Adoni-zedec  forms  an  alliance,  which  he  heads 
as  leader.  His  confederates  are  given  by  name.  We  give 
the  meaning  of  their  names  in  parenthesis,  which  will  be 
helpful  in  a  deeper  study  of  these  types.  Hoham  (the  noise 
of  a  multitude).  King  of  Hebron;  Piram  (the  wild  ass),  King 
of  Jarmuth;  Japhia  (causing  brightness  f)  King  of  Lachish; 
Debir  (an  oracle),  King  of  Eglon.  This  satanic  alliance 
was  aimed  at  Gibeon  and  at  Israel  as  well.  And  Gibeon 
appealed  to  Joshua  for  help. 

Notice  that  they  sent  to  Gilgal,  the  first  camp  of  Israel. 
Joshua  and  the  people  were  at  Gilgal,  and  from  Gilgal  they 

*Salem  in  Gen.  xiv:18,  is  generally  taken  to  be  Jerusalem.  See 
Psalm  lxxvi:2.  The  ancient  tablets  give  the  name  as  Ur-Salim. 
But  the  name  "Jerusalem"  is  found  the  first  time  in  Joshua  x:i. 

iTo  dazzle  the  eye. 


32  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

ascended.  At  Gllgal  they  saw  the  memorials  of  God's 
power,  and  encouraged  by  a  direct  message  from  Jehovah 
they  went  forth  to  war.  Blessed  are  we,  if  in  our  spiritual 
warfare  we  go  forth  from  Gilgal  (the  place  of  self-judgment 
and  of  power). 

The  great  miracle  of  the  standing  still  of  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon  occurred  then.  The  way  this  miracle  has  been  held 
up  to  ridicule  is  known  to  everybody.  Infidels  of  all  genera- 
tions have  sneered  at  it.  Critics  have  followed,  as  they 
always  do,  close  in  their  footsteps.  But  even  good  men  have 
found  diflSculties  here  and  tried  to  explain  it  with  their 
human  wisdom.  One  explanation  given  is  that  the  Hebrew 
word  "dum,"  to  stand,  means  rather  that  the  sun  was  to 
cease  to  give  its  light.  Upon  this  the  statement  is  made, 
that  Joshua's  command  was  that  the  sun  and  moon  should 
cease  giving  their  light,  and  not  that  they  should  cease 
continuing  their  apparent  motion.  Herder  in  his  *^He- 
braische  Poesie"  says: 

*'It  is  astonishing  that  this  fine  passage  has  been  so  long 
misunderstood.  Joshua  attacked  the  Amorites  in  the  early 
morning,  and  the  battle  continued  till  night;  that  is,  for  a 
long  day,  which  seemed  to  protract  itself  into  night,  to  com- 
plete the  victory.  The  sun  and  moon  were  witnesses  of 
Joshua's  great  deeds,  and  held  their  course  in  the  midst 
of  heaven  till  the  triumph  was  perfect.  Who  does  not 
recognize  this  as  poetry,  even  if  it  had  not  been  quoted 
from  the  Book  of  Poems  on  Heroes.  In  the  usual  language 
of  the  Hebrews  such  expressions  were  neither  bold  nor 
unusual." 

These  are  the  attempts  of  man,  by  which  he  tries  to  ex- 
plain the  supernatural  by  the  natural.  The  occurrence  is  a 
miracle.  It  says  the  sun  stood  still.  But  how  is  that  when 
science  tells  us  the  sun  does  not  move?  We  give  the  answer 
from  Kurtz  in  his  "Sacred  History,"  because  it  is  the  most 
concise  statement  we  have  ever  seen: 

"A  voucher  from  the  Old  Testament  for  the  promise  in 
Markxi:23,  24,  'Whosoever  shall  say  unto  this  mountain. 
Be  thou  removed,  &c..'  is  furnished  by  Joshua's  bold  word 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  33 

of  faith  with  its  fulfilment.  It  was  his  prayer  that  the  light 
of  day  might  be  prolonged,  and  the  darkness  of  night  be 
retarded,  until  he  had  secured  the  object  for  which  he 
pursued  the  enemy :  he  obtained  the  answer  which  he  sought 
by  the  miraculous  power  of  his  faith.  No  investigation 
respecting  the  natural  means  which  produced  this  super- 
natural effect  can  furnish  valuable  results.  The  command 
of  faith  is  pronounced  in  the  sense  which  Joshua  assigns  to 
the  words;  the  divine  answer  is  given  in  the  sense  in  which 
God  understands  them.  No  arguments  that  are  either 
favorable  or  unfavorable  to  any  particular  system  of 
astronomy  are  furnished  by  the  occurrence." 

The  miracle  must  have  stricken  with  terror  the  fighting 
nations,  for  they  worshipped  the  sun  and  the  moon. 

Signs  in  heaven  are  frequently  mentioned  in  the  Word. 
Read  and  study  carefully  the  following  passages  2  Kings 
xx:ll;  Is.  xxxviii:8;  Amos  viii:9;  Isaiah  xiii.lO,  lx:20;  Ezek. 
xxxii:7;  Joel  ii:10,  31;  iii:13;  Matt.  xxiv:29;  Rev.  vi:12; 
viii:12,  ix:2,  xvi:8.  When  the  age  ends  with  the  battle 
of  Armageddon  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  appears  the 
second  time  in  great  power  and  glory,  these  signs  as  pre- 
dicted in  some  of  these  passages  will  be  fulfilled.  The 
sun  and  moon  will  be  darkened.  What  terror  will  take 
hold  upon  the  great  masses  of  Christendom,  who  reject 
the  miracle  and  Christ!     Read  Rev.  vi:12-17. 

What  is  the  book  of  Jasher,  mentioned  in  verse  13? 
The  Book  of  Jasher  (or,  of  the  Upright,  that  is,  Israel) 
was  a  collection  of  sacred  war-songs,  and  may  have,  possibly, 
formed  a  continuation,  in  a  certain  sense,  of  the  "Book  of 
the  Wars  of  the  Lord"  (Num.  xxi:14;  2  Sam.  i:18)  The 
collection  was  probably  commenced  in  the  wilderness,  and, 
at  different  periods,  received  additions. 

The  fact  that  it  is  no  longer  in  existence  proves  its  non- 
inspiration. 

Great  are  the  victories  described  in  this  chapter.  See 
verse  41  as  to  the  territory  which  was  covered.  From 
Kadesh-barnea  unto  Gaza,  all  the  country  of  Goshen  unto 
Gibeon.     And    why?     Because    the    Lord    God    of    Israel 


34  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

fought  for  Israel  (verse  42).  If  God  is  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us!  "And  Joshua  returned,  and  all  Israel  with 
him,  unto  the  camp  of  Gilgal."  How  wonderful  it  is  to  return 
after  our  victories  to  Gilgal,  the  place  of  self-judgment 
and  confessed  weakness.  How  often  our  victories  and 
blessings  are  more  dangerous  than  our  failures  and  defeats! 

Further  Conquests. 
CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  Jabin  and  His  Confederacy.     Vs.   1-5. 

2.  The  Divine  Encouragement.     Vs.  6. 

3.  The  Victory.     Vs.  7-14. 

4.  The  Obedience  of  Joshua.     Vs.  15. 

5.    The  Continued  Conflict  with  the  Kings.     Vs.  16-23. 

The  Kings  of  the  north  formed  the  second  confederacy, 
headed  by  Jabin,  King  of  Hazor.  Jabin  means  "under- 
standing" and  Hazor,  "an  enclosure."  He  with  other 
kings,  and  with  them  "much  people  even  as  the  sand  that 
is  upon  the  seashore  in  multitude,  'with  horses  and  chariots 
very  many,"  came  to  fight  against  Israel.  These  different 
confederacies  opposing  the  rightful  owners  of  the  land 
may  be  taken  as  types  of  the  opposition  from  confederate 
nations  which  Israel  will  have  to  face  during  the  great 
tribulation. 

Did  Joshua  fear  In  the  presence  of  such  a  powerful  enemy? 
If  he  feared  his  fear  must  have  vanished  completely  when 
Jehovah  said,  "Be  not  afraid  because  of  them,  for  to-morrow 
about  this  time  will  I  deliver  them  up  all  slain  before  Israel; 
thou  shalt  hough  their  horses,  and  burn  their  chariots  with 
fire."  The  Lord  assured  Joshua,  and  with  such  an  assurance 
he  rushed  at  once  against  the  enemy  by  the  waters  of  Merom. 
It  does  not  matter  how  strong  the  enemy  is,  how  cunningly  his 
plans  are  laid,  how  he  may  come  upon  us  with  an  host  to 
terrify;  if  we  are  right  with  the  Lord  and  on  the  Lord's  side, 
we  shall  be  more  than  conquerors.  The  victory  is  com- 
plete; their  chariots  are  burned  and  the  horses  were  disabled 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  35 

by  cutting  the  sinews  of  their  legs.  The  latter  no  doubt 
had  for  its  purpose  to  make  it  impossible  for  His  people 
to  trust  in  human  resources.  If  they  had  used  these  horses, 
they  might  have  put  their  confidence  in  them.  "Some 
trust  in  chariots  and  some  in  horses;  but  we  will  remember 
the  Lord  our  God"  (Ps.  xx:7). 

At  Hazor,  as  in  other  cities  and  places,  the  divine  com- 
mand of  utter  extermination  of  all  human  beings  was  literally 
carried  out.  "There  was  not  any  left  to  breathe."  An 
awful  picture  indeed  it  is!  Infidels  have  made  the  best  of 
it  by  denouncing  these  records  and  blaspheming  the  righteous 
and  hol}'^  God.  Others  again  have  tried  to  excuse  the 
Israelites  by  saying  that  it  was  the  customary  thing  1,500 
years  before  Christ  to  treat  conquered  nations  in  this  way. 
But  it  was  God  Himself  who  had  commanded  their  exter- 
mination. Joshua  and  Israel  had  no  choice  whatever 
in  the  matter.  They  acted  in  obedience  to  the  divine  will. 
God's  time  for  the  execution  of  His  righteous  judgments 
had  come  and  He  used  Israel  as  His  instrument.  To  Abra- 
ham the  word  was  spoken  concerning  his  seed,  "In  the 
fourth  generation  they  will  come  hither  again;  for  the 
iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  The  iniquity  of 
these  nations  had  reached  such  a  degree,  that  God's  wrath 
and  holy  vengeance  had  to  fall  upon  them.  They  were 
given  to  the  most  awful  abominations  and  practised  unspeak- 
able immoralities.  The  hour  of  judgment  had  come.  The 
whole  race  was  to  be  swept  away.  And  who  dares  to 
question  God's  sovereign  right  to  do  so.  Should  not  the 
Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right.'* 

Nor  must  we  forget  that  the  judgment  of  Canaan,  as 
well  as  the  judgment  of  Egypt,  is  prophetic.  Judgment 
and  wrath  are  in  store  for  this  earth.  The  divine  sword 
will  some  day  be  unsheathed  again.  The  conditions  of  the 
earth  are  such  that  God  must  judge.  Thousands  are 
hardening  their  hearts;  ere  long,  as  it  was  with  the  Canaanites 
(verse  20),  the  Lord  will  harden  their  hearts.  These  judg- 
ments are  written  in  language  which  cannot  be  misunder- 
stood. 


36  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Notice  Joshua's  obedience.  He  left  nothing  undone.  He 
obeyed  the  Word;  he  followed  closely  the  divine  instructions. 
That  led  to  success  and  blessing. 


The  Conquered  Kings. 
CHAPTER  Xn. 

1.  The  Kings  on  the  other  Side  of  Jordan.     Vs.  1-6. 

2.  The  Kings  on  this  Side  of  Jordan.     Vs.  7-24. 

"The  land  rested  from  war"  is  the  concluding  statement 
of  the  previous  chapter.  It  was  after  Joshua  had  made 
war  a  long  time  with  all  those  Kings  (xi:18).  Deut.  vi:10-ll 
was  also  fulfilled.  "And  it  shall  be,  when  the  Lord  Thy 
God  shall  have  brought  thee  into  the  land,  which  He  sware 
unto  thy  Fathers,  to  Abraham,  to  Isaac  and  to  Jacob,  to 
give  thee  great  and  goodly  cities,  which  thou  buildest  not, 
and  houses  full  of  all  good  things,  which  thou  filledst  not, 
and  wells  digged,  which  thou  diggedst  not,  vineyards  and 
olive  trees,  which  thou  plantedst  not."  The  list  of  kings 
which  is  given  in  this  chapter  needs  no  comment.  Thirty- 
one  are  mentioned  as  conquered  by  Joshua.  The  land  was 
only  150  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  50  miles  from  east 
to  west.  Criticism  has  also  objected  to  this,  as  if  so  many 
kings  could  not  exist  in  so  small  a  territory.  Professor 
Maspero,  one  of  the  foremost  archaeologists,  fully  confirms 
the  Bible-record.     We  quote  from  him: 

"The  Canaanltes  were  the  most  numerous  of  all  these 
groups,  and  had  they  been  able  to  amalgamate  under  a 
single  king,  or  even  to  organize  a  lasting  confederacy,  it 
would  have  been  impossible  for  the  Egyptian  armies  to  have 
broken  through  the  barrier  thus  raised  between  them  and 
the  rest  of  Asia;  but,  unfortunately,  so  far  from  showing 
the  slightest  tendency  towards  unity  or  concentration, 
the  Canaanites  were  more  hopelessly  divided  than  any  of 
the  surrounding  nations.  Their  mountains  contained  nearly 
as  many  states  as  there  were  valleys,  while  in  the  plains 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  37 

each  town  represented  a  separate  government,  and  was 
built  on  a  spot  carefully  selected  for  purposes  of  defence. 
The  land,  indeed,  was  chequered  by  these  petty  states, 
and  so  closely  were  they  crowded  together,  that  a  horseman 
travelling  at  leisure  could  easily  pass  through  two  or  three  of 
them  in  a  day^s  journey.'*  Of  the  richer  country  towards 
the  North  he  writes:  "Towns  grew  and  multiplied  upon 
this   rich   and  loomy   soil." 


38  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

II.    The  Division  of  the  Land. 

Chapters  xiii-xxi. 

The  divine  record  concerning  the  division  of  the  land, 
as  it  is  before  us  in  these  chapters,  is  often  looked  upon 
merely  as  history  barren  of  any  spiritual  meaning.  Many 
expositors  pass  over  the  greater  part  of  it  or  give  only 
geographical  information.  However,  a  deeper  meaning 
must  be  sought  here;  there  are  many  and  blessed  lessons 
in  spiritual  and  dispensational  truths  hidden  in  these  chap- 
ters. Why  should  the  Holy  Spirit  have  recorded  all  these 
things  if  they  have  no  meaning  whatever.'*  It  is  written, 
^'All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of  God,  and  is  profitable 
for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  instruction  in 
righteousness"  (2  Tim.  iii:16).  This  surely  applies  to  all 
Scripture,  Including  the  chapters  which  contain  nothing 
but  names.  Again  It  is  written,  "Now  all  these  things 
happened  unto  them  (Israel)  as  types,  and  they  are  written 
for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  ages  have 
come"  (1  Cor.  ix:ll).  "For  whatsoever  things  were  written 
aforetime  were  written  for  our  learning,  that  we  through 
patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  might  have  hope" 
(Rom.  XV  :4).  We  dare  not  deny  these  chapters  in  Joshua 
a  spiritual  application  In  the  light  of  these  plain  words  of 
the  Spirit  in  the  New  Testament. 

In  the  study  of  the  previous  books  we  have  discovered 
(especially  In  Genesis)  the  fact  that  the  meaning  of  the 
Hebrew  names  are  of  deep  significance  and  often  helpful 
in  the  types  as  well  as  the  spiritual  and  dispensational  lessons. 
Here  is  a  wide  field,  which  has  been  but  little  covered. 
Hundreds  of  names  are  found  in  this  second  part  of  Joshua. 
They  all  have  a  meaning  and  through  these  names  we  can 
learn  the  lessons  the  Spirit  of  God  has  written  there  for 
our  learning.    Yet  caution  is  needed.     While  some  ignore 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  39 

this  study  entirely,  others  swing  into  the  opposite  direction 
and  are  fanciful  in  their  application.  This  must  be  avoided. 
We  are  sorry  that  the  scope  of  our  work  does  not  permit 
a  more  detailed  exposition  and  research.  If  we  were  to 
give  way  to  the  desire  to  do  this  we  would  have  to  write 
a  volume.  But  we  hope,  with  His  gracious  help,  to  give 
such  hints  which  will  help  in  a  more  extended  private 
study.* 


*F.  W.  Grant  in  the  Numerioal  Bible  gives  excellent  help,  both  in 
the  meaning  of  the  names  and  in  application.  We  know  of  no  other 
attempt  in  this  direction  and  acknowledge  our  own  indebtedness  to 
him.  This,  of  course,  does  not  mean  that  we  endorse  all  the  trans- 
latioQo  or  applications  he  gives. 


40  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

1.  Instruction    Given;    The   Two   and    One-half  Tribes. 
CHAPTER  xm. 

1     Jehovah  speaks  to  Joshua.     Vs.  1-7. 

2.    Inheritance  of  the  Two  and  One-half  Tribes.     Vs.  8-33. 

About  seven  years  had  gone  by  since  the  passage  over 
Jordan  and  Joshua,  being  old  and  advanced  in  years,  is  ad- 
dressed by  the  Lord.  He  takes  care  of  His  servants  in  their 
old  age  and  provides  for  their  comfort.  Much  land  was  yet 
to  be  possessed.  Israel  never  responded  to  the  fulness 
of  Gods  gift  to  them.  How  great  their  failure,  as  well  as 
our  failure  as  His  spiritual  people,  to  possess  our  possessions, 
which  God's  grace  has  put  on  our  side! 

The  unpossessed  land  is  described  in  verses  2-7.  It  was 
never  possessed  in  full  by  Israel,  nor  did  they  ever  have 
the  land,  as  promised  to  them  from  the  Red  Sea  to  the 
River  Euphrates.  God's  gifts  and  calling  being  without 
repentance  (Rom.  xi:29)  the  time  must  yet  come  when 
they  receive  that  land  in  the  dimensions  as  promised  in 
Exodus  xxiii:31.  When  their  restoration  comes  with  the 
coming  of  their  once  rejected  King,  our  Lord,  this  promised 
land  will  be  possessed  by  the  nation. 

These  undisposed  enemies  may  well  be  taken  as  the  types 
of  our  spiritual  enemies.  The  Philistines,  who  were  not 
Canaanites.  stand  in  the  foreground.  Their  origin  may  be 
traced  in  Genesis.  They  were  sons  of  Ham  and  sprang 
from  Egypt.  The  name  "Palestine"  is  derived  from  "Philis- 
tine." They  typify  the  power  of  corruption  to  the  people 
of  God.  The  Philistines  to-day,  which  keep  God's  people 
back  from  the  enjoyment  of  their  inherita«ice,  are  the 
corrupt  forms  of  Christianity,  Rome  and  her  daughters. 
Note  the  five  princes  of  the  Philistines  and  their  residence. 
Gaza  (strong);  Ashdod  (I  will  spoil);  Ashkelon  (the  fire  of 
infamy);  Gath  (wine-press,  a  type  of  wrath);  Ekron  (up- 
rooting). These  names  describe  the  character  of  these 
powerful  enemies  of  Israel.  We  leave  it  with  the  reader 
to  apply  them  to  that  powerful  ecclesiastical  world-system, 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  41 

Rome.  The  Avvites  belonged  to  the  gigantic  races,  which 
dwelt  in  the  land.  The  name  means  "perverters."  Satan 
with  his  powerful  agencies  perverts  the  truth  and  keeps 
God's  people  in  bondage. 

And  the  Lord  promises  to  drive  them  out  (verse  6).  With 
His  own  power  He  was  ready  to  dispossess  these  wicked 
usurpers,  if  Israel  was  but  willing  to  advance  in  faith  and 
act  upon  His  promise.  Here  is  where  they  failed.  Oh! 
that  we  might  see  that  God  is  on  our  side  in  the  conflict  and 
in  the  possession  of  our  inheritance. 

The  inheritance  of  the  two  tribes  and  a  half,  Reuben, 
Gad  and  half  Manasseh  is  then  restated  and  confirmed. 

2.  Caleb's  Request  and  Inheritance. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  The  Inheritance  by  Lot.     Vs,  1-5. 

2.  Caleb*3  Request.     Vs    6-15. 

Judah's  portion  comes  first,  and  as  they  draw  near  to 
Joshua  to  receive  their  inheritance  by  lot  (See  Prov.  xvi:33 
and  Acts  i;26)  at  Gilgal  (note  the  recurrence  of  this  place  and 
its  significance),  Caleb,  the  son  of  Jephuneh,  steps  to  the 
front.  It  was  not  forwardness  or  love  of  the  pre-eminence 
which  led  him  to  do  this,  but  the  burning  zeal  in  that  old,  yet 
youthful  soul.  He  comes  to  claim  the  inheritance,  which 
forty-five  years  ago  Moses  had  promised  unto  him.  Caleb 
was  eighty -five  years  old.  "As  yet  1  am  as  strong  this  day  as 
I  was  in  the  day  that  Moses  sent  me;  as  my  strength  was  then 
even  so  is  my  strength  now,  for  war,  both  to  go  out  and  to 
come  in."  One  can  almost  see  him  standing  before  Eleazar, 
Joshua  and  the  heads  of  the  tribes.  What  a  beautiful 
testimony  he  gives  to  the  faithfulness  of  the  Lord!  He  could 
say,  "I  wholly  followed  the  Lord  my  God."  He  stands 
for  the  man  who  trusts  His  God,  who  reckons  not  with 
earthly  circumstances  and  conditions,  but  with  the  Lord  and 
His  promised  power.  They  that  honor  me,  I  will  honor. 
Forty  years  old  was  Caleb  when  he  was  put  among  the  spies. 


42  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

and  when,  with  Joshua,  he  honored  God  and  His  Word. 
The  reward  of  faith  became  evident  in  his  long  Hfe.  Mental 
vigor  and  physical  strength  remained  unimpaired.  And 
now  he  claims  his  inheritance.  Patiently  he  had  waited 
for  forty-five  years.  The  hour  has  come.  He  claims 
the  mountain  with  its  Anakim,  the  giants,  the  fenced  cities, 
the  great  cities.  That  beautiful  mountain  with  its  stren- 
uous task  is  the  claimed  inheritance.  Old  age  is  often 
characterized  by  "the  pride  of  life."  The  lust  of  the  flesh  is 
peculiar  to  youth;  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  the  desire  of  increase 
in  earthly  things  to  enjoy  them,  comes  with  middle  life,  and 
in  old  age  the  temptation  is  "the  pride  of  life."  But  not  so 
with  the  man  of  faith.  Listen  to  his  humble  language. 
He  does  not  pride  himself  of  his  faith  and  trust  in  God; 
he  knows  nothing  of  self-confidence.  "If  so  be  the  Lord 
will  be  with  me,  then  I  shall  be  able  to  drive  them  out,  as 
the   Lord    said." 

In  our  day  of  departure  from  God  and  unbelief,  may  we 
be  like  Caleb,  "wholly  following  the  Lord."  We,  too,  wait 
in  faith  and  in  patience  for  the  promised  inheritance,  which 
some  day  will  be  ours,  when  He  comes  to  reward  His  Saints. 
Then  as  Israel's  land  had  rest  from  war  (verse  15)  we  shall 
enter  into  our  rest  from  strife  and  conflict. 

3.  The  Portion  of  Judah. 
CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  The  South-border  of  Judah's  Portion.     Vs.  1-4. 

2.  The  Eastern  and  Northern  Border.     Vs.  5-11. 

3.  The    Western    Border.     Vs.    12. 

4.  Caleb's  Conquest.     Vs.  13-19. 

5.  Inheritance  according  to  Families.     Vs.  20-63. 

This  is  a  chapter  which  contains  many  names;  nearly  one 
hundred  and  fifty  are  recorded.  With  the  help  of  a  good 
Concordance,  or  dictionary  of  Hebrew  names,  the  English 
meaning  may  be  ascertained.  However,  many  of  these 
names  may  be  derived  from  different  roots  and  have  therefore 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  43 

a  different  meaning,  while  the  meaning  of  others  is  rather 
obscure.  For  the  reason  already  stated  we  cannot  follow 
the  possible  meaning  and  application  of  these  names.  The 
lesson,  however,  is  that  the  Lord  distributed  the  inheritance 
to  His  people  and  placed  them  as  it  pleased  Him.  He  knew 
their  faithfulness  and  their  ability,  and  accordingly  they 
received  their  portion.  And  we,  too,  as  members  of  His 
body,  receive  our  portion  and  inheritance  from  Himself, 
"dividing  to  every  man  severally  as  He  will"  (1  Cor.  xii:ll). 
Caleb's  conquest  is  of  additional  interest.  In  the  previous 
chapter  we  learned  of  his  faith  and  how  he  honored  the 
Lord.  He  acknowledged  that  the  Lord  had  kept  him 
alive;  by  His  mercy  he  had  been  spared  (xiv:10).  He 
claimed  His  portion,  and  in  humility  of  faith  he  expected 
success  and  victory.  He  gets  Hebron,  which  means  "com- 
munion." The  application  in  spiritual  lines  is  interesting. 
Faith  longs  for  Hebron,  for  communion.  But  the  giants, 
the  Anakim,  are  there,  to  keep  away  from  real  communion 
with  God.  They  must  be  dispossessed.  Caleb  drove  out  the 
three  sons  of  Anak.  Their  names  are  Sheshai,  which  means 
"my  fine  linen,"*  reminding  us  of  our  own  righteousness; 
Ahiman,  the  meaning  of  this  word  is  "who  is  my  brother?" 
which  may  be  applied  to  pride  of  descent;  Talmai,  the  third 
son  of  Anak,  means  "abounding  in  furrows,"  the  pride  of 
achievement.  Pride  in  different  forms  is  the  hindrance  to 
real  communion  with  God.  Pride  has  to  be  dethroned  in 
the  heart  and  in  the  life  of  His  people.  Only  as  we  follow 
the  Lord  wholly,  as  Caleb  did,  shall  we  conquer  and  enjoy 
our  Hebron  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  he  also  had 
Debir  (Oracle — the  voice  speaking);  Kirjath-sepher  means 
"city  of  the  book."  Thus  Hebron,  communion,  is  closely 
linked  with  the  written  Word  and  the  voice  which  speaks 
there.  And  in  Achsah,  Caleb's  daughter,  we  have  another 
side  of  faith  represented.  When  Caleb  said  unto  her,  "What 
wouldest  thou?"   she  answered,   "Give  me  a  blessing;  for 


*Shesh  is  the  Hebrew  word  used  for  the  fine  linen  in  the  tabernacle. 
In  this  way  we  get  "Sheshai,"  viy  fine  linen. 


44  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

thou  hast  given  me  a  south  land;  give  me  also  springs  of 
water.  And  he  gave  her  the  upper  springs  and  the  nether 
springs."     It  is  faith  which  asks  much  and  receives  much. 

4.  The  Portion  of  Ephraim. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

1.  The  Lot  for  the  Children  of  Joseph.     Vs.  1-4. 

2.  Ephraim's  Portion.     Vs.  5-9. 

3.  Ephraim's  Failure.     V.   10. 

A  wonderful  lot  was  that  of  Joseph,  beginning  at  Jordan, 
the  river  of  death,  up  to  Bethel,  which  means  "the  house 
of  God."  Then  the  portion  of  Ephraim  comes  first.  Eph- 
raim with  the  blessed  inheritance  to  be  "doubly  fruitful" 
(the  meaning  of  Ephraim)  fails.  "They  drove  not  out 
the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  Gezer."  Josephus,  the 
Jewish  historian,  remarks  on  this:  "They  grew  effeminate 
as  to  fighting  any  more  agaiast  their  enemies,  but  applied 
themselves  to  the  cultivation  of  the  land,  which  producing 
them  great  plenty  and  riches,  they  indulged  in  luxury  and 
pleasure."  No  doubt  this  tradition  is  correct.  How  this 
has  been  repeated  in  Christendom!  What  Ephraim  became, 
joined  to  idols,  we  read  in  the  Prophet  Hosea. 

5.  The  Portion  of  Manasseh. 
CHAPTER  xvn. 

1.  Their  Names.     Vs.  1-6. 

2.  Their  Border.     Vs.  7-13. 

3.  The  Complaint  and  the  Answer.     Vs.  14-18. 

Half  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh  had  their  inheritance  on 
the  other  side  of  Jordan,  having  joined  themselves  to  Reuben 
and  Gad.  The  rest  of  Manasseh  are  now  named  according 
to  their  families.  These  are:  Abiezer,  Helek,  Asriel, 
Shechem,  Hepher  and  Shemida.  The  son  of  Hepher, 
Zelophehad  had  no  sons  (see  Num.  xxvii:l-ll);  the  names 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  45 

of  the  five  daughters  are  given  here  again.  They  claim 
now  the  inheritance  which  the  Lord  had  given  to  them. 
They,  too,  exhibit  the  courage  of  faith.  May  we  also  claim 
in  faith  that  inheritance  which  belongs  to  us  through  the 
Grace  of  God. 

The  complaint  of  the  children  of  Joseph  shows  dissatis- 
faction with  their  lot;  it  was  selfishness.  Joshua  takes 
them  by  their  word.  His  answer  reminds  us  of  the  divine 
command  given  in  Chapter  i;3.  "Every  place  that  the 
sole  of  your  foot  shall  tread  upon,  that  have  I  given  unto 
you,  as  I  said  unto  Moses,"  Yonder  were  the  stately 
forests,  the  wooded  hills  and  mountains,  inhabited  still  by 
the  Perizzites  and  the  giants.  All  they  needed  to  do  was 
to  go  there  and  drive  them  out  and  they  would  possess  a 
larger  portion.  But  this  answer  but  brings  out  their  unbe- 
lief and  failure.  They  plead  weakness;  it  was  nothing 
less  than  unbelief,  for  they  looked  to  the  iron  chariots  the 
Canaanites  possessed,  instead  of  looking  to  the  Lord  and 
trusting  His  power.  They  refused  to  meet  the  enemy 
and  have  their  borders  enlarged  under  these  conditions. 
What  a  contrast  with  bold  and  humble  Caleb!  And  yet 
Joshua  encourages  them.  He  urges  them  to  go  forward  and 
possess  the  forest  and  cut  it  down.  It  was  his  challenge 
to  their  faith.  Faith  does  not  reckon  with  chariots,  with 
difficulties. 

6,     The  Portion  of  the  Rest  of  the  Tribes.      Chapters 
XVUI-XIX. 

CHAPTER  XVIIl. 

1.    The  Tabernacle  at  Shiloh      Vs.  1, 

2  The  Remaining  Seven  Tribes.     Vs.  2-10. 

3  The  Lot  of  Beniamin.      Vs.  11-28, 

The  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  is  now  set  up  at 
Shiloh.  Shiloh  means  "peace" — "security,"  The  land  was 
then  subdued  before  them.  Shiloh  is  now  the  center.  From 
there    the    operations    proceed.     Seven    times    after    this 


46  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Shiloh  is  mentioned  in  the  book  of  Joshua :  Chapter  xviii : 
8,  9,  10;  xix;51;  xxi:2;  xxii:9,  12.  Read  these  carefully 
and  see  what  happened  in  connection  with  Shiloh,  the  place 
of  rest.  The  tabernacle  remained  at  Shiloh  till  the  Philis- 
tines came  and  took  the  ark,  as  recorded  in  1  Sara  iv  11. 
Then  it  was  at  Nob  in  the  days  of  Saul,  then  at  Jerusalem, 
at  Gibeon  in  the  beginning  of  Solomon's  reign  (2  Chron, 
i;3).     It  never  got  back  to  this  first  resting-place. 

At  that  time  seven  tribes  still  remained  without  an  in- 
heritance. They  seemed  to  be  content  without  any  inheri- 
tance whatever.  Most  likely  they  had  also  become  tired 
of  war.  Theirs  had  been  a  strenuous  experience.  It  was 
difficult  work  to  go  forth  and  conquer,  to  occupy  new  terri- 
tory and  meet  the  enemies.  They  must  likewise  have 
come  into  possession  of  many  things  for  their  comfort, 
which  were  unknown  to  them  in  the  wilderness;  and  with 
the  natural  and  plentiful  resources  of  the  land  they  became 
self-indulgent  and  were  at  ease.  Joshua's  earnest  appeal 
suggests  such  a  state  of  the  people,  "How  long  are  ye 
slack  to  go  to  possess  the  land,  which  the  Lord  God  of 
your  fathers  hath  given  you?"  And  their  negligence  in  not 
possessing  the  land  avenged  itself,  for  the  unpossessed  land 
with  its  enemies  became  "scourges  in  their  sides  and  thorns 
in  their  eyes."  What  ingratitude  it  was,  after  God's  won- 
derful power  had  brought  them  in,  that  they  should  neglect 
to  avail  themselves  of  .so  great  a  gift!  Such  is  man,  always 
a  failure  in  himself.  It  needs  hardly  to  be  said,  that  all  this 
finds  an  application  with  ourselves,  whom  the  Lord  has 
brought  into  a  better  land  and  richer  inheritance.  How 
slack  we  are  to  go  to  possess  the  land!  How  many  neglect 
so  great  salvation!  Joshua  then  gave  instructions  and  the 
men  selected  walked  through  the  land  and  made  a  survey 
of  it. 

The  inheritance  of  Benjamin  is  described  in  the  remaining 
portion  of  this  chapter.  Their  lot  fell  into  a  steep,  moun- 
tainous country;  many  of  the  cities  they  received  were 
in  high  places,  indicated  by  such  names  as  Gibeon  (hilly); 
Gibeath    (a   hill);   Gaba    (elevation);   Ramah  (the  height); 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  47 

Mizpeh  (watch-tower),  etc.  May  we  ascend  the  heights 
of  glory  we  have  in  Christ,  and  walk  in  our  high -places, 
with  feet  as  swift  as  the  hinds'  feet  (Habak.  iiirOO).  And 
we  too  have  our  "Mizpeh,"  the  place  of  watching  and  waiting 
for  Him,  who  will  lead  us  into  our  wonderful  inheritance  in 
the  day  of  His  coming  Glory. 

"Benjamin  was  counted  the  least  of  the  tribes  (1  Sam. 
ix:31),  and  when,  with  other  tribes,  it  was  represented  by 
its  chief  magistrate,;  it  was  rather  disparagingly  distinguished 
as  'little  Benjamin  with  their  ruler'  (Psalm  lxviii:27).  Yet 
it  was  strong  enough,  on  one  occasion,  to  set  at  defiance 
for  a  time  the  combined  forces  of  the  other  tribes  (Judg. 
xx;12,  etc.).  It  was  distinguished  for  the  singular  skill 
of  its  slingers;  seven  hundred,  who  were  left-handed,  'could 
every  one  sling  stones  at  an  hair-breadth  and  not  miss' 
(Judg.  xx;16).  The  character  of  its  territory,  abounding 
in  rocky  mountains,  and  probably  in  game,  for  the  capture 
of  which  the  sling  was  adapted,  might,  in  some  degree, 
account  for  this  peculiarity. 

"Many  famous  battles  were  fought  on  the  soil  of  Benja- 
min. The  battle  of  Ai;  that  of  Gibeon,  followed  by  the 
pursuit  through  Bethhoron,  both  under  Joshua;  Jonathan's 
battle  with  the  Philistines  at  Michraash  (1  Sam.  xiv);  and 
the  duel  at  Gibeon  between  twelve  men  of  Saul  and  twelve 
of  David  (2  Sam.  ii.l5,  16);  were  all  fought  within  the 
territory  of  Benjamin.  And  when  Sennacherib  approached 
Jerusalem  from  the  north,  the  places  which  were  thrown 
into  panic  as  he  came  near  were  in  this  tribe.  'He  is  come 
to  Aiath,  he  is  passed  through  Migron;  at  Michmash  he 
layeth  up  his  baggage;  they  are  gone  over  the  pass;  they 
have  taken  up  their  lodging  at  Geba;  Ramah  trembleth; 
Gibeah  of  Saul  is  fled.  Cry  aloud  with  thy  voice,  O  daughter 
of  Gallim!  hearken,  O  Laishali!  O  thou  poor  Anathoth! 
Madmenah  is  a  fugitive;  the  inhabitants  of  Gebim  gather 
themselves  to  flee.  This  very  day  shall  he  halt  at  Nob;  he 
shaketh  his  hand  at  the  mount  of  the  daughter  of  Zion,  the 
hill  of  Jerusalem'  (Isa.  x:28-32,  R.  V.),  In  later  times 
Judas  Maccabeus  gained  a  victory  over  the  Syrian  forces  at 


48  THEIBOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Bethhoron;  and,  again,  Cestius  and  his  Roman  troops  were 
defeated  by  the  Jews."* 

The  tribe  counted  the  least,  "Httle  Benjamin,"  came 
into  possession  of  the  richest  inheritance,  which  is  abun- 
dantly witnessed  to  by  the  names  of  the  different  cities, 
if  we  diligently  search  out  their  meaning.  God  delights 
to  take  up  what  is  little  and  make  it  great.  | 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  The  Inheritance  of  Simeon.     Vs.  1-9. 

2.  The  Inheritance  of  Zebulun.     Vs.  10-16. 

3.  The  Inheritance  of  Issachar.     Vs.  17-23. 

4.  The  Inheritance  of  Asher.     Vs.   24-31. 

5.  The  Inheritance  of  Naphtali.     Vs.  32-39 

6.  The  Inheritance  of  Dan.     Vs.  40-48. 

7.  The  Inheritance  of  Joshua.     Vs.  49-51. 

The  many  names  of  cities  and  villages,  the  inheritance  of 
the  remaining  six  tribes,  we  must  leave  untouched.  Blessed 
and  deep  spiritual  lessons  are  written  in  all  these  names. 
Simeon's  inheritance  is  closely  connected  with  that  of 
Judah.  "Their  inheritance  was  in  the  midst  of  the  inheri- 
tance of  the  children  of  Judah."  Simeon  means  "Hearing" 
and  Judah  means  "Praise."  Thus  the  two  are  linked 
together.  If  our  hearts  are  open  to  hear  and  our  faith 
appropriates  we  praise  and  worship  and  enjoy  our  God-given 
inheritance  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  the  different 
cities  have  a  blessed  meaning.  Diligent  and  prayerful 
searching  will  discover  the  hidden  treasures  which  faith 
prizes  more  than  gold,  and  which  are  "sweeter^than  honey." 
Let  us  glance  briefly  at  Asher  to  give  a  Httle  illustration 
of  this.  Asher  means  "happy,"  commonly  translated  by 
"Blessed"  (Psalm  i:l;  xxxii:l;  cxix:l).  The  Lord's  people 
must  be  a  happy  people.     Moses  had  pronounced  them  so 


*Expositor's  Bible. 

f  Saul  of  Tarsus,  our  great  Apostle  Paul  (Paul  means  "Little"),  was  of 
the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  He  possessed  and  enjoyed  his  inheritance  in 
the  Heaveulies. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  49 

(Deut.  xxxiii:29).  A  few  of  the  cities  and  boundaries  of 
Asher  and  their  meaning  will  show  in  what  the  happiness 
of  God's  people  consists.  Helkath  means  "portion;"  the 
Lord  Himself  is  the  portion  of  His  people.  He  is  our  joy 
and  happiness.  Hali  means  "an  ornament  worked  out 
with  pain."  We  possess  that  which  Christ  has  worked 
out  for  us  in  His  death.  Ahamelech  means  "God  is  King." 
This  is  a  sweet  morsel  to  faith.  Amad,  "an  eternal  people," 
speaks  of  our  security,  that  we  belong  to  God  and  nothing 
can  separate  us  from  Him.  Misheal,  "feeling  after  God," 
tells  of  the  longing  of  the  new  nature,  which  finds  happiness 
in  God.  Hammon,  "sunny;"  Kanah,  "He  has  purchased"; 
Zidon,  "taking  the  prey";  Hosah,  "trust";  Ummah,  "union"; 
Aphek,  "strength" — these  and  others  are  easily  seen  as 
giving  spiritual  lessons  on  the  happiness  of  the  people  of 
God  who  enjoy  in  faith  the  inheritance. 

After  all  had  received  their  portions  Joshua  received  his. 
It  was  Timnath-serah,  which  means  "an  abundant  portion." 
The  portion  of  Joshua  is  the  blessed  type  of  the  inheritance, 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  received.  We  must  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  the  children  of  Israel  gave  Joshua 
the  inheritance.  Christ  is  our  inheritance  and  we  are  His 
inheritance.  He  has  an  inheritance  in  the  Saints  (Ephes. 
i  :18) .    May  we  give  Him  that  inheritance. 

7.  The  Cities  of  Refuge. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  The  Ordinance  Repeated.     Vs.  1—6. 

2.  The  Cities  Named.     Vs.  7-9. 

The  reader  will  find  the  meaning  of  the  ordinance  of  the 
cities  of  Refug?  in  Numbers  and  Deuteronomy,  so  that 
we  do  not  need  to  repeat  it  here.  But  only  three  cities  are 
mentioned  in  the  Pentateuch.  Here  the  three  cities  in  the 
land  are  added.  Kedesh  was  in  Naphtali.  Kedesh  means 
"Sanctuary,"  and  Naphtali  means  "Wrestler — Struggler." 


50  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

Christ  is  the  refuge  for  the  struggling  sinner.  Sheehem 
means  "shoulder,"  and  is  the  type  of  service.  He  who  is 
the  perfect  servant,  who  ministered  and  gave  His  life,  is  the 
place  of  refuge.  Kirjath-arba,  which  is  Hebron,  is  the  third, 
and  Hebron  means  "communion."  This  we  find  in  Him. 
Bezer  (defense),  Ramoth  (heights)  and  Golan  (rejoicing) 
were  the  other  three  beyond  Jordan,  named  already  in 
the  Pentateuch. 

8.  The  Portion  of  the  Levites. 
CHAPTER  XXI. 

1.  The  Levites,  the  Children  of  Aaron,  and  their  Portions.     Vs.  1-8. 

2.  Kohath.     Vs.  9-26. 

3.  Gershon.     Vs.  27-33. 

4.  Merari.     Vs.  34-40.  , 

5.  The  Lord's  Faithfulness.  '^  Vs.'41-45. 

In  chapters  xiii:14,  83  and  xiv:3,  4  the  statement  is  made 
that  Moses  gave  no  inheritance  to  the  Levites.  The  Lord  was 
their  inheritance.  After  the  tribes  had  received  their  allot- 
ments the  heads  of  the  fathers  of  the  Levites  came  to  Joshua 
and  Eleazar  with  a  petition.  They  based  their  petition  upon 
the  Word  of  God  spoken  to  Moses.  'Command  the  children 
of  Israel,  that  they  give  unto  the  Levites  of  the  inheritance  of 
their  possession  cities  to  dwell  in;  and  ye  shall  give  also  unto 
the  Levites  suburbs  for  the  cities  roimd  about  them"  (Num. 
XXXV  :2).  The  people  were  obedient  and  gave  them  cities 
out  of  their  several  inheritances.  But  the  cities  were  also 
assigned  by  lot,  so  that  the  Lord  assigned  them  their  habi- 
tations. How  it  must  have  pleased  Him  to  see  His  Word 
remembered,  obeyed  and  acted  upon!  They  were  scattered 
throughout  the  entire  domain  of  Israel.  The  Kohathites 
and  the  children  of  Aaron  had  thirteen  cities  in  th'"  '.ribes 
of  Judah,  Benjamin  and  Simeon,  and  two  more  in  Ephraim, 
Dan  and  Manasseh.  The  Gershonites  were  placed  in 
cities  in  eastern  Manasseh,  Issachar,  Asher  and  Naphtali. 
The  Merarites  were  in  Zebulun  and  among  Gad  and  Reuben. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  51 

The  divine  purpose  in  scattering  them  over  the  land  was, 
no  doubt,  that  they  might  exercise  a  beneficent  influence 
in  divine  things  to  exhort  the  tribes  to  worship  Jehovah, 
to  remind  them  of  His  goodness  and  to  restrain  them  from 
idolatry.  At  the  close  of  this  chapter  we  read  of  the  faith- 
fulness of  the  Lord.  He  gave  them  the  land;  He  gave 
them  rest;  He  gave  them  victory.  'There  failed  not  ought 
of  any  good  thing  which  the  Lord  had  spoken."  All  God's 
promises  will  be  in  due  time  accomplished. 


52  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

III.     The    Final    Words  of  Joshua.     The 
Epilogue. 

Chapters  xxii-xxiv 
1.  The  Two  and  One-half  Tribes.    The  Altar  Ed. 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

1.  Joshua's  Address.     Vs.  1-6. 

2.  The  Tribes  Dismissed  and  their  Return.     Vs.  7-9. 

3.  The  Great  Altar  Erected.     V   10. 

4.  War  Proposed.     Vs.    11-12. 

5.  The  Mission  of  Phinehas  and  the  Explanation.     Vs   13-29. 

6.  The    Explanation    Accepted,     Vs.    30-31. 

7.  The  Altar  Ed.     Vs.  32-34. 

A  beautiful  scene  is  before  us.  Joshua,  the  aged  servant 
of  God,  called  the  Reubenites,  the  Gadites  and  half  of 
Manasseh.  Their  selfish  choice  in  selecting  their  portion 
on  this  side  of  Jordan  is  found  in  Numbers.  They  had, 
however,  to  pass  over  Jordan  with  the  other  tribes  and  help 
them  in  the  conflict  (Chapter  i:12-18).  The  promise  they 
had  made  was  conscientiously  kept  and  the  time  for  their 
return  to  their  habitations  had  come.  Joshua  commends 
them  for  their  faithfulness,  and  exhorts  them  to  love  the 
Lord,  to  walk  in  all  His  ways,  to  keep  His  commandments, 
to  cleave  unto  Him  and  to  serve  Him.  May  we  also  heed 
these  words.  Only  as  we  walk  in  all  His  ways  and  are 
obedient  to  His  Word  can  we  enjoy  the  fellowship  and  the 
spiritual  blessings  which  belong  to  us.  They  returned  with 
great  riches,  with  silver,  gold,  brass,  iron  and  raiment. 

They  erected,  after  their  homegoing,  a  great  altar.* 
It  was  of  immense  size,  so  that  it  might  be  seen  far  and 
wide  as  a  silent  witness.  When  the  rest  of  Israel  heard 
of  this  altar,  and  thinking  that  it  meant  a  separate  worship. 


*Hebrew:     An  altar  great  to  the  sight. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  53 

instituted  by  these  two  and  a  half  tribes,  they  were  ready  to 
go  to  war.  They  exhibited  great  zeal  for  the  Lord  and  were 
ready  to  carry  out  His  Word.  See  Exodus  xx:24;  Lev.  xvii: 
8-9;  Deut.  xii:5-13;  xiii:7-13.  But  while  they  were  zealous, 
they  also  exhibited  wisdom  and  sent  Phinehas  with  ten 
princes  to  investigate  the  supposed  apostasy.  The  explana- 
tion follows  and  is  accepted.  The  altar  was  then  called 
Ed,  which  means  "witness."  It  was  to  bear  witness  between 
them,  that  the  Lord  is  God,  and  that  the  tribes,  though 
separated  by  Jordan,  are  one  people.  But  where  is  to-day 
the  witness  in  Christendom  that  there  is  one  body.'*  That 
witness  seems  to  have  been  lost. 

2.  Joshua's  Two  Addresses. 

Chapters  xxiii-xxiv:28. 

The  First  Address. 
CHAPTER  xxm. 

1.  The  People  Gathered.     Vs.  1-2. 

2.  God's  Faithfulness  Remembered.     Vs.   3-5. 

3.  Exhortations  to  Obedience.     Vs.  6-11. 

4.  Warning.     Vs.  12-13. 

5.  Conclusion  of  First  Address.     Vs.  14-16. 

It  was  about  eight  years  after  the  Lord  had  given  rest 
unto  Israel,  that  the  aged  Joshua  called  for  all  Israel  and 
their  elders  to  assemble  in  his  presence.  He  was  very  old 
and  the  time  of  his  departure  at  hand.  The  purpose  of  his 
first  address  is  to  remind  the  people  and  their  elders  of  the 
Lord's  faithfulness  in  keeping  all  His  promises,  and  to  exhort 
them  to  be  faithful  to  Him  and  to  warn  them  of  the  results 
of  apostasy.  He  exhorts  them  with  the  same  message, 
which  the  Lord  had  given  to  him  in  the  beginning  of  the  book. 
Compare  verse  6  with  chapter  i:7.  He  had  been  obedient 
to  this  command  and  the  Lord  had  done  all  for  him  He  had 
promised.  Joshua  was  a  man  of  faith  and  courage,  an  excel- 
lent character. 


54  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

"He  is  characterized  by  conscientious  fidelity  to  the  Law, 
and  unclouded  theocratical  sentiments.  He  is  deliberate 
and  prudent  when  he  acts  himself,  for  he  conducts  the 
wars  of  the  Lord;  but  he  becomes  prompt,  bold  and  decided, 
when  the  Lord  sends  him.  His  courage  is  humility,  his 
strength  is  faith,  his  wisdom  is  obedience  and  the  fear  of  the 
Lord.  He  has  a  gentle  spirit,  but  does  not  betray  weakness; 
the  evidence  of  the  latter  is  furnished  by  his  strict  judgment 
in  the  case  of  Achan.  and  the  scrupulous  exactness  with  which 
he  executes  the  Lord's  sentence  respecting  the  Canaanites. 
Such  a  union  of  gentleness  and  rigor,  of  simplicity  and 
prudence,  of  humility  and  grandeur  of  sentiment,  presents 
evangelical  features.  This  peculiarity  of  his  character, 
combined  with  the  peculiarity  of  that  age  of  the  kingdom  of 
God  in  which  he  lived,  and  also  of  the  position  which  he 
occupied,  adapts  both  himself  and  the  work  which  he  per- 
formed to  be  highly  significant  types  of  the  future.  He 
conducts  the  people  into  the  land  of  promise  and  of  rest; 
but  there  remains  a  better  rest  into  which  his  archetype, 
who  bears  the  same  name,  conducts  the  people  of  God  (Heb. 
iv  :8,  9) ;  he  carries  on  the  wars,  and  executes  the  judgments 
of  the  Lord,  in  which  are  shadowed  the  victories  and 
judgments  of  Christ. 

"The  sentiments  which  govern  Joshua,  pervade  the 
people  in  general  in  his  day.  The  whole  history  of  the  chosen 
people  presents  no  other  period  in  which  they  were  generally 
animated  by  such  zeal  in  the  cause  of  the  theocracy,  by  such 
conscientious  fidelity  to  the  Law,  by  such  vigorous  faith 
and  sincere  fear  of  God  as  that  generation  manifested.  It 
was  the  period  of  first  love,  and,  in  this  aspect,  may  be 
compared  vn\h  the  first  centuries  of  the  Christian  Church."* 

And  we  need,  as  His  people,  the  courage  of  faith  to  stand 
for  the  Lord  and  for  His  Word  in  the  days  of  departure  from 
God.  And  Joshua's  warning  was  sadly  fulfilled  in  the 
subsequent  history  of  Israel. 


*Kurtz  in  "Sacred  History." 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  55 

The  Second  Address. 

CHAPTER  XXIV:l-28. 

1.  The  Gathering  at  Shechem.     V.  1. 

2.  Historic  Retrospect  and  Exhortations.     Vs.  2-15. 

3.  The  Answer  Given  by  Israel.     Vs.  16-18. 

4.  Joshua's  Answer.     Vs.  19-20. 

5.  The  Promise  Made.     V.  21. 

6.  Joshua's  Appeal  and  the  Repeated  Promise.      Vs.  22-24. 

7.  The  Covenant  made  and  Joshua's  6nal  Word.     Vs.  25-28. 

In  Joshua's  second  and  last  address  to  the  people  at 
Shechem  we  have  first  a  historic  retrospect.  It  must  not 
be  overlooked,  that  the  words  of  Joshua  are  not  his  own, 
but  the  words  given  to  him  by  the  Lord.  "Thus  suith  the 
Lord,  God  of  Israel,"  is  the  manner  in  which  he  begins. 
The  retrospect  is  a  marvel  in  terse  statements  and  rehearsal 
of  the  entire  history  of  Israel,  beginning  with  the  call  of 
Abraham.  Its  object  is  to  remind  the  assembled  congre- 
gation once  more  of  the  mercies  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah. 
How  soon  they  may  be  forgotten!  Yet  upon  remembering 
what  we  are  by  nature  and  what  the  Lord  in  His  infinite 
grace  has  done  for  us,  depends  a  true  walk  with  God.  The 
Spirit  of  God,  through  Joshua,  shows  that  Abraham  was 
called  away  from  idolatry  and  traces  all  Jehovah  did  for 
him  and  his  seed.  Notice  the  different  acts  of  the  Lord. 
I  took  your  father  Abraham — I  led  him — I  multiplied  his 
seed — gave  him  Isaac — I  gave — I  sent  Moses — I  plagued 
Egypt — I  brought  you  out — I  brought  you  into  the  land. 
All  the  promises  made  in  Exodus  and  Deuteronomy  con- 
cerning the  possession  and  conquest  of  the  land  had  been 
fulfilled.  Read  Exodus  xxiii:28  and  Deut.  vii:20  and  com- 
pare with  verse  12.  He  gave  them  a  land  for  which  they 
did  not  labor. 

The  covenant  is  then  renewed.  Beautiful  are  Joshua's 
words,  "As  for  me  and  vay  house,  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 
He  had  served  Him  all  his  life  and  on  the  eve  of  his  departure, 
he  renews  his  vow.  With  such  an  enthusiastic,  consecrated 
and   successful   leader,   the   people   could   only   answer   in 


56  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

the  aflSrmative.  They  renewed  their  previous  promise  to 
serve  the  Lord.  The  answer  they  gave  is  an  echo  of  Joshua's 
words.  They  repeat  what  Jehovah  had  so  graciously  done 
unto  them.  Joshua's  answer  to  the  enthusiastic  reply 
of  the  people  was  *'Ye  cannot  serve  the  Lord."  He  well 
knew  by  the  light  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  this  people,  so 
stiffnecked  in  the  past,  would  soon  depart  from  this  resolution 
and  follow  other  gods.  Besides  this,  Joshua  knew  the  final 
words  of  Moses,  the  great  prophecies  concerning  the  apostasy 
of  the  nation,  their  deep  fall  into  idolatries  and  their  coming 
dispersion  among  the  Gentiles.  With  the  Word  of  God 
before  him,  he  could  not  believe  that  the  future  of  the 
people,  whom  Jehovah  had  brought  out  and  brought  in, 
would  be  a  future  of  obedience  and  blessing.  He  is  not 
deceived  by  the  enthusiasm  which  had  taken  hold  of  the 
assembled  congregation.  We  also  have  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment the  predictions  and  the  warnings  concerning  the  course 
of  the  professing  church  on  earth  during  the  present  age. 
We  do  well  to  heed  these.  If  not  we  shall  be  deceived  in 
expecting  that  which  is  nowhere  promised  for  this  age. 

"The  predictions  of  the  Church's  course  have  so  little 
ambiguity  that  it  is  marvelous  that  the  smooth  preaching 
of  peace,  and  the  comforting  assurance  of  progressive 
blessing,  could  ever  gain  credence  with  those  who  boast  in  an 
'open  Bible.'  But  the  Bible  can  be  but  little  'open'  as 
long  as  man's  pride  and  self-seeking  hang  their  imaginative 
veil  before  it;  and  the  Church,  believing  herself  heir  to  Israel's 
promises,  has  largely  refused  to  accept  the  lessons  of  Israel's 
career,  which  she  has  so  closely  followed.  Thank  God,  we 
are  near  the  end  of  the  strange  history  of  almost  two  mil- 
lennia; and  for  us  the  end  is  the  coming  of  the  Lord."* 

The  covenant  was  thus  renewed  and  a  great  stone  set  up 
as  a  witness.  How  long  did  it  last?  Our  next  book  gives 
the  answer:  "And  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  and  served  the  Baalim"  (Judges  ii:ll). 

*F.  W.  Grant. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  57 

"And  they  forsook  the  Lord  and  served  Baal  and  Ash- 
taroth"  (verse  13). 

3.  The  Epilogue. 

CHAPTER  XXIV:29-33. 

1.  Joshua's  Death  and  Burial.     Vs.  29-31. 

2.  The  Bones  of  Joseph   Buried.     V.  32. 

3.  Eleazar's  Death.     V.   33. 

Moses,  the  instrument  through  whom  the  law  was  given, 
was  buried  by  the  Lord,  no  doubt  a  hint  that  some  day 
the  Lord  would  put  away  the  law,  with  its  curse,  as 
we  learn  in  the  New  Testament.  Joshua  was  buried 
by  the  people  in  his  own  inheritance;  he  died  ten 
years  younger  than  Moses,  that  is  110  years  old.  Joseph 
had  reached  the  same  age,  having  died  some  200  years 
before.  Gen.  1:25;  Exod.  xiii:19  and  Hebrews  xi:22  must 
be  consulted  to  understand  the  burial  of  his  bones  recorded 
here.  They  had  carried  those  bones  all  through  the  wil- 
derness and  never  attempted  to  bury  them  till  they  were 
settled  in  the  land.  The  book  closes  with  the  account 
of  Eleazar's  death. 


58  THE  BOOR  OF  JOSHUA. 


Appendix, 


THE  DISPENSATIONAL  ASPECT  OF  THE  BOOK  OF 

JOSHUA. 

The  Book  of  Joshua  foreshadows  the  great  coming  events 
in  which  Israel,  Israel's  land  and  the  nations  are  concerned. 
Everything  in  Israel's  history  is  prophetic.  The  events 
connected  with  the  lives  of  the  Patriarchs,  Abraham,  Isaac 
and  Jacob,  as  well  as  the  story  of  Joseph,  have  a  prophetic 
dispensational  meaning.  Israel  in  the  furnace  of  Egypt 
foreshadows  Babylon,  and  also  the  great  dispersion  in 
which  they  are  now.  Their  persecutors  then  were  Gentiles, 
who  hated  them  and  would  not  let  them  go;  Gentiles  are  still 
troubling  them  and  will  persecute  them  during  the  time  of 
the  end.  Their  remarkable  experiences  and  preservation 
in  Egypt  are  the  types  of  their  miraculous  keeping,  and 
no  less  miraculous  increase  among  all  the  nations  of  the 
world,  among  whom  they  have  been  scattered.  The  plagues 
which  fell  upon  Egypt  are  typical  of  the  judgments  of  God, 
which  will  fall  upon  the  world  at  the  close  of  the  present  age. 
Their  Exodus  from  Egypt  teaches  similar  lessons.  The 
passage  through  the  Red  Sea,  their  slain  enemies  and  the 
song  of  Praise,  as  given  in  Exodus  XV,  have  likewise  a 
dispensational  aspect.  So  has  the  visible  presence  of 
Jehovah.  As  He  was  there  with  His  people,  so  will  He 
be  with  them  again. 

As  we  have  seen  in  the  study  of  Numbers,  the  parables 
of  Balaam  are  great  prophecies,  touching  the  future  of 
Israel.  When  the  dying  people  were  looking  upon  the 
brazen  serpent,  and  the  healing  which  resulted,  may  also 
be  taken  as  a  type  of  their  future  looking  upon  Him,  whom 
they  have  pierced.  There  is  therefore  also  a  dispensational 
foreshadowing  in  the  book  of  Joshua.  We  shall  mention 
seven  things. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  59 

1.   The  Possession  of  the  Land. 

That  goodly  land  in  its  great  dimensions  is  still  Israel's 
land,  the  land  of  promise.  They  have  yet  to  possess  it 
from  the  Euphrates  to  the  River  Nile.  To  say  that  Israel 
will  never  receive  the  land  and  possess  it  in  the  future  as  a 
redeemed  people,  would  mean  the  same  as  accusing  God 
of  breaking  His  promises  and  oath-bound  covenants. 

As  surely  as  we  are  in  Christ  the  Heirs  of  God  and  Joint- 
heirs  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  surely  will  Israel  inherit 
and  possess  the  land.  As  there  was  a  definite  time  for 
Israel  to  cross  Jordan  and  possess  the  land,  so  is  there  a 
definite  time  when  God  will  bring  them  in  again.  It  will  be 
when  the  measure  of  wickedness  of  the  nations,  who  are  the 
present  possessors  of  the  land,  is  filled  up,  as  the  wickedness 
of  the  Canaanites  was  filled  up  in  Joshua's  days.  When 
that  time  comes  God  will  once  more  remember  the  covenant, 
and  He  will  give  the  land  back  to  His  people  and  bring 
them  in,  as  He  brought  them  in  through  Joshua. 

The  land  is  God's  gift.  We  have  often  talked  with  Jews 
and  Zionists.  Some  years  ago  a  Zionistic  leader  mentioned 
in  our  presence  their  plans  of  getting  the  land  back  grad- 
ually, and  eventually  buy  the  whole  land.  We  asked 
him:  "What  would  you  think,  if  your  horse  had  been 
stolen  by  a  thief,  and  you  knew  the  thief,  went  to  him  and 
offered  him  a  hundred  dollars  to  buy  your  horse  back.'' 
Would  it  not  be  the  most  nonsensical  as  well  as  unjust 
dealing?"  You  Zionists  are  trying  to  buy  back  the  land 
from  the  power  which  has  no  right  to  have  the  land  That 
power  holds  stolen  property.  And,  besides,  this  land, 
according  to  the  law,  is  not  to  be  bought  nor  to  be  sold. 
To-day  the  power  which  holds  Palestine  Turkey  is  crum- 
bling to  pieces.  It  is  only  the  question  of  time  when  the 
fate  of  Palestine  has  to  be  decided. 

II.  Joshua  Their  Leader. 

As  we  have  mentioned  before  in  the  annotations,  Joshua 
means  "Jehovah  is  Saviour. "    Moses,  the  first  one,  could 


60^  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

not  bring  them  in,  but  Joshua,  the  second  divinely  appointed 
leader,  brought  them  in.  Moses  is  the  type  of  Christ's 
first  Coming,  and  Joshua  the  type  of  the  second  coming 
of  Christ.  It  is  at  the  second  Coming  of  our  Lord  that 
Israel  will  receive  the  land.  He  will  restore  to  them  the 
God-given  inheritance. 

Under  Joshua  the  people  were  no  longer  stiff-necked, 
but  obedient  and  submissive,  willing  followers  of  Him  who 
led  them  forth.  This  will  be  the  case  when  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  returns.  Then  they  will  be  His  willing  people 
(Psalm  cx:3).  Joshua  was  magnified  before  the  eyes  of 
all  Israel,  even  as  Christ  will  be  magnified  when  He  comes 
again.  At  the  close  of  the  fourth  chapter  of  Joshua  we  read 
that  all  the  people  may  know  and  fear  the  Lord.  This  surely 
will  be  the  result  of  the  second  Coming  of  our  Lord. 

III.  The  Spies  and  Rahab. 

God's  abounding  Grace  is  illustrated  in  the  salvation  of 
Rahab  and  her  house.  In  the  New  Testament  we  find  her 
with  three  other  Gentile  women  in  the  genealogy  of  our  Lord 
in  Matthew's  Gospel.  We  read  of  her  in  Hebrews  xi  and 
in  the  Epistle  of  James.  The  meaning  of  these  passages  has 
already  been  pointed  out.  The  scarlet  line,  and  her  security 
and  salvation  from  judgment,  we  have  also  seen  in  the 
annotations.     But  the  story  has  still  another  application. 

The  two  spies  entered  the  land  in  advance  of  the  whole 
nation.  They  were  faithful  and  courageous  men,  and  took 
their  lives  into  their  own  hands.  They  may  well  be  taken 
as  a  type  of  the  faithful  remnant,  which  will  be  a  kind  of 
an  advance  guard  entering  into  the  land,  before  the  rest 
of  Israel  is  taking  possession.  The  King  of  Jericho,  who 
seeks  their  lives,  is  the  type  of  that  wicked  One,  the  counter- 
feit King  and  Messiah.  Their  flight  to  the  mountains 
reminds  us  of  the  word  of  warning  given  by  our  Lord  in 
His  Olivet  discourse,  "Let  them  that  be  in  Judea  flee  unto 
the  mountains."  Rahab,  who  believed  and  hid  the  spies 
and  was  saved  on  account  of  it,  foreshadows  those  of  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA.  61 

nations,  who  believe  the  last  message  concerning  the  coming 
of  the  King  and  the  judgment  in  store  for  this  earth.  They 
will  do  good  to  the  Jewish  remnant,  as  Rahab  did  hide  the 
spies.  When  the  Lord  comes  and  takes  the  seat  upon  the 
throne  of  His  Glory,  He  will  say  to  them:  "What  ye  have 
done  to  the  least  of  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  done  unto 
Me."  Rahab  remained  in  the  land  and  enjoyed  blessings 
with  Israel.  So  the  nations,  who  believe  during  the  great 
tribulation,  will  remain  on  the  earth,  and  not  be  swept 
away  by  the  divine  judgments. 


IV.  The  Events  at  Gilgal  have  a  Prophetic  Significance. 

The  circumcision  of  Israel,  as  carried  out  by  Joshua,  is 
the  type  of  the  spiritual  circumcision  which  the  Lord  will 
effect  for  the  whole  nation.  Of  this  the  Word  of  prophecy 
speaks:  "And  the  Lord  Thy  God  will  circumcise  thine 
heart  and  the  heart  of  thy  seed,  to  love  the  Lord  Thy  God 
with  all  thine  heart  and  with  all  thy  soul,  that  thou  mayest 
live"  (Deut.  xxx).  "Behold  I  will  gather  them  out  of  all 
countries,  whither  I  have  driven  them  in  my  anger,  and 
in  my  fury  and  great  wrath;  and  I  will  bring  them  again 
unto  this  place,  and  I  will  cause  them  to  dwell  safely.  And 
they  shall  be  my  people,  and  I  will  be  their  God.  And  I 
will  give  them  one  heart,  and  one  way,  that  they  may  fear 
Me  forever,  for  the  good  of  them,  and  of  their  children 
after  them"  (Jeremiah  xxxii:37-39).  "Then  I  will  sprinkle 
clean  water  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  be  clean;  from  all  your 
filthiness  and  all  your  idols  will  I  cleanse  you.  And  a  new 
heart  will  I  give  you,  and  a  new  spirit  will  I  put  within  you. 
And  I  will  take  away  the  stony  heart  out  of  your  flesh, 
and  I  will  give  you  an  heart  of  flesh"  (Ezek.  xxxvi:25-28). 
Then  the  reproach,  which  has  rested  upon  them  for  so 
long,  will  be  rolled  away.  They  will  become  the  head  of  all 
the  nations  of  the  world. 


62  THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUA. 

V.  The  Fall  of  Jericho  and  the  Overthrow  of  Israel's  Enemies. 

As  stated  in  the  annotations,  Jericho  is  the  type  of  the 
world  ripe  for  judgment.  The  number  seven,  in  its  fre- 
quency in  the  fall  of  Jericho,  the  reader  will  find  more 
fully  described  in  the  annotations  of  chapter  vi.  The 
walls  of  Jericho  fell  without  the  single  sword  being  lifted 
up.  The  breath  of  Jehovah  laid  them  flat.  So  shall  the 
day  come  when  the  power  of  God  will  throw  down  the  high 
and  lofty  things. 

The  warfare  which  Israel  carried  on  is  likewise  prophetic. 
Israel  was  used  to  execute  God's  vengeance  upon  the  wicked 
nations  of  Canaan.  It  will  be  repeated  in  the  future. 
"Thou  art  my  battle-ax  and  weapons  of  war;  for  with  thee 
will  I  break  in  pieces  the  nations,  and  with  thee  will  I  destroy 
kingdoms"  (Jer.  xxi:20).  Read  also  Micah  v;8-9:  Ez. 
xxxix:10;  Zech.  ii;6;  Zech.  xiv:14), 

VI.  Battle  at  Gibeon. 

It  was  the  most  remarkable  battle  in  Israel's  history. 
There  was  no  day  like  it,  nor  ever  after,  because  the  Lord 
hearkened  unto  the  voice  of  Joshua.  The  Lord  fought 
for  Israel.  The  sun  stood  still,  and  the  moon  stayed  until 
the  people  had  avenged  themselves  upon  their  enemies. 
This  is  a  prophetic  type  of  the  coming  day  of  the  Lord. 
What  will  happen  in  that  day?  Habakkuk,  seeing  that 
day  and  describing  its  details,  tells  us,  "The  sun  and  the 
moon  stood  still  in  their  habitation,  at  the  light  of  thine 
arrows,  as  they  went,  at  the  shining  of  thy  glittering  spear. 
Thou  didst  march  through  the  land  in  indignation;  thou 
didst  thresh  the  nations  in  anger.  Thou  wentest  forth 
for  the  salvation  of  thy  people,  for  salvation  with  thine 
anointed;  thou  woundest  the  head  of  the  house  of  the  wicked 
by  laying  bare  the  foundations  to  the  neck"  (Hab.  iii). 


[THE  BOOK  OF  JOSHUAJ  63 

<Vn.  The  Division  of  the  Land  and  Israel's  Rest. 

They  came  into  the  land,  and  the  land  was  divided  unto 
them  by  lot.  Though  it  was  not  a  permanent  rest,  yet  the 
land  had  rested  from  wars  for  a  time,  and  the  tabernacle  was 
set  up  at  Shiloh.  The  prophetic  Word  tells  us,  that  when 
Israel  is  brought  in,  they  shall  no  more  be  plucked  out  of 
the  land.  There  is  in  store  for  them  a  great  Sabbath,  a 
great  Jubilee,  when  His  people  and  His  land  will  have 
rest.  It  will  be  after  the  Lord  has  come.  Then  the  land 
will  be  re-divided.  See  Ez.  xlvii-xlviii.  Israel's  land  will 
then  become,  with  its  magnificent  temple,  the  gloryland 
of  this  earth,  the  center  of  the  Kingdom. 


JUDGES 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction 65 

Division  of  the  Book  of  Judges 68 

Analysis  and  Annotations 70 


The  Book  of  Judges 


Introduction 

The  previous  book  began  with  the  statement:  "Now  after  the 
death  of  Moses,  the  servant  of  the  Lord,  it  came  to  pass"; 
the  Book  of  Joshua  is,  therefore,  closely  linked  with  Deuter- 
onomy. The  Book  of  Judges  has  for  its  opening  word  a  similar 
announcement:  "Now  after  the  death  of  Joshua  it  came  to  pass." 
Judges  is,  therefore,  the  book  which  contains  Israel's  history  after 
the  occupation  of  the  promised  land  and  the  death  of  Joshua.  It 
covers  about  320  years,  extending  to  the  judgeship  of  Samuel.  In 
Acts  xiii:20  we  read:  "And  after  that  He  gave  them  judges  about 
the  space  of  four  hundred  and  fifty  years,  until  Samuel  the  prophet." 
This  is  a  general  statement  and  does  not  claim  a  chronological  char- 
acter. It  is  founded  on  the  addition  of  the  numbers  mentioned  in 
Judges.  Some  of  these  synchronize  with  others  and  must  be  deducted 
from  the  total. 

"We  find  one  express  and  clearly  fixed  chronological  point  in 
1  Kings  vi:l,  according  to  which  480  years  intervene  between  the 
departure  out  of  Egypt,  and  the  building  of  the  temple,  in  the 
fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign;  after  the  necessary  deductions  have 
been  made,  about  320  years  remain  for  the  age  of  the  Judges.  The 
chronological  data  in  the  Book  of  Judges  agree  with  this  result,  if 
the  Ammonite  oppression  of  the  east-Jordanic  territory  (Jephthah, 
IbzaUj  Elon,  Abdon)  are  assumed  as  contemporaneous  with  the  Phil- 
istine oppression  of  the  west-Jordanic  territory.  (Eli,  Samson, 
Samuel.)  In  this  case,  Eli's  priesthood  preceded  the  term  of  Sam- 
son's labors;  the  first  operations  of  Samuel  (merely  prophetic  in 
their  character),  belong  to  Samson's  term,  and  it  was  only  after  the 
death  of  the  latter  that  he  assumed  the  office  of  a  Judge.  It  may, 
indeed,  appear  a  singular  circumstance,  that  the  Book  of  Judges 
should  not  refer  to  Eli  and  Samuel,  and  that  the  two  books  of 
Samuel  should  not  mention  Samson,  but  both  circumstances  are 
readily  and  satisfactorily  explained  by  the  difl^erence  in  the  objects 
for  which  these  books  respectively  were  written.  The  books  of  Sam- 
uel design  to  relate  the  history  of  David,  the  necessary  introduction 
of  which  is  an  account  of  Saul,  Samuel,  and  Eli,  the  events  of  whose 
lives  are  interwoven  with  those  which  belong  to  the  earlier  years  of 

65 


66  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

David's  careeir;  and  here  no  reference  whatever  to  Samson  was  re- 
quired. The  Book  of  Judges,  on  tfie  other  hand,  relates  nothing 
concerning  Eli,  because  he  was  not  a  Judge,  in  the  peculiar  sense  of 
that  word,  but  presided  over  public  affairs  merely  in  the  capacity  of 
a  high-priest;  and  it  related  nothing  concerning  Samuel,  since  his 
later  acts,  when  he  officiated  as  a  Judge,  no  longer  belong  to  the 
period  of  Israel's  repeated  apostasy  from  Jehovah,  which  it  is  the 
design  of  this  book  to  describe."  * 

The  main  part  of  the  Book  of  Judges  is  given  to  the  sad  history  of 
Israel's  departure  from  God,  their  chastisement  and  deliverance 
through  the  mercy  and  faithfulness  of  the  Lord.  The  divinely  given 
predictions  through  Moses,  recorded  in  Deuteronomy,  are  now  seen 
passing  into  history.  Joshua's  warning  is  being  fulfilled.  "Know  for 
a  certainty  that  the  Lord  your  God  will  no  more  drive  out  any  of 
those  nations  from  before  you;  but  they  shall  be  snares  and  traps 
unto  you,  and  scourges  in  your  side,  and  thorns  in  your  eyes,  until 
you  perish  from  off  this  good  land  which  the  Lord  our  God  hath 
given  you."  (Josh.  xxiii:13.)  The  whole  nation  disintegrates. 
All  goes  to  pieces.  The  whole  sad  story  of  decline  is  written  in  two 
statements,  one  at  the  beginning  and  the  other  at  the  end  of  the 
book.  In  the  beginning  of  this  book  they  asked  the  question  of  who 
is  first  to  go  up  to  fight  the  Canaanites.  (Chapter  i:i.)  At  the  end 
they  ask  who  is  to  battle  against  their  own,  to  fight  the  children  of 
Benjamin.  (xx:18.)  They  began  in  the  Spirit  and  ended  in  the 
flesh.  First,  they  fought  the  common  foe,  then  they  fought  each 
other. 

The  Book  of  Judges,  therefore,  records  the  complete  failure  of  the 
people  of  God  and  the  graciousness  of  the  Lord.  Perhaps  nowhere 
else  in  the  Word  of  God  do  we  find  the  patience  and  faithfulness  of 
Jehovah  towards  an  unfaithful  and  backsliding  people  so  fully  made 
known  as  in  Judges. 

The  instruments  Jehovah  used  were  the  Judges.  They  were  raised 
up  by  God  in  the  days  of  declension  to  bring  about  deliverances  from 
the  enemies,  who  had  been  permitted  to  bring  Israel  into  servitude. 
They  were,  therefore,  more  than  what  the  word  Judge  in  our  lan- 
guage denotes.  They  were  Prophets  in  action.  Their  persons  show 
how  God  has  chosen  the  weak  things  to  accomplish  His  purposes. 
One  was  left-handed.  Another  used  an  ox-goad ;  still  another  pitcher 
and  trumpets  and  one  had  for  a  weapon  the  jawbone  of  an  ass.  One 
was  a  woman.  There  were  thirteen  Judges.  Six  decletisions  are 
clearly  marked  by  the  phrase  that  the  children  of  Israel  did  evil  in 
the  sight  of  the  Lord.  (iii:l,  12;  iv:l;  vi:l;  x:6;  xiii:l.)  And 
these  six  main  declensions  resulted  in  corresponding  punishments 
followed  by  gracious  deliverances  through  the  Judges. 

*  J.  H.  Kurtz  in  Sacred  History. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  67 

What  is  the  value  and  meaning  of  this  historical  book?  If  it  has 
no  other  object  beyond  acquainting  us  with  Israel's  history,  a  deeper 
study  would  indeed  be  useless. 

Again  we  refer  to  that  familiar  New  Testament  word,  which  fully 
authorizes  us  to  read  these  histories  in  their  typical  bearings. 
"Now  all  these  things  happened  unto  them  as  types;  and  they  are 
written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the  ends  of  the  ages  have 
come."  (I  Cor.  x:ll.)  "For  as  many  things  as  have  been  written 
before  have  been  written  for  our  instruction,  that  through  endurance 
and  through  encouragement  of  the  Scriptures  we  might  have  hope." 
(Rom.  XV: 4.) 

We  have  learned  from  the  study  of  the  Pentateuch,  especially 
from  the  history  of  Israel  in  Egypt,  her  experiences  in  the  wilder- 
ness and  entrance  into  the  promised  land,  how  indeed  all  these 
things  are  types  and  what  blessed  lessons  are  written  everywhere 
for  our  instruction.  The  history  of  the  Book  of  Judges  finds  also  a 
most  interesting  and  important  typical  application.  The  Book  of 
Joshua  typifies  the  heavenly  blessings  of  the  people  of  God  and  the 
heavenly  inheritance  { corresponding  to  Ephesians ) .  The  Book  of 
Judges  unfolds  in  a  typical  way  the  sad  story  of  the  decline,  apos- 
tasy, dissension  and  corruption  of  the  professing  church  on  earth. 
The  diflerent  errors  and  evils  of  Christendom  may  be  traced  here  as 
well  as  the  diff'erent  revivals  and  restorations.  The  flesh  and  the 
world  and  what  allegiance  these  lead  to,  slavery  and  misery  with 
distance  from  Jehovah,  and  how  the  Lord  can  deliver  and  bring 
back  His  people,  are  the  prominent  lessons  of  this  book.  Like 
Joshua  and  the  Pentateuch,  Judges  is  so  full  and  rich  in  these 
spiritual  types  and  instructions  that  they  cannot  be  exhausted.  We 
touch  upon  these  things  in  the  analysis  and  annotations.  May  they 
prove  to  be  helpful  hints  to  a  deeper  study  of  this  neglected  book. 
And  blessed  are  we  if  we  discover  our  individual  experience,  our 
failures,  our  need  and  the  faithfulness  of  our  gracious  Lord  in  this 
book  and  thus  learn  more  of  Him. 


68  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 


The  Division  of  the  Book  of  Judges 

The  history  of  the  different  declensions  in  Israel,  their 
oppression  by  the  enemies,  and  the  work  wrought  by  the 
Judges  the  Lord  raised  up,  begins  with  chapter  iii:5  and 
is  continuously  related  to  the  end  of  chapter  xvi.  The 
opening  chapters  of  the  book  are  a  general  introduction, 
part  of  which  touches  upon  the  contents  of  the  book  itself. 
Chapters  xvii-xxi  are  an  appendix  to  the  main  part. 
The  events  recorded  in  these  closing  chapters  must  have 
occurred  a  little  while  after  the  death  of  Joshua,  during 
the  life-time  of  Pliinehas,  the  high-priest  (xx:28).  They 
give  a  glimpse  of  the  sad  internal  conditions  of  the  peo- 
ple, how  every  man  did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own 
eyes.  Their  complete  failure  towards  God  and  towards 
themselves  as  the  people  of  God  is  clearly  seen  in  these 
records. 

This  gives  us  a  threefold  division  of  the  Book  of  Judges. 

I.     THE    INTRODUCTION.    ISRAEL'S    FAILURES 
AND  THE  RESULTS.     Chapter  i-iii  A. 

1.  Israel's  Failure  in  mingling  with  Canaanites. 

Chapter  i. 

2.  The  Angel  at  Bochim.    The  history  of  the  en- 

tire Book.     Chapter  ii-iii  :4, 

XL    THE  DECLENSIONS,  PUNISHMENTS  AND  DE- 
LIVERANCES.    Chapter  iii:4-xvi. 

1.  The  Sin  of  Idolatry.    Othniel.    Chapter  iii  :5-ll. 

2.  Second  Declension.    Under  Moab.    Ehud  and 

Shamgar.     Chapter  iii:12-31. 

3.  Third    Declension.    Under    Jabin.    Deborah 

and  Barak.    Chapter  iv-v. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  69 

4.  Fourth  Declension.  Under  Midian.  Gideon, 
Tola  and  Jair.     Chapter  vi-x  :5. 

6.  Fifth  Declension.  Under  the  Philistines  and 
Ammon.    Jephthah,  Ibzan,  Elon  and  Abdon. 

Chapter  x:6-xii. 

6.    Sixth     Declension.    Under    the     Philistines. 

Samson.     Chapter  xiii-xvi. 

III.    THE  APPENDIX.    ISRAEL'S  INTERNAL  COR- 
RUPTION.    Chapter  xvii-xxi. 

1.  Micah's  Idolatry  and  its  punishment.    Chap- 

ter xvii-xviii. 

2.  Israel's  moral  condition.    The  War  on  Benja- 

min.    Chapter  xix-xxi. 


70  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.     The  Introduction.     Israel's  Failure  and  the 
ResultSo 

Chapter  i-iii:4. 
1.    Israel's  Failure  in  mingling  with  the  Canaanites. 

CHAPTER  I 

1.  The  Question  and  the  Answer.     Verses  1-4. 

2.  Adoni-Bezek.     Verses  5-7. 

3.  Jerusalem.     Verse  8. 

4.  Judah's  Victory  and  Failure.     Verses  9-21. 

5.  The  Children  of  Benjamin  and  their  Failure.     Verse  21. 
G.  The  Failures  of  Others.     Verses  22-36. 

The  book  begins  with  an  inquiry  of  the  Lord.  This  was 
immediately  after  the  death  of  Joshua.  From  chapter  ii: 
7-10  we  learn  that  the  people  served  the  Lord  during  the 
days  of  Joshua  and  the  Elders  who  had  seen  the  great 
worfes  of  the  Lord  and  who  outlived  their  leader.  Israel 
looked  to  the  Lord  for  guidance.  They  feel  their  depend- 
ence upon  Him.  How  different  the  history  of  His  people 
would  have  been  if  they  had  maintained  this  dependence  on 
the  Lord,  and  acted  always  in  subjection  to  Him !  And  the 
Lord  answered  the  inquiry  as  He  always  delights  to  answer 
those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him.  Judah  is  to  go  up  to 
fight  against  the  Canaanite,  and  the  Lord  promises  victory. 
The  first  sign  of  weakness  follows  at  once.  Judah  invites 
Simeon  his  brother  to  go  with  him  to  fight  against  the 
Canaanites,  and  he  promises  in  return  to  help  Simeon  in 
conquering  his  lot.     It  showed  that  Judah  had  not  full  confi- 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDOES  71 

dence  in  Jehovah.  He  put  some  dependence  in  his  brother, 
as  if  he  needed  his  help  to  gain  the  promised  victory.  How 
often  His  people  have  dishonored  the  Lord  by  trusting 
in  something  besides  Himself.  Judah  going  forward  by 
divine  command,  yet  asking  the  help  of  Simeon,  gained  vic- 
tories, yet  he  could  not  drive  out  the  inhabitants  of  the 
valley,  for  they  had  chariots  of  iron.  (Verse  19.)  What  is 
iron  to  omnipotence !  Had  Judah  gone  forth  in  utter  de- 
pendence on  Jehovah  and  in  His  promise,  ' '  I  have  delivered 
the  land  into  his  hand, ' '  the  chariots  of  iron  would  not  have 
stopped  him. 

But  there  were  great  victories,  the  blessed  assurance  that 
Jehovah  is  with  His  people,  if  they  go  but  forward.  Adoni- 
Bezek  is  punished  in  the  same  manner  as  he  in  his  wicked- 
ness had  done  to  others.  Infidels  have  often  found  fault 
with  the  extermination  of  the  Canaanites.  The  confession 
of  Adoni-Bezek  answers  these  objections.  "As  I  have  done, 
so  God  hath  requited  me."  Their  punishment  was  just  and 
well  deserved. 

The  eighth  verse  is  of  interest.  In  Joshua  x  :i  Jerusalem 
is  mentioned  for  the  first  time  in  the  Bible  and  that  in  con- 
nection with  war.  Here  the  city  is  smitten  by  the  sword 
and  burned  with  fire.  This  has  been  her  history  over  and 
over  again,  and  will  be  again  in  the  future,  till  the  times  of 
the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled. 

Then  there  is  mentioned  once  more  the  most  refreshing 
picture  of  Caleb,  Othniel  and  Aehsah.  (See  Joshua  xv:16- 
19.)  Othniel,  which  means'"lion  of  God,"  is  the  center  of 
it.  God  delights  in  whole-heartedness  and  the  victories  of 
His  people. 

The  rest  of  this  first  chapter  has  failure  stamped  upon  it. 
Benjamin,  the  warrior  tribe  permitted  the  Jebusites  to  dwell 
with  them  and  did  not  drive  them  out.  There  is  not  even  a 
reported  attempt.  The  command  of  the  Lord  was  wholly 
ignored  by  them.  They  were  in  the  worst  condition. 
(Chapter  xx-xxi.)  Manasseh  failed.  Ephraim  did  not 
drive  out  the  Canaanites  that  dwelt  in  Gezer.  Zebulun, 
Asher  and  Naphtali  all  failed  to  dislodge  the  enemies  God 


72  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

had  commanded  them  to  destroy  entirely.  And  Dan  in- 
stead of  conquering  was  conquered.  The  Amorites  forced 
them  into  the  hill  country.  Unbelief,  lack  of  confidence  in 
Jehovah,  was  the  cause  of  it  all.  These  enemies  here  are 
typical  of  the  flesh  and  the  fleshly  lusts  in  the  believer. 
And  these  lusts,  the  carnal  nature,  must  be  put  and  kept  in 
the  place  of  death.  We  are  enabled  to  do  this  by  faith  in 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  through  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  who  is  given  to  us  of  God.  If  we  walk  not  in  the 
Spirit,  that  is,  in  faith,  we  shall  be  overcome  by  these  things ; 
instead  of  conquering  we  will  be  conquered.  The  old  na- 
ture not  triumphed  over  will  bring  us  into  bondage  as  it  is 
with  so  many  of  God's  children. 


2.    The  Angel  at  Bochim.    The  History  of  the  Entire 
Book. 

CHAPTER  II-III:4 

1.  The  Angel  at  Bochim.     Verses  1-5. 

2.  Israel's  Obedience  Remembered.     Verses  6-10. 

3.  Israel's    Strange    Gods.     Turned   from    God   to    Idols.     Verses 

11-15. 

4.  Israel's  History  Under  the  Judges  Outlined.     Verses  16-18. 

5.  The  Nations  Left  to  Prove  Israel.     Verses  19-iii:4. 

The  opening  event  of  this  chapter  is  significant.  The 
angel  of  the  Lord  came  up  from  Gilgal  to  Bochim.  This 
angel  is  Jehovah  Himself.  His  own  words  reveal  this  fact. 
In  Joshua's  time  after  the  land  had  been  possessed  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord,  Jehovah  in  visible  form,  was  with  them 
and  as  leader  of  the  Lord 's  host  led  them  on  in  the  conquest. 
(Joshua  v:13-15.)  Israel  had  left  Gilgal,  the  place  where 
the  reproach  had  been  rolled  away,  the  place  of  the  ''sharp 
knives,"  typical  of  self -judgment.  It  was  for  Israel  the 
place  of  strength  and  power  for  victory,  as  it  gave  the  flesh 
nothing  to  glory  in.  They  had  left  Gilgal.  How  often  we, 
who  are  crucified  with  Christ,  leave  our  Gilgal  and  instead 
of  glorying  in  the  Lord  and  having  no  confidence  in  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  73 

flesh,  we  too  act  in  self-confidence.  The  place  to  which  the 
Angel  went  was  "Bochim."  It  means  "Weepers."  It 
was  the  best  place  for  Israel  to  be  after  all  their  failures  to 
do  what  the  Lord  had  commanded  them.  It  is  the  place  to- 
day for  us  in  the  midst  of  the  worldliness  in  which  so  many 
of  the  Lord's  people  have  drifted,  as  well  as  the  divisions 
which  exist  among  those,  who  are  members  of  the  one  body, 
and  other  evils  besides.  But  Bochim,  the  place  for  weep- 
ing must  be  the  place  of  self -judgment  and  confession.  It 
was  not  so  for  Israel.  They  wept  when  the  plain  words  of 
Jehovah  told  them  their  disobedience  and  when  they  heard 
what  should  follow.  ' '  I  will  not  drive  them  out  before  you ; 
but  they  shall  be  as  thorns  in  your  sides,  and  their  gods 
shall  be  a  snare  unto  you."  But  we  do  not  read  anything 
of  a  true  repentance  and  return  unto  Jehovah. 

From  chapter  ii  :6-iii  :4  we  have  the  history  of  the  whole 
period  of  Judges  outlined.  There  is  first  mention  made  of 
their  obedience  and  service,  how  they  began  in  the  Spirit. 
The  second  generation,  as  it  is  always  the  case,  leads  to  fail- 
ure. For  the  first  time  we  read  the  words  which,  as  already 
stated,  appear  in  six  other  places  in  this  book.  "And  the 
children  of  Israel  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. ' '  They 
forsook  Him,  the  loving,  gracious  Jehovah,  whose  kindness 
and  tender  mercies  are  so  fully  revealed  in  their  past  history 
and  instead  of  serving  such  a  God,  they  served  Baal  and 
Ashtaroth.  Connected  with  this  Canaanite  * '  religion ' '  were 
the  vilest  immoralities  by  which  they  were  dragged  down 
to  the  level  of  these  doomed  nations.  All  moral  corruption, 
social  and  political  confusion  is  the  result  of  turning  away 
from  God.  Romans  i:19-32  reveals  the  awful  steps  down. 
Christendom  in  apostasy,  turning  away  from  God  and  from 
the  Light,  leads  to  moral  corruption  as  well.  Turning 
away  from  the  Truth  means  being  turned  unto  fables. 

The  Lord  then  acted  in  behalf  of  His  backslidden  peo- 
ple and  raised  up  Judges.  (Verse  16-18.)  The  result  was 
recovery,  and  once  more  the  people  under  these  revivals  re- 
joiced in  victory  over  their  enemies  and  the  promised  cove- 
nant blessings.    Self-judgment,  which  is  true  repentance, 


74  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

had  to  precede  each  revival.  They  cried  unto  the  Lord; 
they  sought  His  face,  and  then  deliverance  came.  Even  so 
it  is  in  the  individual  experience  of  the  children  of  God. 

Yet  in  spite  of  these  revivals  in  Israel  the  tendency  is 
downward.  "When  the  judge  died  they  returned  and  cor- 
rupted themselves  beyond  their  fathers  .  .  .  thej^  ceased  not 
from  their  own  doings,  nor  from  their  stubborn  way."  So 
it  has  been  in  the  professing  church.  Revivals  have  come 
and  gone,  but  it  has  not  remedied  the  wayward  conditions, 
and  the  departure  from  God  and  His  Word  becomes  more 
and  more  pronounced  till  the  final  great  apostasy  is  reached. 
The  only  complete  deliverance  can  be  the  Coming  of  the 
Lord  which  we  do  not  find  fully  revealed  in  the  types  of 
the  Book  of  Judges. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  75 


II.     The  Declensions,  Punishments  and 
Deliverances 

Chapter  iii:5-xvi 
1.    The  Sin  of  Idolatry.    Othniel. 

CHAPTER  111:5-11 

1.  The  First  Declension.     Verses  5-7. 

2.  Sold  to  the  King  of  Mesopotamia.     Verse  8. 

3.  The  Deliverance  through  Othniel.     Verses  9-11. 

The  first  declension,  bondage  and  deliverance  is  briefly  re- 
lated. We  see  how  Israel  went  from  bad  to  worse.  First, 
the  wicked  nations  they  were  to  exterminate  dwelt  amongst 
them.  Then  the  children  of  Israel  established  some  rela- 
tionship with  them  and  dwelt  amongst  these  nations.  First, 
the  children  of  Israel  permitted  them  to  exist  in  their  midst ; 
then  the  doomed  nations  gained  the  power  over  Israel  and 
the  people  of  God  became  dependent  on  them.  The  third 
step  down  is  inter-marriage.  They  did  exactly  what  Je- 
hovah had  forbidden.  (Dent.  vii:2.)  Then  they  began  to 
serve  their  idol-gods.  It  began  by  ''forgetting  the  Lord." 
The  application  to  the  individual  believer  and  to  the  pro- 
fessing church  can  easily  be  made.  If  He  is  forgotten,  who 
has  redeemed  us  and  made  us  His  own,  an  alliance  with  the 
world  is  soon  formed  and  rapid  decline  follows.  The  same 
story  is  written  in  the  message  to  Ephesus,  which  stands 
prophetically  for  the  Apostolic  age.  "I  have  against  thee 
that  thou  hast  left  thy  first  love."  (Rev.  ii:4.)  Leaving 
the  first  love  means  to  have  no  longer  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  aU-absorbing  object  before  the  heart.     Thus  the  de- 


76  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

eline  began  in  the  church,  and  it  always  begins  in  this  way 
in  the  individual  believer. 

Cushan-Rishathaim,  King  of  Mesopotamia,  becomes  their 
Lord  and  they  served  him  eight  years.  This  king  is  the  first 
punitive  instrument  in  Jehovah's  hands.  His  name  very 
significantly  reveals  the  very  condition  into  which  Israel  had 
plunged.  Cushan-Rishathaim  means  "the  blackness  of 
double  wickedness."  They  had  become  doubly  wicked, 
leaving  Jehovah  and  serving  strange  gods. 

When  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  out  of  the  depths  of  their 
misery  and  sin,  casting  themselves  once  more  upon  Jehovah 
and  turning  their  backs  upon  the  strange  gods,  the  Lord  an- 
swered and  sent  a  Saviour  *  who  saved  them.  It  is  the  same 
Othniel  of  whom  we  read  in  chapter  i  :13  and  Joshua  xv  :18. 
Othniel  means  ' '  Lion  of  God, ' '  and  as  he  was  of  Judah,  he 
is  the  type  of  Him,  who  is  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah. 
Upon  him  rested  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  The  King  of 
Mesopotamia  was  given  into  his  hands,  and  a  rest  of  fifty 
years  followed  for  Israel.  Thus  we  too  must  return  to  the 
Lord  and  expect  our  deliverance  from  Him.  What  grace 
towards  His  people  is  manifested  in  this  first  deliverance ! 

2.    Second  Declension  Under  Moab.  Ehud  and  Shamgar. 

CHAPTER  111:12-31 

1.  The  Second  Declension — Serving  Eglon,  King  of  Moab.     Verses 

12-14. 

2.  Ehud  Raised  Up.     Verse  1.5. 

3.  Eglon,  King  of  jMoab,  Slain  by  Ehud.     Verses  16-25. 

4.  Moab  Siil)dued  and  the  Eighty  Year  Rest.     Verses  26-30. 

5.  The  Deliverance  l)y  Shamgar.     Verse  31. 

When  they  continued  to  do  evil  Jehovah  used  Eglon  King 
of  Moab  to  punish  their  disobedience  and  evil-doings.  With 
him  there  is  Amnion  and  Amalek,  a  trinity  of  evil.  The  city 
of  Palms  is  Jericho  (Dent.  xxxiv:3)  a  type  of  the  world,  as 
we  saw  from  Joshua.     IMoab  pictures  typically  an  outward, 

*  The  authorized  version  has  deliverer.  The  correct  translation 
is  saviour. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  77 

empty,  Christian  profession.  Amalek  is  the  type  of  the 
lusts  of  the  flesh  which  flourish  with  those,  who  have  the 
form  of  godliness  but  deny  the  power  thereof.  How  many 
to-day  have  become  captives  of  Moab !  The  greater  part  of 
Protestantism,  with  a  name  to  live,  yet  dead,  is  in  that  de- 
plorable condition. 

They  served  Eglon  eighteen  years.  For  the  second  time 
they  cried  unto  the  Lord  and  again  He  answered  graciously 
by  raising  up  Ehud,  the  son  of  Gera,  the  left-handed  Ben- 
jamite.  The  story  of  the  deliverance  wrought  by  him  is  in- 
teresting. Without  repeating  the  history  of  the  chapter  we 
give  briefly  its  typical  meaning.  Ehud's  father  was  Gera, 
which  means  "meditation."  This  is  needed  first  of  all  to 
get  deliverance  from  a  mere  profession  or  world  prosperity 
with  its  attending  evils  to  bring  the  soul  to  a  blessed  realiza- 
tion of  its  possessions  and  blessings  in  Christ.  Ehud  means 
' '  I  will  give  praise. ' '  Here  is  the  deliverance  for  God 's  peo- 
ple out  of  a  dead  formalism.  Meditation  on  the  Word 
leads  to  a  believing  possession  of  the  realities  of  redemp- 
tion in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  followed  by  praise, 
the  confession  of  His  Name.  Then  Moab's  bondage  is 
ended. 

Ehud  was  left-handed,  showing  the  weakness  of  the  in- 
strument. The  two-edged  dagger  is  the  type  of  the  Word 
of  God,  while  the  hand  which  grasps  it  illustrates  how  faith 
is  to  use  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  Then  Ehud,  the  Son  of 
Gera,  the  left-handed,  thrust  the  two-edged  dagger  into  the 
fat  belly  of  Eglon.  Fat  is  the  emblem  of  prosperity,  the 
prosperity  of  the  world  by  which  so  many  of  God's  people 
become  captivated.  The  sword  of  the  Spirit  must  be  plunged 
into  that  which  is  of  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust 
of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life. 

"Face  to  face  in  this  solemn  place,  in  solemn  silence  and 
alone  they  stand ;  the  fat,  prosperous  World ;  and  poor,  left- 
handed  Faith,  The  scene  is  quickly  over.  Into  the  very 
belly  of  Eglon  sinks  the  sharp  sword  of  Ehud;  the  very 
belly,  the  centre  of  all  that  is  of  the  world  and  not  of 
the  Father;  of  'the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the 


78  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

pride  of  life';  that  which  flesh  serves  (Phil,  iii)  and  which 
is  never  satisfied,  is  pierced  through  and  through.  With 
what  result  ?  Its  true  nature  is  fully  exposed.  Let  us  not 
be  so  falsely  delicate  as  not  to  profit  by  this  strong-worded 
truth.  The  prosperity  of  the  world,  fat  and  flourishing  as 
it  appears  externally,  is  seen  under  the  stroke  of  God's 
word — in  the  light  of  Jesus,  whom  it  crucified,  being  the 
Son  of  the  living  God — as  nothing  but  'dirt.'  Yea,  so 
says  another  Benjamite,  who  well  knew  how  to  wield  that 
sword:  'I  count  all  things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord ;  for  whom  I  have 
suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  do  count  them  hut  dung 
that  I  may  win  Christ  and  be  found  in  Him.'  How  much 
does  this  leave  of  fat  Eglon  alive  ?  "  * 

Then  the  trumpet  of  victory  was  blown.  Even  so  is  our 
faith  the  victory  which  overcometh  the  world. 

Shamgar's  work  seems  to  have  been  closely  connected 
with  that  of  Ehud.  He  smote  the  Philistines  with  an  ox- 
goad.  The  ox-goad  is  like  the  sword,  an  emblem  of  the 
Word  of  God.     Then  the  land  had  rest  for  eighty  years. 

3.    Third  Declension.    Under  Jabin,  Deborah  and  Barak. 

Chapter  iv-v 

CHAPTER  IV 

1.  Sold  into  the  Hand  of  Jabin.     Verses  1-2. 

2.  The  Cry  of  the  Children  of  Israel.     Verse  3. 

3.  Deborah  and  Barak.     Verses  4-11. 

4.  The  Conflict  and  Jael's  Deed.     Verses  12-24. 

Ehud  the  mighty  instrument  of  Jehovah  had  died,  and 
again  the  children  of  Israel  lapsed  into  evil.  Then  the  Lord 
sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Jabin,  King  of  Canaan,  that 
reigned  in  Hazor.  His  captain  was  Sisera,  which  dwelt  in 
Harosheth  of  the  Gentiles.  A  powerful  oppressor  he  was, 
for  this  King  had  nine  hundred  chariots  of  iron  and  op- 
pressed Israel  twenty  years.     About  one  hundred  and  thirty 

*  Notes  on  Judges. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  79 

years  before  Joshua  had  overcome  Jabin,  King  of  Hazor. 
* '  He  took  Hazor  and  smote  the  King  thereof  with  the  sword, 
for  Hazor  before  him  was  the  head  of  all  these  kingdoms. ' ' 
All  were  slain  and  Hazor  was  burnt  with  fire.  And  now 
the  Lord  sold  them  into  his  hand.  This  Jabin  is  a  successor 
of  the  one  whom  Joshua  had  killed.  Hazor  had  been  built 
again  out  of  its  ruins.  We  see,  so  to  speak,  a  resurrection 
of  an  old  enemy.  It  is  significant  too  that  this  declension 
and  captivity  under  Jabin  is  the  third  one.  As  mentioned 
in  annotations  on  Genesis  (pp.  18-19)  the  number  three 
stands  everywhere  in  the  Word  for  revival  and  resurrection. 
The  former  enemy  enslaves  Israel  once  more.  How  often 
has  this  been  the  case  in  the  history  of  the  church,  and  how 
true  it  is  to-day.  Satan  knows  how  to  revive  old  errors  and 
evils  and  use  them  to  bring  God's  people  into  captivity. 
And  is  it  not  so  in  our  individual  experience?  Some  sin 
which  overpowered  us  was  through  the  grace  and  strength 
of  Christ  and  of  His  Spirit  mastered,  and  its  power  broken. 
But  can  that  same  sin  not  be  revived?  Is  it  forever  gone? 
If  there  is  neglect  of  prayer,  no  child-like  dependence  in  true 
humility,  no  watchfulness,  it  will,  like  Jabin,  return  and 
domineer  over  us  in  even  greater  power  than  before.  Jabin 
means  "discerning" — "understanding."  This  city  Hazor, 
where  he  dwelt,  means  ' '  enclosure. ' '  This  Jabin  represents 
human  intellect,  the  understanding  of  the  natural  man, 
which  is  corrupt  and  opposed  to  God  and  to  His  revelation. 
It  is  the  wisdom  of  the  world.  Jabin  is  in  his  own  "enclo- 
sure," which  rejects  and  excludes  what  God  has  given.  The 
Christian  believer  is  called  upon  to  bring  every  thought  into 
captivity  to  the  obedience  of  Christ.  ' '  Casting  down  imag- 
inations (reasonings),  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  it- 
self against  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  bringing  every 
thought  to  the  obedience  of  Christ."  (2  Cor.  x:5.)  Man's 
own  thoughts,  his  natural  understanding,  must  be  completely 
subjected  to  God's  AVord.  How  much  of  this  spirit  of  ex- 
altation against  the  knowledge  of  God  is  about  us  and  in  the 
professing  church  !  Higher  criticism  belongs  here.  All  the 
errors  in  doctrine,  affecting  always  the  Person  of  our  liord. 


80  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

are  the  results  of  putting  the  thoughts  of  man  above  the 
Word  of  God.  Then  in  connection  with  this  we  must  think 
of  the  sects  and  parties,  the  works  of  the  flesh,  that  is  the 
natural  man  and  his  reasonings,  w^hich  have  divided  the 
body  of  Christ.  These  divisions  are  "the  enclosures"  of 
Jabin.  "As  the  enemy  of  the  people  of  God,  it  is  the  wis- 
dom of  the  world  with  which  we  have  here  to  do — a  wisdom 
which  reigns  in  its  own  'enclosure,'  shut  up,  as  is  the  con- 
stant fashion,  in  cliques  and  parties  and  philosophies,  by 
which  it  elevates  itself  over  what  is  outside  its  boundary, 
The  spirit  of  it  is  easily  manifest  as  that  of  self :  self-inter- 
est, self-assertion,  self-satisfaction,  the  true  'trader'  or  Ca- 
naanite  spirit,  that  of  gain.  The  inroad  of  this  into  the 
Church  was  early  indeed.  'AH  seek  their  own,  not  the 
things  of  Jesus  Christ,'  was  said,  in  the  apostle's  days,  of 
those  at  Rome,  (Phil,  ii,  21,)  Of  the  Ephesian  elders  it 
was  prophesied,  'Also  of  your  own  selves  shall  men  arise, 
speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  away  disciples  after 
them.'  (Acts  xx:30.)  But  already  at  Corinth  the  sects 
and  parties  produced  by  such  attempts  were  being  formed, 
as  we  know,  and  the  true  people  of  God  were  becoming  sub- 
ject to  Jabin 's  rule;  and  this  has  developed  much  more 
widely  since,  even  until  the  Church  of  God  has  been  broken 
up  into  various  denominations,  to  the  dishonor  of  the  One 
Name  which  is  upon  us  all. ' '  * 

Then  once  more  the  children  of  Israel  cried  unto  the  Lord. 
Jabin 's  mighty  oppression  and  the  humiliation  connected 
with  it  had  become  so  great  that  they  turned  to  the  Lord. 
How  beautiful  it  is  to  see  throughout  these  declensions, 
that  the  Lord  seemed  to  just  wait  for  this  one  thing,  His 
people  to  cry  to  Him.  As  soon  as  they  cried  He  answered. 
He  is  the  same  to-day.  How  willing  and  ready  He  is  to 
break  all  the  chains  of  His  people  and  save  them  from  the 
hands  of  all  their  enemies!  True  revivals  alM^ays  started 
in  deep  humiliation,  in  self-judgment,  in  prayer.  But  alas ! 
the  state  of  such,  who  have  departed  from  the  faith,  who 
are  the  willing  captives  of  Satan,  who  love  this  present  evil 

*F,  W.  Grant. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  81 

age  and  who  do  not  cry  to  the  Lord !  The  Lord  brought  de- 
liverance through  a  woman,  Deborah,  the  prophetess.  The 
weaker  vessel  is  now  summoned  to  judge.  The  name  De- 
borah means  ' '  The  "Word. "  It  is  the  Word  and  the  Word 
of  God  alone  which  can  deliver  from  the  wisdom  of  this 
world  and  from  error  and  sin.  But  Deborah  is  married. 
She  is  the  wife  of  Lapidoth.  Lapidoth  means  ' '  firebrands. ' ' 
He  is  typical  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Word,  and  the  Spirit 
in  the  Word  give  the  victory  and  deliver.  And  Deborah  did 
not  dwell  in  an  "enclosure."  She  dwelt  under  the  palm 
tree  between  Ramah  and  Bethel.  The  palm  tree  typifies  the 
spiritual  prosperity  of  the  believer.  This  we  enjoy  if  we 
let  the  Word  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  judge  us.  Then 
we  have  our  Ramah  (heights)  the  blessed  knowledge  of  our 
standing  in  Christ  and  Bethel  (House  of  God)  our  fellow- 
ship with  Him.  That  is  where  our  palm  tree,  our  spiritual 
blessing  lies. 

Deborah  sent  for  Barak.  Barak  means  "Lightning." 
Here  we  have  judgment  indicated.  The  Word  calls  for 
judgment  and  judgment  will  surely  come,  as  it  was  exe- 
cuted through  Barak  upon  Jabin  and  his  host. 

And  so  this  age  ends  with  the  lightning  flash  of  judgment, 
when  the  bundled  up  tares  will  be  burned  with  fire.  All  the 
wisdom  of  this  world,  higher  criticism,  Christian  Science, 
falsely  so-called,  and  every  other  form  of  evil  will  then  pass 
away.  All  error  will  end  forever  with  the  coming  of  our 
Lord.  But  there  is  a  second  woman  mentioned  in  this  chap- 
ter, Jael  the  wife  of  Heber.  She  slew  Sisera,  the  wicked 
captain  of  Jabin,  with  the  tent  pin.  Her  deed  is  specially 
celebrated  in  song. 

The  Song  of  Deborah  and  Barak. 

CHAPTER  V 

1.  The  Praise  of  Jehovah.     Verses  1-5. 

2.  The  Condition   of  the   People  and  their   Deliverance.     Verses 

6-11. 

3.  The  Celebration  of  the  Victory  and  the  Victors.     Verses  12-22. 

4.  The  Fate  of  the  Enemy.     Verses  23-31. 


82  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

This  is  one  of  the  prophetic  songs  of  the  Bible.  It  is  full 
of  the  fire  of  passion  and  enthusiasm,  reflecting  the  char- 
acter of  the  woman  through  whom  the  deliverance  had  been 
wrought.  It  has  been  classed  with  the  barbaric  outbursts 
of  the  battle-hymns  and  odes  of  triumph  of  heathen  nations, 
likened  to  some  wild  chant  of  a  victor,  whose  blood-thirst  has 
been  quenched  in  the  cruel  overthrow  of  his  enemies.  Such 
estimates  of  this  song,  so  often  made  by  the  critics  of  the 
Bible,  are  incorrect.  Deborah  speaks  as  a  prophetess. 
She  begins  with  ascribing  praise  to  Jehovah;  she  ends 
with  Jehovah.  This  prophetic  outburst  is  marked  by 
limitations.  She  has  no  glimpse  of  the  final  victory  which 
is  mentioned  in  other  songs  of  triumph,  and  especially  in 
the  Psalms.  There  are  phrases  which  the  Holy  Spirit  utters 
through  Deborah,  which  He  used  in  other  prophetic  songs. 
The  following  passages  of  Scripture  may  be  compared  with 
Deborah's  words  and  will  be  helpful  in  the  closer  study  of 
this  chapter.  Exodus  xv:l-9;  Deut.  xxxii:l-3;  16-17; 
Psalms  Ixviii  :l-4 ;  8,  11 ;  34-35 ;  Psalms  Ixxxiii  :9-10 ;  Habak. 
iii:l-4;  Psalms  xviii:7;  Psalms  lxxvii:ll-12  Luke  i:28;  71- 
74. 

While  all  this  is  true  and  we  do  not  forget  that  Deborah 
was  the  chosen  instrument,  raised  up  to  effect  the  great  de- 
liverance, we  also  must  recognize  the  strong  human  element 
which  is  so  prominent.  One  must  beware  of  giving  to  the 
deeds  done,  especially  to  the  deed  of  Jael  in  its  details,  di- 
vine sanction  and  endorsement.  It  was  an  act  of  courage 
and  of  faith ;  she  was  moved  by  faith  and  that  faith  led  her 
to  kill  Sisera,  the  enemy  of  Israel. 

"The  act  of  Jael,  who  smote  a  nail  into  the  temples  of 
the  sleeping  Sisera,  does  not  claim  our  approbation;  still, 
when  we  estimate  the  character  of  the  act,  the  extenuating 
circumstances  are  entitled  to  attention — the  times  in  which 
she  lived,  her  ardent  and  enthusiastic  devotion  to  the  cause 
of  Israel,  the  general  and  glowing  hatred  of  the  tyrannical 
oppressor  of  the  people,  etc.  If  such  considerations  are  al- 
lowed to  plead  in  favor  of  a  Charlotte  Corday,  much  more 
appropriately  do  they  vindicate  the  act  of  a  Jael.     The 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  83 

same  remark  applies  to  the  act  of  Ehud,  which,  according  to 
our  moral  principles,  was  an  assassination  worthy  of  repro- 
bation alone. ' '  * 

Meroz  is  especially  mentioned.  (Verse  23.)  Deborah 
speaks  with  authority  then,  and  has  her  message  from  the 
Angel  of  the  Lord.  He  said:  "Curse  ye,  Meroz,  curse  ye 
bitterly  the  inhabitants  thereof;  because  they  came  not  to 
the  help  of  the  Lord,  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the 
mighty."  Meroz  might  have  helped,  but  they  lived  there 
in  luxuries.  Meroz  means  * '  built  of  cedars ' ' ;  they  dwelt  in 
palaces  of  cedars  and  lived  in  ease,  unconcerned  about  the 
condition  of  their  brethren.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  said 
that  they  did  not  call  up  to  the  help  of  the  Lord.  The  in- 
difference they  manifested  in  not  helping  their  brethren  is 
thus  charged  as  not  helping  the  Lord  against  the  mighty. 
As  in  the  New  Testament  so  here  the  Lord  identifies  Him- 
self with  His  suffering  people.  God  deliver  His  people 
to-day  from  the  indifference  of  Meroz,  which  is  high  treason 
against  the  Lord  and  His  cause !  Verses  24-31  are  a  vivid 
description  of  what  took  place.  The  mother  of  Sisera  is  seen 
awaiting  the  return  of  her  victorious  son.  She  expects  noth- 
ing but  good  and  her  wise  ladies  are  with  her.  It  is  a  re- 
markable irony.  Thus  all  the  enemies  of  Jehovah  will  per- 
ish, while  for  those  who  love  Him  there  is  glory  and  rest  in 
store.  Deborah  could  only  express  a  longing  that  the  ene- 
mies might  perish,  and  those  that  love  Him  be  as  the  sun  in 
might  and  splendour.  It  was  her  prayer.  "We  know  more 
through  the  full  light  of  prophecy  how  the  enemies  of  God 
will  perish  and  the  Glory  which  shall  be  for  those  who  love 
Him. 

*  Sacred  History — Kurtz. 


84  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

4.    Fourth    Declension.    Under    Midian.    Gideon,    Tola 

and  Jair. 

Chapter  vi-x:5 

Under  Midian.    Gideon  raised  up. 

CHAPTER  VI 

1.  Israel's  Suffering  from  Midian.     Verses  1-6. 

2.  Their  Repentance  and  tlie  Divine  Answer.     Verses  7-10. 

3.  Gideon,   the   Deliverer,   Chosen.     Verses    11-24. 

4.  The  Restored  Worship.     Verses  25-32. 

5.  The  Gathering  for  the   Conflict.     Verses  33-35. 

6.  The  Sign  of  the  Fleece.     Verses  36-40. 

After  Deborah  and  Barak  the  land  had  fifty  years'  rest, 
and  when  again  they  did  evil  they  were  delivered  into  the 
hand  of  Midian  for  seven  years.  It  was  a  most  cruel  op- 
pression which  they  suffered  and  on  account  of  their  re- 
peated unfaithfulness.  They  sank  now  lower  than  during 
the  previous  declensions  and  captivities.  They  were 
stripped  of  everything  and  greatly  impoverished.  The 
Amalekites  came  also  and  made  common  cause  with  Midian 
against  Israel. 

The  word  Midian  means  ** strife."  Midian  is  typical  of 
the  world  in  its  opposition  to  and  separation  from  God. 
Midian  and  Moab  are  often  seen  together.  Both  typify  the 
world  as  the  enemy  of  God.  The  Midianites  with  Moab  tried 
to  get  Balaam  to  curse  Israel.  (Num.  xxii:4.)  Moab  and 
Midian  were  the  means  of  bringing  God's  judgment  upon 
Israel  through  the  woman  Balaam  brought  into  the  midst  of 
God's  people.  Then  Israel  was  joined  to  Baal-Peor,  and 
the  Lord  told  Moses : ' '  Vex  the  Midianites  and  smite  them. ' ' 
(Numbers  xxv:17.)  Amalek  represents  the  flesh  with  its 
lusts.  The  world  and  the  flesh  ever  combine  to  enslave 
God 's  people  and  rob  them  of  their  blessings ;  * '  greatly  im- 
poverish them"  as  Midian  did  to  Israel.  How  the  Church 
has  been  spoiled  by  Midian  and  is  to-day  in  the  sad  condi- 
tion typified  by  Midian 's  power  over  Israel,  we  cannot  fol- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  85 

low  at  greater  length.  The  world  is  in  the  church — separa- 
tion is  given  up  and  the  methods  of  the  world  have  become 
the  methods  of  the  church.  In  the  church  message  to  Par- 
gamos,  Balaam  and  the  stumbling-block  he  cast  before  the 
children  of  Israel,  is  mentioned.  It  represents  that  period 
of  the  church  when  the  church  gave  up  her  separation  and 
settled  down  in  the  world.* 

And  the  same  application  of  Midian  must  be  made  of  the 
individual  believer.  How  God's  Word  warns  against  the 
world  and  the  corruption  which  is  through  lust.  "Love  not 
the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in  the  world.  If  any 
man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him." 
(1  John  ii:15.)  "Ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses,  know  ye 
not  that  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God? 
Whosoever  therefore  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  is  the 
enemy  of  God."     (James  iii:4.) 

When  they  cried  to  the  Lord  a  Prophet  was  sent  to  them. 
The  deliverer  they  looked  for  is  withheld  for  a  time  to  deepen 
their  need  and  burden  their  souls  with  a  greater  sense  of  the 
evil  they  had  done.  The  unnamed  Prophet  brings  there- 
fore a  twofold  message:  The  message  of  God's  faithful- 
ness and  the  message  of  their  disobedience. 

Next  we  see  an  angel  of  the  Lord  under  an  oak  in  Ophrah. 
Gideon  the  son  of  Joash  threshed  wheat  by  the  winepress  to 
hide  it  from  the  Midianites.  The  angel  greeted  him.  ' '  The 
Lord  is  with  thee,  thou  mighty  man  of  valour."  And 
Gideon  addressed  him  telling  out  the  burden  of  his  soul.  If 
the  Lord  be  with  us  why  then  is  all  this  befallen  us?  But 
now  the  Lord  hath  forsaken  us.  It  was  the  language  of  de- 
spair. "Then  the  Lord  looked  upon  him  and  said.  Go  in 
this  thy  might,  and  thou  shalt  save  Israel  from  the  land  of 
the  Midianites ;  have  not  I  sent  thee  ? ' '  And  still  Gideon  is 
reluctant  to  believe  the  message  and  the  Lord  tells  him 
"Surely  I  will  be  with  thee,  and  thou  shalt  smite  the 
Midianites  as  one  man."     The  Lord  had  called  him,  and 


*  Tlie  seven  eliurch  messages  in  Rev.  ii  and  iii  are  prophetic  of 
the  history  of  the  church  on  earth.  Pergamos  is  that  period  vphich 
began  with  Constantine. 


86  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

when  He  calls  He  also  fits  for  the  service  and  is  with  the 
servant.  Oh !  the  blessed  word  ' '  I  will  be  with  thee. ' '  And 
the  One  who  spoke  to  Gideon  is  the  same,  who  has  left  to  us 
the  precious  word, ' '  Lo,  I  am  with  you  always  even  unto  the 
end  of  the  world. ' '  Then  Gideon  brought  his  offering  upon 
the  rock,  and  the  Angel  of  the  Lord  with  his  staff  brought 
the  fire  which  consumed  it  all,  Avhile  He  departed  from 
Gideon's  sight.  Then  it  dawned  upon  Gideon  that  he  had 
been  face  to  face  with  Jehovah,  and  he  feared  death. 
A  blessed  message  came  to  him  then,  ' '  Peace  be  unto  thee ; 
fear  not ;  thou  shalt  not  die. ' ' 

Then  he  built  his  altar  and  called  it  "  Jehovah-shalom 
— the  Lord  is  peace.  All  is  full  of  meaning.  The  offering 
he  brought  typifies  Christ ;  so  does  the  rock  upon  which  it 
was  brought.  The  fire  consumed  it  all,  carried  it  upward  to 
God.  And  upon  that  the  assurance  of  peace  is  given.  Even 
so  He  is  our  peace.  Blessed  be  God  for  such  a  precious, 
beautiful  name — "  Jehovah-shalom  " — the  Lord  is  peace. 
So  we  need  not  to  fear,  for  He  has  made  peace  through  the 
blood  of  His  cross,  and  He  is  our  peace.  And  therefore  like 
Gideon  we  need  an  altar  to  worship.  True  peace  with  God, 
and  the  enjoyment  of  Himself  as  our  peace,  leads  to  wor- 
ship, yea,  it  demands  worship.  Such  the  Father  seeketh. 
As  holy  priests  we  come,  made  nigh  by  His  precious  blood, 
and  bring  our  spiritual  sacrifices.  If  Christ  were  con- 
stantly enjoyed,  the  facts  of  our  redemption  of  blood  never 
forgotten,  Midian,  this  poor  world,  could  never  impoverish 
us.  And  deliverance  out  of  worldliness  and  a  new  separa- 
tion unto  Him  must  needs  have  for  its  starting  point  a 
heart  —  returrt  to  Himself,  who  is  our  peace. 

Then  Gideon  does  what  his  name  (cutter  down)  means. 
Baal's  altar  must  fall  down.  He  began  his  great  work 
at  home.  It  was  a  bold  deed  by  which  he  put  himself 
completely  on  the  Lord's  side  and  stirred  up  the  wrath 
of  the  enemy.  And  then  the  enemies  gather  for  the 
battle.  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  then  came  upon  Gideon. 
He  was  endued  with  the  Spirit  for  the  approaching  de- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  87 

liveranee.     The  enemies  were  coming  in  like  a  flood,  but  the 
Spirit  of  God  lifted  up  a  standard  against  them. 

Finally  Gideon  asked  his  signs.  He  still  hesitated.  And 
the  wonderful  patience  and  condescension  of  Jehovah  in 
meeting  poor,  wavering  Gideon!  The  fleece  in  the  midst 
of  the  ground  is  the  type  of  Israel  in  the  midst  of  the  na- 
tions. The  dew  is  a  symbol  of  divine  grace  and  mercy. 
It  is  the  Lord  who  forsakes  and  who  refreshes  Israel.  Israel 
to-day  is  like  the  fleece  without  the  dew,  while  the  ground, 
the  Gentiles,  possess  of  the  Grace  of  God.  But  ere  long- 
the  dew  will  fall  upon  Israel  again  and  the  time  of  their 
blessing  and  fulness  will  come. 

The  Victory  of  Gideon. 

CHAPTER  VII 

1.  The  Sifting  of  Gideon's  Army.     Verses  1-8. 

2.  The  Dream  of  the  Midianite.     Verses  9-15. 

3.  Victory  through  Weakness.     Verse.s  16-25. 

G  ideon  ' '  the  cutter  down, ' '  now  also  called  Jerubbaal '  *  the 
contender  with  Baal,"  after  his  faith  had  been  strength- 
ened, pitched  his  camp  at  the  well  of  Harod.  ("Trem- 
bling.") The  Lord  did  not  need  the  large  army  he  had 
gathered,  lest  Israel  would  say : ' '  Mine  own  hand  hath  saved 
me."  First  22,000  were  let  go.  They  were  afraid.  What 
an  evidence  of  the  sad  conditions  among  the  people.  Je- 
hovah had  commanded  through  Moses  this  test.  "And  the 
officers  shall  speak  further  unto  the  people,  and  they  shall 
say,  What  man  is  there  that  is  fearful  and  faint  hearted? 
Let  him  go  and  return  unto  his  house,  lest  his  brethren's 
heart  faint  as  well  as  his  heart."  (Deut.  xx:8.)  Faint 
heartedness  and  fear  are  but  unbelief.  Faith  is  courage 
and  does  not  reckon  with  iron-chariots,  with  the  powers  of 
Midian,  but  with  an  omnipotent  Lord.  After  the  22,000 
had  left,  10,000  remained  and  the  Lord  said  again,  "The 
people  are  too  many."  Only  300  were  selected  who  took 
up  water  out  of  the  brook  in  their  hands  as  they  drank. 


88  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

Kneeling  down,  drinking  in  leisure,  is  the  natural  way  for 
man  to  do.  They  showed  thereby  that  they  were  inclined 
to  take  matters  easy  and  to  satisfy  their  need  to  the  full. 
Taking  the  water  into  the  hand  and  lapping  it  like  a  dog  is 
not  the  natural  way  for  man  to  drink.  They  were  less  ab- 
sorbed with  satisfying  their  natural  wants.  They  showed 
thereby  their  eagerness  to  press  on.  Thus  the  army  was 
narrowed  down  to  the  300  whom  the  Lord  would  use  in  His 
service.  How  many  of  the  Lord's  people  to-day  like 
Gideon's  arm}^  are  unfit  for  service?  Unbelief  and  too 
much  occupation  with  earthly  things,  the  creature  wants, 
stand  in  the  way. 

To  encourage  Gideon  still  more  the  Lord  permitted  him 
to  overhear  how  a  soldier  related  his  dream.  That  dream 
was  like  Nebuchadnezzar's  great  dream  given  by  the  Lord. 
The  loaf  of  barley  bread  which  smote  the  tent  is  another 
figure  of  the  Word  of  God.  Midiau  and  Amalek,  the  world 
and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  can  only  be  dealt  with  and  over- 
thrown by  the  Bread  of  life,  the  living  and  abiding  Word  of 
God. 

Read  in  connection  with  Gideon's  victory  2  Cor.  iv:4-12. 
Here  we  find  a  l)lessed  application.  The  light  hath  shined 
into  our  hearts,  so  that  it  might  shine  out.  The  pitchers, 
the  earthen  vessels,  represent  our  old  self.  If  the  light  is 
to  shine  out,  the  victory  to  be  won,  the  old  self  must  be 
broken  to  pieces. 

Internal  Strife.     Gideon's  Failure  and  End. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

1.  The  Strife.     Verses  1-9. 

2.  The   Complete   Deliverance.     Verses    10-21. 
.3.     Gideon's  Failure  and  End.     Verses  22-32. 

4.     Israel's  Failure  after  Gideon.     Verses  33-35. 

Internal  strife  follows.  The  two  princes  of  Midian,  Oreb 
and  Zeeb,  were  slain.  (Chapter  vii:25.)  Oreb  means 
"Raven"  and  Zeeb  means  "Wolf."  Oreb,  the  Raven,  is 
slain  on-  the  Rock  and  Zeeb,  the  Wolf,  at  the  winepress. 
The  Raven,  the  bird  which  represents  darkness  and  evil, 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  89 

is  the  type  of  corruption ;  the  Wolf  is  the  destroyer  of  the 
sheep.  The  rock  and  the  winepress  typify  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  and  His  Cross.  There  the  victory  over  both  was 
won.  The  internal  strife  was  born  in  selfishness.  Eph- 
raim  chided  him  sharply,  because  he  had  not  called  them 
to  the  fight.  Gideon's  wise  and  gracious  answer  averted 
the  threatening  dissension.  How  beautifully  it  illustrates 
Phil.  ii:l-5.  All  church  strifes  begin  with  self-seeking 
vain-glory.  The  remedy  is  "in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each 
esteem  the  other  better  than  themselves." 

A  greater  victory  follows  after  the  internal  strife  had 
been  overcome.  The  men  of  Succoth  and  of  Peniel,  Israel- 
ites, mocked  Gideon  and  refused  him  help.  They  were 
really  secret  allies  of  Midian.  After  the  victory  these 
mocking,  half-hearted  Israelites  were  whipped  by  Gideon 
with  the  briers  and  thorns  of  the  wilderness  to  teach  them 
the  needed  lesson.  How  often  we  also  in  half-heartedness, 
world-bordering  and  being  occupied  too  much  with  earthly 
things,  need  the  thorns  and  briers,  anxieties,  disappoint- 
ments and  sufferings  to  bring  us  into  line. 

When  they  wanted  to  make  Gideon  king  he  refused. 
But  while  he  refused  that  honor  he  tries  to  grasp  another, 
the  priesthood.  He  gathers  the  gold  to  make  a  priestly 
ephod  and  put  it  in  Ophrah.  It  became  a  snare  for  all 
Israel  as  well  as  for  Gideon,  for  they  went  "a  whoring  after 
it."  The  gold  was  taken  from  the  enemy.  It  was  a  self- 
glorification  of  the  victor  Gideon,  He  and  all  Israel  for- 
got that  the  glory  belonged  to  Jehovah.  Gideon  claimed 
an  honor  which  did  not  belong  to  him.  Even  so  it  has 
been  done  on  Christian  ground.  A  false  priesthood  with 
man  in  place  of  the  Lord  and  His  work,  the  instruments 
used  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  of  God  exalted  instead  of 
Him  who  furnished  the  instrument,  these  are  the  lessons 
which  may  be  traced  here  in  Gideon's  sad  failure.  How 
many  a  servant  of  Christ,  forgetting  I  Cor.  iv:7:  "And 
what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive?  Now  if  thou 
didst  receive  it,  why  dost  thou  glory,  as  if  thou  hadst  not 
received  it?"  has  fallen  into  the  same  snare,  and  as  a  re- 


90  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

Bult  lost  his  power  and  blessing !  The  many  wives  of  Gid- 
eon and  the  concubine  of  Shechem  tell  the  other  side. 
Amalek  (the  flesh)  spoiled  him.  Like  priest,  like  people. 
Israel  went  whoring  after  Baal  and  forgot  once  more  Je- 
hovah. 

Abimelech  the  King,  and  His  Wickedness. 

CHAPTER  IX 

1.  The  Murder  of  Gideon's  Sons.     Verses   1-6. 

2.  Jotham's  Parable.     Verses  7-21. 

3.  Scenes  of  Strife  and  Destruction  of  Shechem.     Verses  22-49. 

4.  Abimelech's  End.     Verses  50-57. 

The  story  of  Abimelech  is  intensely  interesting  in  its 
typical  meaning.  Abimelech  was  the  offspring  of  an  un- 
lawful union :  the  son  of  Gideon  and  the  concubine  in 
Shechem,  He  was  half  Israelite  and  half  Canaanite. 
Abimelech  means  "my  father  was  king";  he  claims  there- 
fore supremacy,  lordship  over  the  people  Israel  on  the 
basis  of  succession.  His  father  had  refused  that  honor; 
the  bastard  offspring  claims  it.  He  gains  his  object  by  a 
conspiracy  and  by  murdering  the  sons  of  his  father,  with 
the  exception  of  Jotham,  who  hid  himself.  And  this  domi- 
neerer  over  the  people  bears  the  name  of  the  Philistine 
kings. 

This  illustrates  perfectly  that  corrupt  system  of  Chris- 
tendom which  is  half  Christian  and  half  Heathenish — 
Rome.  It  is  like  Abimelech — a  bastard  system.  She  is 
called  in  Revelation  "Jezebel,"  the  heathen  woman  who 
was  married  to  an  Israelitish  king.  Rome  claims  apostolic 
succession  through  Peter,  who  disclaimed  any  preeminence, 
but  rather  warned  against  "lording  over  God's  heritage." 
Ecclesiastical  assumption  to  control  and  govern  the  people 
of  God,  so  prominent  in  corrupt  Christendom,  is  clearly 
indicated  in  Abimelech 's  act  of  putting  himself  forward  as 
king.  And  the  murderous  spirit  of  Abimelech  is  there  like- 
wise. 

Jotham  (meaning:  Jehovah  is  perfect),  the  youngest  son 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  91 

of  Gideon,  is  the  witness  against  it.  He  uttered  a  parable 
from  Gerizim.  The  Olive,  the  Fig-tree  and  the  Vine  re- 
fused to  reign  over  the  trees.  The  Bramble  becomes  king 
to  devour  with  fire  the  cedars  of  Lebanon.  He  applied  the 
parable  to  Abimeleeh,  who  had  been  made  king. 

"The  tendency  of  man's  heart  is  to  make  another  king 
than  God,  to  put  leaders  in  His  place,  and  thus  to  destroy 
the  use  and  blessing  for  which  the  olive,  the  fig,  the  vine, 
the  various  gifts  of  God,  are  given.  But  just  those  who 
are  really  worthiest  will  most  surely  refuse  to  leave  their 
spheres  of  happy  service,  their  sweetness,  and  their  fruit, 
to  go  to  'wave  over,' — to  flutter  idly  in  the  wind  over  the 
trees.  Thus  royalty  comes  naturally  to  the  thorn-bush, 
which  need  give  up  nothing,  but  which  has  thus  nothing 
in  its  gift  but  thorns, — such  as,  indeed,  the  men  of  Succoth 
(chapter  viii:16)  were  taught  with.  But  worse  would 
come  than  this— the  fire  of  God's  wrath,  which,  from  this 
side  and  from  that,  would  destroy  both  king  and  people. ' '  * 

Three  years  later  the  prediction  in  Jotham's  parable 
comes  true;  fire  came  out  from  Abimeleeh  and  devoured 
the  men  of  Shechem ;  and  fire  came  out  from  Shechem  and 
devoured  Abimeleeh.  It  was  God  who  sent  an  evil  spirit 
between  Abimeleeh  and  the  men  of  Shechem.  Then  there 
is  the  revolt  of  Gaal,  ("loathing"),  the  son  of  Ebed 
("servitude"),  and  he  opposed  Abimeleeh.  Something 
similar  came  to  pass  in  Christendom.  On  account  of  the 
domineering  rule  of  Rome  there  was  the  revolt  against 
her.  The  overthrow  of  the  ecclesiastical  oppressor  was  at- 
tempted. But  Gaal's  attempt  fails.  He  is  overcome. 
Abimeleeh  and  his  officer  Zebul  are  victorious.  The  revolt 
has  failed.  Even  so  to-day .  Rome  is  gaining,  and  those 
who  "protested"  once  against  her  wickedness,  now  are 
following  her  pernicious  ways  once  more.  Abimeleeh 's 
end  was  brought  about  by  a  piece  of  a  millstone  which  a 
woman  cast  on  him,  and  a  young  man  thrust  him  through 
with  a  sword  and  he  died.     It  was  a  fearful  end  in  judg- 

*  Numerical  Bible. 


92  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

ment.  Even  so  it  is  written  of  Babylon,  the  mother  of 
harlots,  Rome.  "And  a  mighty  angel  took  up  a  stone  like 
a  great  millstone,  and  cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying,  Thus 
with  violence  shall  that  great  city  Babylon  be  thrown  down, 
and  shall  be  found  no  more."  .  .  .  "And  in  her  was  found 
the  blood  of  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of  all  that  were 
slain  upon  the  earth."     (Rev.  xviii:21,  24.) 

Tola  and  Jair. 

CHAPTER  X:l-5 

1.  Tola  Judging  Twenty-three   Years.     Verses    1-2. 

2.  Jair  Judging  Twenty-two  Years.     Verses   3-5. 

These  are  but  brief  records  but  not  without  meaning. 
Tola  means,  translated,  "a  worm."  What  a  contrast  with 
the  proud,  wicked,  domineering  Abimelech!  Here  is  one, 
who  takes  the  place  in  self-abasement.  It  reminds  us  of 
Him,  whose  voice  we  hear  in  the  great  Atonement  Psalm 
* '  I  am  a  worm  and  no  man. ' '  Tola,  no  doubt,  typifies  our 
Lord  in  His  humiliation.  When  Abimelech 's  awful  rule 
is  ended,  He  who  was  obedient  unto  death,  the  death  of  the 
cross,  will  come  to  reign  in  righteousness. 

And  this  seems  to  be  more  fully  brought  to  our  attention 
in  Jair,  the  judge,  who  followed  Tola.  His  name  means, 
"  Enlightener, "  He  is  a  type  of  our  Lord  in  His  coming 
as  "the  Sun  of  Righteousness."  The  thirty  sons,  who  rode 
on  thirty  ass-colts  and  had  thirty  cities,  must  mean  the 
rule  of  that  kingdom  to  come  in  which  His  sons.  His  co- 
heirs, will  have  a  part,  as  Jair's  sons  had  authority  over 
these  cities. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  93. 

5.    Fifth  Declension.     Under  the  Philistines  and  Ammon. 
Jephthah,  Ibzan,  Elon,  and  Abdon. 

CHAPTER  X:6-XII 
The  Great  Declension  and  Eevival. 

CHAPTER  X:6-18 

1.  Tlie  Great  Declension.     Verses  6-9. 

2.  Their   Cry   and  the  Lord's  Answer.     Verses   10-14. 

3.  Confession  and  Self -judgment.     Verses  15-18. 

This  is  the  greatest  declension  yet.  They  did  evil  again, 
served  Baalim,  Ashtaroth,  the  gods  of  Syria,  Zidon,  Moab, 
Ammon  and  the  Philistines.  They  were  then  sold  by  the 
Lord  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  and  into  the  hands 
of  the  children  of  Ammon.  Ammon  has  rightly  been 
taken  to  typify  rationalism  in  every  form  and  the  wicked 
doctrines,  the  denials  of  the  faith,  which  follow  in  its  train. 
Christian  Science,  Russellism,  Higher  Criticism,  Seventh 
Day  Adventism,  Unitarianism  and  a  host  of  other  ''isms" 
are  of  the  Ammonite  tribe.  The  Philistines  typify  ritual- 
ism. Like  Ammon  and  the  Philistines,  these  two  enemies 
distress  sorely  the  people  of  God  from  all  sides.  Then 
they  cried  unto  Him  and  confessed  their  sins,  and  Jeho- 
vah reminded  them  of  all  His  goodness  in  past  deliverances 
and  threatened  them  that  He  would  not  deliver  them. 
' '  Go  and  cry  unto  the  gods  which  ye  have  chosen ;  let  them 
deliver  you  in  the  time  of  your  tribulation."  But  when 
they  continued  to  plead  and  to  confess,  when  they  put  away 
the  strange  gods,  when  they  began  to  serve  Him  again, 
though  He  had  denied  their  first  cry — His  soul  was  grieved 
for  the  misery  of  Israel.  What  a  compassionate  Lord  He 
is!  Then  they  gathered  together  and  encamped  at  Miz- 
pah — the  watchtower. 


94  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 


Jephthah  and  the  Ammonites. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1.  Jephthah's  Covenant.    Verses  1-11. 

2.  The  Messages  to  Ammon.     Verses  12-28. 

3.  Jephthah's  Vow  and  Victory.     Verses  29-33. 

4.  Jephthah  Keeps  His  Vow.     Verses  34-40. 

Jephthah  the  judge  who  delivered  Israel  from  the  servi- 
tude of  Ammon  was  the  offspring  of  an  unholy  union  "the 
son  of  an  harlot."  Then  he  became  an  outcast  and  had  to 
flee  from  his  brethren.  He  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Tob 
(meaning,  "goodness")  and  vain,  or  worthless,  men  gath- 
ered unto  him.  Yet  he  was  a  mighty  man  of  valor.  He 
was  therefore  an  humble  instrument,  despised  and  rejected 
by  His  own.  But  finally  those  who  rejected  him  had  to 
send  for  Jephthah  to  be  their  saviour  from  the  hands  of 
the  children  of  Ammon.  They  had  to  own  him  as  their 
leader,  whom  they  had  hated  and  cast  out  on  account  of 
his  lowly  birth.  He  reminds  us  of  our  Lord,  who  was 
hated  by  His  own  and  who  is  yet  to  be  their  deliverer. 

Jephthah  means  "He  opens."  Gilead,  to  which  he  be- 
longed, means  "witness."  The  enemy  "Ammon,"  as  we 
stated  in  the  annotations  of  the  previous  chapter,  typifies 
for  us  rationalism  and  the  wicked  errors  connected  with  it, 
which  distress  the  people  of  God.  Here  then  we  have  in  a 
simple  yet  blessed  way  the  deliverance  from  those  evils 
indicated.  It  needs  "a  true  witness,"  one  who  "opens." 
The  witness  of  an  opened  Word,  the  testimony  of  the  Word 
of  God  and  with  it  the  Spirit  of  God,  will  make  an  end  of 
error.  It  is  the  only  true  way  to  combat  the  wicked  de- 
partures from  the  faith  so  prominent  in  the  last  days. 
How  God  in  this  book  bears  witness  in  types  to  the  one 
remedy  for  all  the  declensions  and  backslidings  of  His 
people!  Othniel  has  Debir  "the  Word";  Ehud  with  his 
sword,  the  sword  of  the  Spirit ;  Shamgar  and  his  ox-goad ; 
Deborah  and  Lapidoth,  the  Word  and  the  Spirit;  the  bar- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  95 

ley  loaf  which  smote  down  Midian's  tent  and  Jephthah, 
the  one  who  opens,  the  true  witness. 

Jephthah  made  a  hasty  vow.  It  was  bargaining  with 
Jehovah,  as  Jacob  did.  And  when  his  daughter  met  him 
first  the  awful  vow  was  carried  out.  In  reading  the  story 
one  can  hardly  escape  the  literal  offering  up  of  the  child. 

"It  is  true  that  a  mode  of  interpreting  this  vow  and  its 
fulfilment  has  been  proposed,  according  to  which  Jeph- 
thah's  daughter  was  not  offered  as  a  sacrifice,  but  devoted 
to  a  life  of  celibacy,  and  consecrated  to  the  service  of  the 
tabernacle;  and  the  confirmation  of  this  view  has  been 
sought  in  the  institution  of  an  order  of  females  who  served 
before  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxviii:8;  1  Sam.  ii:22; 
Luke  ii:37).  Luther  already  remarked:  'Some  maintain 
that  she  was  not  sacrificed,  but  the  text  is  too  clear  to  admit 
of  this  interpretation.'  But  stronger  evidence  of  her  sac- 
rifice than  even  the  unambiguous  words  of  the  vow  afford, 
is  found  in  the  distress  of  the  father,  in  the  magnanimous 
resignation  of  the  daughter,  in  the  annual  commemoration 
and  lamentation  of  the  daughters  of  Israel,  and,  particu- 
larly, in  the  narrative  of  the  historian  himself,  who  is  not 
able  to  describe  clearly  and  distinctly  the  terrible  scene  on 
which  he  gazes  both  with  admiration  and  with  abhorrence. 
The  Law  undoubtedly  prohibited  human  sacrifices  as  the 
extreme  of  all  heathen  abominations  (Lev.  xviii:21;  Deut. 
xii:31,  etc.).  But  the  age  of  the  Judges  had  descended  to 
a  point  far  below  the  lofty  position  occupied  by  the 
Law. ' '  *  And  yet  there  are  difficulties  in  connection  with 
this  literal  interpretation.  The  word  burnt-offering  is  in 
the  Hebrew  "an  offering  that  ascends." 

"The  great  Jewish  commentators  of  the  Middle  Ages 
have,  in  opposition  to  the  Talmud,  pointed  out  that  these 
two  last  clauses  ('shall  surely  be  the  Lord's  and  I  will  of- 
fer it  up  for  a  burnt-offering')  are  not  identical.  It  is 
never  said  of  an  animal  burnt-offering  that  it  'should  be  to 
Jehovah,' — for  the  simple  reason  that  as  a  burnt-offering 

*  Sacred  History  by  Kurtz. 


96  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

it  is  such.  Biut  where  human  beings  are  offered  to  Jeho- 
vah, there  the  expression  is  used,  as  in  the  case  of  the  first- 
born among  Israel  and  of  Levi  (Nu.  iii,  12,  13).  But  in 
these  cases  it  has  never  been  suggested  that  there  was 
actual  human  sacrifice.  If  the  loving  daughter  had  de- 
voted herself  to  death,  it  is  next  to  incredible  that  she 
should  have  wished  to  have  spent  the  two  months  of  life 
conceded  to  her,  not  with  her  broken-hearted  father,  but 
in  the  mountains  with  her  companions. ' '  * 

Whatever  it  was,  one  thing  stands  out  very  prominently, 
the  loyalty  of  Jephthah  to  Jehovah  and  the  obedience  and 
surrender  of  the  daughter. 


The  Strife.    Jephthah 's  Death.    The  Other  Judgfes. 

CHAPTER  XII 

1.  The  Strife  and  the  Slaying  of  the  Ephraimites.     Verses  1-6. 

2.  Jephthah's  Death.     Verse  7. 

3.  Ibzan,  Elon  and  Abdon.     Verses  8-15. 

The  strife  of  Ephraim  and  their  question  reminds  us  of 
what  happened  under  the  judgeship  of  Gideon.  There 
the  soft  answer  turned  away  wrath.  How  different  it  is 
here.  Jephthah  in  self-exaltation  shows  a  far  different 
spirit.  Notice  the  "I"  in  his  answer.  "I  was  at  great 
strife"— ''I  and  my  people"— * 'I  called  you"— "I  saw" 
— "I  put  my  life  in  my  band."  A  great  strife  follows. 
The  Gileadites  take  the  fords  of  Jordan  and  those  who 
said  '  *  Sibboleth ' '  were  slain.  Horrible  record !  Forty- 
two  thousand  Ephraimites  were  murdered.  And  this  sad 
extermination  of  brethren  has  its  sequel  in  Christendom. 
Shibboleth  means  ''flood,"  that  which  divides.  Sectarian- 
ism is  undoubtedly  in  view  here.  How  God's  people  have 
suffered  under  it  and  still  suffer!  It  is  true  ''every  test 
that  divides  the  people  of  God  from  one  another,  and  not 
from  their  enemies,  is  another  false  'shibboleth,'  "  May 
God  graciously  deliver  His  people  from  all  sectarian  strife, 

*  A.  Edersheim. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  97 

which  is  but  the  work  and  the  fruit  of  the  flesh.     (Gal. 
v:19-21.) 

Three  judges  follow  after  Jephthah's  death.  These  cor- 
respond in  their  typical  meaning  to  Tola  and  Jair  after 
Abimelech's  lordship  had  been  broken.  Ibzan  of  Beth- 
lehem. Ibzan  means  ' '  shining ' ' — ' '  splendor. '  *  Then  there 
is  Elon,  which  means  "strength";  and  Abdon,  the 
meaning  of  which  is  "service,"  the  son  of  Hillel,  "Prais- 
ing." These  three  give  us  a  little  glimpse  of  "Him  who 
will  come  in  splendor  and  in  strength" — that  is  "in 
power  and  great  glory,"  to  set  things  right.  Then  all 
strife  and  disorder  will  end  and  happy  service  and  Praise 
will  follow, 

6.    Sixth  Declension.    Under  the  Philistines.    Samson. 

CHAPTER  XIII-XVI 

Israel  Under  the  Philistines.    Manoah  and  His  Wife. 
Samson  Born. 

CHAPTER  XIII 

1.  Israel  Delivered  to  the  Philistines.     Verse  1. 

2.  Manoah  and  His  Wife.     Verses  2-23. 

3.  Samson  Born.     Verses  24-25. 

The  sixth  and  last  declension  of  Israel  in  this  book  is 
now  before  us.  This  section  has  deep  and  interesting  les- 
sons. The  darkest  period  is  reached.  The  Philistines 
lorded  over  Israel.  We  miss  in  connection  with  this  de- 
clension the  statement  which  occurs  in  every  preceding  de- 
parture from  Jehovah :  ' '  And  the  children  of  Israel  cried 
unto  the  Lord."  Here  is  no  cry  recorded  nor  a  return 
unto  the  Lord.  It  seems  the  greatest  indifference  con- 
trolled the  people  so  that  there  wa.s  no  desire  to  cry  to  the 
Lord.  And  when  we  come  to  the  deliverance  we  find  that 
it  was  an  imperfect  one.  "He  shall  begin  to  deliver  Israel 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines"  (verse  5),  is  the  divine 
announcement  of  Samson's  work.    And  how  did  he  end? 


98  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

He  died  as  a  captive  of  the  Philistines.  But  what  does 
the  Philistine  typify?  He  represents  the  religious  man, 
one  who  has  the  form  of  godliness  but  knows  not  the  power, 
the  ritualistic  Pharisee.  We  quote  from  ''Notes  on 
Judges. ' '  * 

"Turning  to  the  tenth  chapter  of  Genesis,  we  find  the 
genealogy  of  the  Philistines.  They  are  the  children  of 
Ham,  and  Ham  is,  as  his  name  denotes,  the  'black  one' 
or  sunburnt.  Dark  indeed,  but  darkened  by  the  sun.  God 
wanted  a  man  who  should  show  us,  as  in  a  figure,  or  pic- 
ture, what  He  sees  man  who  is  turned  away  from  Himself 
(Light)  to  be,  so  He  brings  on  to  the  stage  of  this  world 
a  'black  man,'  a  man  made  black  by  the  sun,  and  crystal- 
lizes the  sorrowful  truth  in  his  name,  'Ham.'  A  very 
clear  picture  of  the  'old  man.'  The  sun  has  shone  upon 
him  indeed,  but  he  has  not  received  the  light.  He  has  re- 
jected the  Light — has  not  come  to  the  Light,  has  hated  the 
Light,  and,  of  course,  it  has  not  enlightened  him;  but  it 
must  have  had  some  effect.  What  is  it?  It  has  been  only 
to  darken  him.  We  may  truthfully  say  that  if  he  had 
never  had  light  he  would  not  have  been  dark  as  he  is,  and 
the  brighter  the  light,  the  darker  he  has  become.  Now 
this  is  surely  the  picture  of  the  Pharisee  rather  than  the 
Publican.  It  was  the  Pharisee,  the  religious  man,  who 
was  warned  "if  the  light  which  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how 
great  is  that  darkness."  It  was  the  Pharisee,  the  re- 
ligious man,  not  the  Publican,  of  whom  the  Lord  testified 
that  his  deeds  were  evil.  It  was  the  Pharisee,  the  reli- 
gious man  of  that  day,  who,  vsdth  the  very  Light  of  the 
World — the  true,  bright  Light  shining  clearly  right  before 
his  eyes — asked  for  a  sign!  As  if  one  should  ask  for  a 
light  at  noonday — what  would  it  prove  but  his  blindness? 
Oh,  blind  Pharisee,  Oh,  dark  Pharisee,  Oh,  thou  child  of 
Ham,  thou  unregenerate  religionist,  thou  unconverted 
church-member,  how  great  was,  and  is  even  up  to  this  day, 
thy  darkness — a  'black  man'  indeed!" 

*  By  F.  C.  Jennings. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  99 

The  marks  of  the  Philistine  are  given  as  follows : 

"First.  Wherever  there  is  an  introduction  of  carnal 
principles — that  is,  principles  that  the  flesh  can  under- 
stand and  approve — into  the  things  of  God,  there  is  the 
Philistine. 

"Secand.  Wherever  there  is  the  teaching  of  some  other 
way  into  the  land  of  blessing  than  by  the  Ked  Sea  and 
Jordan  (the  Cross  of  Christ)  there  is  the  Philistine. 

"Third.  Wherever  there  are  claims  to  sole  authority 
over  the  refreshing  fountain  of  God's  Word,  which  is  then 
tightly  shut  up,  there  is  the  Philistine,  for  that  is  how  his 
ancestors  treated  Abraham's  wells. 

"Fourth.  Wherever  you  get  uncertainty  as  to  sins  for- 
given— a  dread,  cold  fear  that  all  is  not  well,  for  there  is 
no  knowledge  of  a  sacrifice  that  takes  away  sin — there  is 
the  work  of  the  Philistine. 

"Fifth.  Wherever  you  get  principles  that  would  bind 
the  energy  of  faith,  there  is  the  Philistine.  And  one  may 
still  further  question  whether  there  are  not  other  phases 
of  Philistinism,  far  more  subtle  and  dangerous  in  these 
last  days,  than  these  open  expressions  of  it.  The  Philistine 
women  of  whom  we  shall  read  were  not  warriors,  but  they 
were  always  the  ensnarers  of  the  Nazarite. " 

And  who  is  the  deliverer  out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philis- 
tine? A  Nazarite.*  Even  so  the  heart  knowledge  of 
Christ,  our  blessed  place  in  Ilim,  as  well  as  the  practical 
life  of  separation  into  -which  we  are  called,  is  the  power 
which  delivers  from  the  evil  of  Philistinism.  The  Angel 
of  the  Lord  appeared  to  the  wife  of  Manoah  and  later  also 
to  Manoah.  Her  name  is  not  given.  He  announces  to  her, 
who  was  barren,  the  birth  of  a  son,  who  was  to  be  a  Naza- 
rite unto  God  from  the  womb.  The  mother  herself  was  to 
abstain  from  wine  and  strong  drink  and  defilement  with 
any  unclean  thing.  The  messenger,  the  Angel  of  the  Lord, 
is  the  same  who  had  come  from  Gilgal  to  Bochim,  the 

*  See  our  Annotations  on  Numbers  vi  of  what  the  Nazarite  is 
and  represents.  A  careful  perusal  of  that  chapter  is  needed  to  un- 
derstand the  typical  meaning  of  Samson. 


100  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

Captain  of  the  Lord's  host,  He  who  appeared  to  Moses  in 
the  burning  bush,  Jehovah  Himself.  When  asked  what  is 
thy  Name?  He  answers:  "It  is  Wonderful"  (see  Isaiah 
ix:6).  Then  He  ascended  in  the  flame  of  the  altar.  Sam- 
son was  born  and  Jehovah  blessed  him.  The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  even  in  his  young  days  began  to  move  him  in  Ma- 
haneh-dan,  the  camp  of  Dan.     (Dan  means  "judging.") 


The  First  Deeds  of  Samson. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

1.  The  Woman  in  Timnath.     Verses  1-4. 

2.  The  Killing  of  the  Young  Lion  and  the  Honey  in  the  Car- 

case.    Verses  5-9. 

3.  The  Marriage  Feast  and  the  Riddle.     Verses  10-14. 

4.  The   Riddle   Answered.     Verses   15-18. 

5.  Thirty  Philistines  Slain  by  Samson.    Verses  19-20. 

Samson  was  called  of  God  to  be  a  true  Nazarite,  but  in 
his  life  which  was  to  manifest  the  Nazarite  character  he 
failed.  "He  went  down  to  Timnath"  is  a  foreboding  be- 
ginning. It  was  a  step  in  the  wrong  direction.  He 
stepped  upon  the  territory  of  the  enemy  to  enter  into  an 
alliance  with  the  Philistines.  He  meets  one  of  the  daugh- 
ters of  the  Philistines,  a  woman  in  Timnath.  Two  other 
women  we  find  in  Samson's  life,  an  harlot  of  Gaza  and 
Delilah.  They  are  alike,  representing  the  "wiles  of  the 
devil."  They  lead  him  all  down  and  ultimately  accom- 
plish his  downfall  and  death.  Timnath  means  "portion 
assigned."  He  left  his  occupation  to  seek  a  portion  with 
the  Philistines.  Yet  it  was  of  the  Lord  in  the  sense  that 
He  permitted  it  for  a  wise  purpose.  And  in  that  wrong 
course  he  came  to  the  vineyards  of  Timnath  and  met 
the  roaring  lion.  The  lion  is  the  type  of  Satan.  (Amos 
iii:8;  1  Pet.  v:8.)  He  roared  at  the  Nazarite,  as  Satan 
still  roars  against  any  one  who  bears  the  marks  of  separa- 
tion unto  God.  Then  in  the  power  of  the  Spirit  who  came 
"upon  Samson  he  rent  the  lion  as  a  kid.    Then  h«  saw  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  101 

woman  and  she  pleased  him  well.  Strange  contrast!  In 
the  power  of  the  Spirit  he  tore  the  lion  and  then  falls 
victim  to  the  enemy  in  another  form.  How  often  this  is 
the  case  in  the  experiences  of  God's  people.  Afterwards 
he  found  in  the  carcase  of  the  lion  the  swarm  of  bees  and 
the  honey,  which  he  ate  and  also  gave  to  his  parents. 
''Out  of  the  eater  came  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong 
came  forth  sweetness.*  Our  blessed  Lord  has  conquered 
Satan  and  as  the  result  of  that  mighty  overthrow  and  vic- 
tory, accomplished  on  the  Cross,  we  have  our  meat,  our 
sweetness,  our  salvation  and  blessing. 

Then  he  is  in  very  bad  company.  He  went  down  to 
Timnath  alone.  He  met  the  woman,  then  he  made  a  feast 
and  is  surrounded  by  thirty  Philistines  as  companions. 
He  had  allied  himself  with  the  enemy.  And  this  compro- 
mise, this  mingling  with  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ, 
is  the  common  thing  to-day  and  has  led  to  the  grieving  of 
the  Spirit  and  the  loss  of  power.  ' '  For  example,  the  mod- 
ern system  of  revival — to  which  our  Samson,  in  his  failure, 
so  closely  answers — in  which,  whilst  there  doubtless  often  is 
more  or  less  of  true  faithful  service,  yet  to  effect  the  end  an 
alliance  even  with  the  enemy  is  sought;  the  aid  of  the  world 
is  sought  in  obtaining  deliverance  from  the  world! 
Fleshly    attractions,    eloquent    speakers,    exquisite   music, 

*  Another  application  besides  the  above  and  also  of  the  believer's 
personal  experience  in  conquering  by  faith  the  enemy  and  receiving 
sweetness  through  it,  has  been  suggested:  "The  occurrences  which 
took  place  when  Samson  visited  Timnatli,  the  residence  of  the 
woman  (the  lion,  and  the  honey  afterwards  found  in  the  carcase), 
w'ere  highly  significant,  and  adapted  to  instruct  both  him  and  his 
people.  He  seems  himself  to  be  aware,  in  some  degree,  of  their 
importance,  as  he  introduces  them  in  his  riddle.  The  lion,  namely, 
is  an  image  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  which  are  hostile  to  the 
kingdom  of  God;  the  attack,  the  struggle,  and  the  victory  thus  ac- 
quire a  symbolical  meaning.  The  riddle  also  includes  a  truth  of 
great  importance,  the  evidence  of  which  is  furnished  in  manifold 
ways  by  the  history  of  the  world,  and  which  admits  of  an  appropri- 
ate application  even  to  our  times.  The  attack  of  the  lion  was  an 
image  of  the  Philistine  invasion;  the  eater  furnished  Israel  with 
meat  and  sweetness,  the  destroyer  brought  salvation  and  blessings 
with  him ;  for  the  yoke  of  the  Philistines  was  a  chastisement,  de- 
signed to  lead  the  people  to  repentance,  and  terminate  in  their  re- 
n«wed  acctptableness  before  God." 


102  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

cunning  schemes  for  gathering  crowds  to  attract  crowds; 
all  the  churches  closed  except  one,  thus  awakening  a  nat- 
ural excitement;  all  these  are  daughters  of  the  Philistine, 
very  fair,  all  serving  religion  and  pleasing  us  well;  but 
very,  very  dangerous.  For  whilst  at  first  they  may  not 
appear  serious,  they  point  to  the  possibility  of  their  be- 
coming so  in  the  future ;  nor  do  they  ever  radically  aid,  but 
always  hinder,  the  Nazarite." 

He  gives  the  riddle  to  the  Philistines  and  makes  a  wager. 
The  woman,  now  Samson's  wife,  wept  and  continued  till 
he  told  her  the  secret,  "and  she  told  the  riddle  to  the  chil- 
dren of  her  people."  Here  was  his  weak  point,  which 
eventually  resulted  in  his  shameful  downfall  and  humili- 
ating experience.  He  could  not  keep  a  secret.  But  it  was 
all  the  results  of  his  going  down,  forming  an  alliance  with 
the  enemy  he  was  called  to  overcome.  He  did  not  see  that 
he  had  stepped  in  the  wrong  direction.  He  blamed  the 
Philistines  and  not  himself.  "If  ye  had  not  plowed  with 
my  heifer,  ye  had  not  found  out  my  riddle."  Then  he 
slew  thirty  Philistines  to  make  good  his  promise  and  thus 
openly  declared  his  hatred  and  antagonism  to  the  enemy 
for  the  first  time. 


The  Conflict  with  the  Philistines.    Bound  7et  Free. 

CHAPTER  XV 

1.  The  Damage  Done  to  the  Philistines.     Verses  1-8. 

2.  Bound  by  His  Own  Brethren.     Verses  9-13. 

3.  The  Deed  with  the  Jawbone.     Verses  14-17. 

4.  His  Prayer  and  the  Answer.    Verses   18-20. 

He  discovered  next  the  true  character  of  the  Philistines. 
His  wife  has  been  given  to  another.  Nothing  came  of  his 
alliance  with  the  Philistines  but  trouble  and  unpleasant- 
ness for  himself.  Was  it  of  the  Lord  when  he  took  the 
300  foxes  *  and  the  firebrands  to  destroy  the  corn,  the 

*  Literal :  jackals.  It  would  have  been  hard  work  to  catch  300 
foxes,  for  they  go  alone,  but  jackals  go  in  packs. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  103 

vineyards  and  olive-groves?  We  find  that  there  is  no  rec- 
ord that  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him  for  this 
work.  He  acted  out  of  revenge,  because  they  had  given 
his  wife  to  another,  whom  as  an  Israelite  with  the  Naza- 
rite  vow  upon  himself,  he  should  never  have  taken.  It 
was  anger  and  not  a  judgment  commanded  by  the  Lord. 
And  touching  the  jackal,  an  unclean  beast,  he  had  defiled 
himself.  How  often  God's  people  act  in  the  same  way 
in  an  undignified  manner,  biting  and  devouring  each  other 
and  like  Samson  destroying  corn,  vineyards  and  olives,  the 
types  of  spiritual  blessings.  Whenever  an  unchristlike 
spirit  manifests  itself  among  the  children  of  God,  the  spirit 
of  malice,  envy  and  vain-glory,  the  people  of  God  are 
robbed  of  their  joy  and  peace.  The  Philistines  paid  him 
in  the  same  coin.  They  burnt  his  wife  and  her  father. 
Then  he  slew  the  Philistines  with  a  great  slaughter  and 
dwelt  in  the  rock  Etam.  (Literal:  the  cleft  of  the  rock.) 
It  was  a  safe  place  for  him  against  "their  ravening,"  the 
meaning  of  Etam.  And  we  too  have  our  safe  place  in  the 
cleft  of  the  rock.  His  own  brethren  bind  him  out  of  fear 
for  the  Philistines,  but  in  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  he  bursts 
now  the  new  cords  and  with  the  jawbone  of  an  ass  he  slew 
a  thousand  men.  It  is  now  faith  which  acts.  It  was  a 
feeble  thing  he  used;  boasting  was  excluded.  Nor  was  it 
his  own  physical  strength  which  accomplished  the  deed, 
but  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  who  had  come  upon  him.  The 
jawbone  having  done  its  work  is  cast  away. 

**He  will  not  keep  it.  It  might  become  a  snare  to  him. 
Israel  might  go  a-whoring  after  it  as  after  Gideon's  ephod. 
It  has  served  his  purpose,  now  let  it  go — after  all  it  is 
nothing  more  than  the  poor  jawbone  of  a  dead  ass!  Oh, 
that  we  could  learn  something  from  this !  It  is  such  a  day 
to  exalt  the  poor,  foolish  instruments  that  God,  in  His 
goodness,  may  use.  Do  not  we  everywhere  hear  what  a 
wonderful  man  is  such  a  man !  What  marvellous  power  in 
the  Gospel !  What  beauty  of  exposition !  What  magnet- 
ism !  What  a  smart  man  is  he !  Yes,  indeed,  just  as  well 
might  Samson  say,  'What  a  powerful  jawbone!    What  a 


104  THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

wonderful  jawbone!  What  a  magnetic  jawbone!'  No,  no, 
put  the  poor  jawbone  where  it  belongs,  lest  it  detract  from 
the  glory  of  Him  to  whom  all  glory  alone  is  due. ' '  * 

Then  after  the  victory  he  thirsts  and  God  cleaves  a  place 
in  Lehi.  "God  clave  the  hollow  that  was  in  Lehi"  and 
water  flows  forth  to  refresh  him.  A  beautiful  picture  of 
Him  who  was  smitten  that  the  refreshing  waters  of  life 
may  flow  forth, 

Delilah  and  Samson.    His  Death. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  In  Gaza.     Verses   1-3. 

2.  Delilah  and  Her  Victory  Over  Him.     Verses  4-20. 

3.  The  Captive  of  the  Philistines.     Verse  21. 

4.  Tlie  Feast  of  Dagon  and  Samson's  Death.     Verses  22-31. 

Down  he  goes  again,  and  this  time  to  Gaza,  the  Philistine 
stronghold.  There  he  unites  himself  with  a  harlot.  We 
are  here  reminded  of  the  history  of  the  church.  The  har- 
lot typifies  that  system  which  in  Revelation  is  called  by  the 
same  name,  she  who  seduces  to  commit  fornication,  Baby- 
lon the  great,  Rome.  Rome  is  the  capital  of  Philistinism, 
ritualistic  Christendom,  as  Gaza  was  the  capital  of  the 
Philistines.  But  the  attempt  of  the  Philistines  to  kill  him 
fails.  He  carries  the  gates,  posts  and  bars  of  the  city  and 
took  them  to  the  top  of  the  hill  before  Hebron.  We  may 
see  in  it  a  little  picture  of  the  recovery  from  the  power 
of  the  harlot  in  the  Reformation  movement.  But  it  was 
not  Samson's  last  visit  and  farewell  to  Gaza.  We  shall 
see  him  there  again,  stripped  of  his  power,  his  eyes  put 
cut,  a  ridiculed  captive.  We  find  him  first  at  Sorek,  He 
is  entangled  with  Delilah,  which  means  "exhausted." 
He  loves  her  and  she  becomes  the  fearful  instrument  of 
his  downfall.  She  is  the  type  of  the  world,  the  fair,  pleas- 
ure-loving, religious  world,  which  aims,  like  Delilah,  to 
rob  the  true  Nazarite  of  his  separation,  the  real  power  of 

*  Notes  on  Judges. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  105 

the  Christian  life.  It  would  take  pages  to  describe  the 
subtilities,  the  cunning  ways,  the  wiles  of  the  fair  Delilah 
of  the  last  days.  And  even  then  we  would  have  to  say 
**not  the  half  has  been  told."  And  how  she  presses  upon 
the  Nazarite !  Again  and  again  he  deceives  her  and  keeps 
his  secret.  He  knows  well  she  is  after  his  destruction. 
Like  a  moth  attracted  to  the  light  though  burning  awaits 
it,  he  goes  back  to  the  dangerous  sport,  till  at  last,  vexed 
unto  death,  he  tells  her  his  secret.  Again  he  sleeps  upon 
her  knees.  The  locks  of  hair  fall  under  the  razor.  Then 
she,  the  fair  Delilah,  afflicts  him.  Her  caresses  become 
blows  and  his  strength  went  from  him.  "And  he  awoke 
out  of  his  sleep,  and  said,  I  will  go  out  as  at  other  times 
before,  and  shake  myself.  And  he  wist  not  that  the  Lord 
was  departed  from  him."  Alas!  the  sad  story,  how  it  has 
been  repeated  in  the  individual  experiences  of  many  be- 
lievers. Flirting  with  the  unholy  principles  of  this  pres- 
ent evil  age  is  a  dangerous  thing.  Loving  the  world  will 
end,  if  unchecked,  in  disaster  for  the  child  of  God.  And 
the  remedy  is  the  close  walk  in  heart  dependence  and  heart 
devotion  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  thus  it  has  hap- 
pened and  still  more  happens  in  our  days  with  the  church. 
Stripped  of  her  strength,  her  confessed  weakness,  lowli- 
ness, separation  and  utter  dependence  on  the  Lord,  the 
Philistines  have  come  upon  her,  lulled  to  sleep  by  Delilah's 
wiles.  There  is  a  shaking  too,  like  Samson's  shaking. 
Efforts  are  made  by  a  powerless  church  and  they  do  not 
know  that  the  power  is  no  longer  there,  for  the  Spirit  is 
grieved  and  quenched.  That  is  the  sad  state  of  the  pro- 
fessing church  as  seen  in  those  of  Laodicea.  (Rev.  iii:14- 
17.) 

Oh,  the  sad  picture  the  Nazarite  shorn  of  his  locks, 
naked  in  this  sense;  eyes  put  out,  blind,  bound  in  fetters, 
grinding  in  the  mill !  What  sport  the  Philistines  had  with 
him!  And  is  a  church  robbed  of  power,  naked  and  blind 
not  a  sadder  spectacle?  The  end  of  Samson  was  a  great 
victory.  He  had  learned  his  lessons.  Thoroughly  hum- 
bled and  chastised  he  must  have  repented  of  all  his  sin  and 


106  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

folly.  His  hair  grew  again.  He  cries  to  Jehovah  between 
the  pillars,  where  he  made  sport.  Then  follows  his  prayer. 
''0  Lord  God,  remember  me,  I  pray  thee,  and  strengthen 
me;  I  pray  thee,  only  this  once,  0  God,  that  I  may  be  at 
once  avenged  of  the  Philistines  for  my  two  eyes."  Then 
he  bowed  himself,  and  an  awful  catastrophe  follows  when 
the  house  collapsed  and  he  and  the  vast  multitude  of  Philis- 
tines were  slain  and  buried  in  the  ruins. 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  107 


III.     The  Appendix.     Israel's  Internal 
Corruption 

Chapter  xvii-xxi 
Micah's  and  Dan's  Idolatry  and  Its  Punishment. 

CHAPTER  XVII-XVIII 
The  Images  Made  and  the  Hired  Priest. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1.  Tlie  Stolen  Money  Restored  and  the  Images.     Verses   1-6. 

2.  The  Levite  Hired  for  a  Priest.     Verses  7-13. 

The  last  five  chapters  of  the  book  form  an  appendix. 
The  events  given  did  not  occur  after  Samson's  death,  but 
they  happened  many  years  before.  These  chapters  are  not 
in  chronological  order  but  arranged  in  this  way  to  teach 
the  root  of  the  evil  and  its  results.  This  answers  much,  if 
not  all,  of  the  objections  of  the  critics.  These  chapters 
reveal  the  internal  corruption  which  existed  in  Israel  dur- 
ing the  different  declensions.  Idolatry  and  lawlessness 
are  the  two  characteristic  features.  True  worship  and  de- 
pendence on  God  is  given  up  and  then  follows  the  dread- 
ful fruit  of  this,  which  is  hatred,  strife  culminating  in 
lawlessness.  The  predictions  in  the  New  Testament  reveal 
the  same  two  phases.  Departure  from  the  faith  is  fol- 
lowed by  moral  corruption.  (1  Tim.  iv:l;  2  Tim.  iii:l- 
4.)  Then  we  find  in  these  chapters  a  statement  which 
does  not  appear  elsewhere  in  the  book.  "There  was  no 
king  in  Israel"  is  the  statement  made  four  times,  (xvii :6 ; 
xviii:l;  xix:l;  xxi:25.)  A  king  was  needed  to  remedy 
these  sad  internal  conditions,  this  departure  from  God 
and  strife  of  one  against  the  other.  This  is  an  evident 
link  with  and  preparation  for  the  history  which  follows. 


108  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

Even  80  in  this  age  of  evil,  darkness  and  cunning  lawless- 
ness; what  the  world  needs  is  a  king,  the  King  of  right- 
eousness and  peace.  When  He  comes  order  will  be 
brought  out  of  chaos,  all  strife  and  war,  all  bloodshed  and 
lawlessness  will  cease. 

Into  what  a  scene  this  chapter  introduces  us!  The 
thieving  son,  the  cursing  mother.  He,  for  the  fear  of  the 
curse  (true  faitli  was  not  there,  but  superstition),  restores 
the  money  and  that  ungodly  woman  can  say,  "Blessed  be 
thou  of  the  Lord,  my  sou."  Then  she  uses  two  hundred 
shekels  of  silver  and  has  two  images  made.  Micah,  whose 
wicked  life  belies  his  name  (Micah  means  "who  is  like 
Jehovah"),  had  a  house  full  of  gods,  made  an  ephod,  tera- 
phim  and  then  "ordained"  one  of  his  sons  for  a  priest. 
Then  a  wandering  Levite  passed  by  and  to  make  his  idol- 
atrous worshi])  a  little  more  "religious"  he  hires  the  Le- 
vite to  be  a  "father"  and  "a  priest."  He  also  promises 
him  a  yearly  salary,  his  board  and  clothing.  Then  he  set- 
tled down  and  said,  "Now  know  I  that  the  Lord  will  do 
me  good,  seeing  I  have  a  Levite  to  my  priest." 

There  is  no  need  of  much  comment.  The  typical  appli- 
cation is  seen  at  a  glance.  Here  is  a  man-made  god,  a 
man-made  worship  and  a  man-made  priest.  Such  is  the  state 
of  ritualistic  Christendom.  Much  of  that  which  is  called 
worship  is  simply  man-made  and  dishonors  God  as  much, 
or  even  more,  than  the  idolatry  of  heathendom.  And  how 
the  false  priesthood  is  here  typified!  We  have  but  one 
Priest  as  the  people  of  God  and  that  is  our  gracious  Lord. 
Through  His  infinite  grace  all  true  believers  are  consti- 
tuted priests  with  Him.  We  are  a  holy  and  a  royal  priest- 
hood. Any  other  priesthood  is  man-made  and  a  wicked 
assumption  which  has  corrupted  and  is  corrupting  Chris- 
tianity. The  hirelings  too  are  represented  in  this  scene. 
Religious  service  is  so  much  reduced  to  a  commercial  basis. 
And  there  is  the  delusion  of  thinking  that  the  Lord  must 
surely  bless  and  give  prosperity.* 

^'"  The  Levite  himself  is  another  sign  of  the  times.  He  is  of  the 
Levites  of  Judah,  has  been  for  a  while  in  Bethlehem-judah  and  wan- 


THE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  109 

The  Danite  Idolatry. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

1.  The  Danites  Seek  an  Inheritance.     Veraea  1-12. 

2.  Their  Eobbery.     Verses  13-26. 

3.  Laisli  Taken.     Idolatry  Consummated.     Verses  27-31. 

The  history  of  this  chapter  is  closely  linked  with  the 
preceding.  The  tribe  of  Dan  had  failed  to  take  the  God- 
given  inheritance  (Josh.  xix:40-46).  ''The  Amorites 
forced  the  children  of  Dan  into  the  mountain:  for  they 
would  not  suffer  them  to  come  down  to  the  valley." 
(Judges  i:34.)  Then  in  self-will,  entirely  disregarding 
the  will  of  God,  they  sent  out  spies  to  seek  another  inherit- 
ance. They  meet  Micah's  priest,  the  hireling.  Micah's 
idolatrous  outfit  including  the  hired  priest  are  taken  by  the 
invaders.  The  hireling  sees  an  advantage  for  himself,  his 
"usefulness"  is  enlarged  for  filthy  lucre's  sake.  Then 
they  killed  the  people  of  Laish  and  set  their  city  on 
fire.  The  whole  tribe  of  Dan  becomes  idolatrous.  We 
have  in  all  a  picture  of  complete  apostasy. 

2.    Israel's  Moral  Condition.    The  War  on  Benjamin. 

CHAPTER  XIX-XXI 

The  Levite  and  His  Concubine. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

1.  The  Levite  and  the  Unfaithful  Woman.     Verses  1-21. 

2.  The  Fate  of  the  Concubine.     Verses  22-30. 

The  results  of  departure  from  God  are  now  revealed  in 

dered  away  again  to  find,  where  he  may,  another  temporary  resting- 
place.  His  is  the  restless  foot  of  a  stranger  where  he  might  have 
claimed  inheritance,  and  he  is  ready  to  find  a  home  where  he  should 
have  been  a  stranger.  Little  solicitation  prevails  with  him:  his 
sustenance,  a  suit  of  clothes,  a  salary,  has  prevailed  with  many  in 
all  ages  of  the  world,  and  the  Levite  exchanges  his  ministry  for 
priesthood  in  the  house  of  Micah,  where  the  idolatry  of  the  place  is 
sanctified  with  Jehovah's  name.  All  this  is  simple  enough  to  read 
by  those  that  care,  and  Christendom  has  exhibited  every  detail  of 
this  transformation, — not,  alas,  as  it  would  seem,  a  long  process:  a 
manufactured  priesthood  for  manufactured  gods,  all  covered  with  a 
fair  name  of  orthodoxy,  and  men  doing  with  great  satisfaction  what 
is  right  in  their  own  eyes!" 


110  THE  BOOK  OE  JUDGES 

the  awful  corruption  and  violence  so  faithfully  recorded 
in  this  chapter.  The  moral  condition  of  Israel  has  gone 
down  to  the  same  level  of  the  Canaanites;  they  sank  even 
lower  than  the  nations  whom  God  had  doomed  to  destruc- 
tion. We  do  not  repeat  the  horrible  details  of  this  deed  of 
lust  and  violence.  Apostasy  from  God,  rejection  of  the 
Truth  is  followed  by  moral  corruption.  Romans  i:26-32 
shows  the  vileness  of  the  Gentiles,  who  turned  their  backs 
to  the  light  and  did  not  glorify  God.  2  Tim.  iii:l-5  con- 
tains the  description  of  the  moral  corruption  of  the  last 
days  of  the  present  age,  the  conditions  of  those  who  claim 
to  be  "religious"  and  yet  are  apostates.  The  days  of  Lot, 
with  their  vileness,  are  to  precede  the  coming  of  the  Son 
of  Man.  (Luke  xvii:28-30.)  Evidences  that  such  moral 
corruption  and  violence  exists  to-day  throughout  profess- 
ing Christendom  are  only  too  numerous. 


The  Horrible  War. 

CHAPTER  XX 

1.  The  Levite's  Story.     Verses   1-7. 

2.  Tlie  Uprising.     Verses  8-11. 

3.  The  Slaying  of  the  Israelites.     Verses  12-25. 

4.  Benjamin    Exterminated    Except    Six    Hundred    Men.     Verses 

26-48. 

This  and  the  concluding  chapter  bring  before  us  the 
awful  harvest  of  what  had  been  sown,  "For  whatsoever 
a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap."  (Gal.  v:7.)  They 
had  sown  the  wind  and  now  reaped  the  whirlwind.  Vio- 
lence and  lawlessness  result  in  the  slaying  of  40,000  Israel- 
ites and  25,000  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  Nearly  the  en- 
tire tribe  was  wiped  out.  From  Dan  to  Beersheba  into 
the  land  of  Gilead  they  gathered  at  Mizpeh  to  hear  the 
story  of  the  Levite.  Benjamin  refused  to  give  up  the 
wicked  men  and  instead  of  humbling  themselves,  acknowl- 
edging the  dreadful  guilt  and  bringing  the  guilty  ones  to 
judgment,  they  gathered  themselves  together  to  fight  their 


TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES  111 

own  brethren.  Their  company  was  small  in  comparison 
with  the  mighty  host  of  Israel.  The  divine  counsel  was 
that  Judah  should  go  up  first  to  battle  with  Benjamin, 
What  a  contrast  with  the  beginning  of  the  book!  There 
they  were  to  fight  against  the  common  foe;  here  against 
their  own  brethren. 

''But  to  be  fit  to  be  used  of  God  to  deal  with  evil  in- 
volves much  more  than  readiness  to  be  His  instrument. 
They  are  too  ready,  as  we  see  in  the  result.  Their  wrath 
is  too  prompt,  too  implacable,  too  unsparing.  Theirs  is 
the  reckless  haste  of  vengeance,  and  not  the  solemn  dis- 
crimination of  divine  judgment.  They  remember  not  their 
own  sins,  bring  no  sin-offering  to  God,  no  tears  of  peni- 
tence. They  build  on  their  numbers ;  no  doubt  on  the  jus- 
tice of  their  cause,  also,  but  in  self -righteousness  and  with- 
out self-suspicion.  Thus  they  go  up  to  smite,  and  they  are 
smitten  heavily,  disastrously.  Benjamin,  the  wrong-doer, 
is  wholly  victorious." 

Here  too  are  the  lessons  for  God's  people  in  judging 
what  is  evil  amongst  them.  Then  the  children  of  Israel 
went  to  Bethel  ("House  of  God")  and  with  prayer  and 
fasting  waited  on  the  Lord  and  brought  the  offerings. 
Then  the  Lord  gave  them  the  assurance  of  victory,  Benja- 
min is  smitten,  their  women  and  children  are  wiped  out. 
Only  six  hundred  men  escaped  to  the  rock  of  Rimmon. 
All  their  cities  were  burned. 

To  even  greater  scenes  of  violence,  bloodshed  and  deso- 
lation this  poor  world,  which  has  rejected  God  and  His  be- 
loved Son,  is  hastening  on. 

The  Repentance  About  Benjamin. 

CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  Sorrow  of  the  People.     Jabesli-Gilead  Smitten.     Verses  1-15. 

2.  The  Restoration  of  Benjamin.     Verses   16-25. 

A  tribe  of  the  nation  was  almost  entirely  exterminated. 
Then  the  oath  thej^  had  made  not  to  give  their  daughters 
to  wife  to  the  Benjamites  left  assured  the  complete  ex- 


112  TEE  BOOK  OF  JUDGES 

tinction  of  the  tribe.  The  dreadful  work  they  had  done 
dawned  suddenly  upon  them  and  weeping  before  Jehovah 
they  said,  ''Why  is  this  come  to  pass  in  Israel  that  there 
should  be  to-day  one  tribe  lacking  in  Israel  1 ' '  The  answer 
surely  was,  it  came  to  pass  on  account  of  their  departure 
from  God  and  their  sins.  Thus  people  ask  when  they  be- 
hold the  scenes  of  bloodshed  and  war,  as  we  see  in  our 
times,  why  is  this?  and  are  even  ready  to  blame  God,  in- 
stead of  thinking  of  sin  and  its  curse.  Then  once  more 
they  acted  themselves  and  committed  another  deed  of  vio- 
lence. Jabesh-Gilead  is  destroyed;  only  four  hundred  vir- 
gins are  saved.  These  were  given  to  the  Benjamites.  But 
what  hypocrisy  they  showed  in  having  a  feast  of  Jehovah 
and  commanding  the  Benjamites  to  steal  the  daughters 
of  Shiloh !  Failure  and  decline  is  written  in  this  book. 
God's  faithfulness  towards  His  people  whom  He  loves  is 
not  less  prominent. 

"This  is  Israel,  the  people  of  God:  infirm  and  wavering 
where  good  is  to  be  accomplished ;  quick  and  decisive  where 
patience  and  forbearance  would  become  them;  tolerant  of 
what  is  only  against  God;  fierce  and  unsparing  in  judg- 
ment, save  only  of  themselves ;  scrupulously  keeping  an  in- 
sane oath,  yet  managing  to  evade  it  by  a  Jesuitry  that 
deceives  no  one.  Such  is  the  people  of  God,  and  such  is 
Christendom  to-day;  and  such  it  has  been.  Let  us  search 
our  hearts  as  we  read  the  record, — not  given  as  a  record 
without  purpose  in  it.  How  solemn  is  the  repetition  at 
the  end  of  what  has  been  the  text  of  these  closing  chapters : 
*'In  those  days  there  was  no  king  in  Israel:  every  mo/n  did 
lohat  ivas  right  in  his  own  eyes."  * 

*  Numerical  Bible. 


RUTH 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction 117 

Analysis  and  Annotations 119 


The  Book  of  Ruth 


Introduction 

This  book,  containing  the  beautiful  story  of  Ruth,  is 
closely  linked  with  Judges.  The  beginning  of  the  book 
makes  this  clear :  ' '  Now  it  came  to  pass  in  the  days  when 
the  Judges  ruled."  The  events  happened  during  the  pe- 
riod of  the  Judges.  It  therefore  belongs  next  to  that  book. 
In  the  Hebrew  Bible  it  occupies  another  place.  We  find 
it  there  next  to  the  Song  of  Solomon,  followed  by  Lamen- 
tations. Five  books  are  called  by  the  Jews  "Megilloth" 
and  are  read  by  them  at  different  feasts  commemorating 
past  events.  The  Song  of  Solomon  is  read  during  Pass- 
over; Ruth  at  Pentecost;  Lamentations  on  the  ninth  day 
of  the  month  Ab  in  memory  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusa- 
lem; Ecclesiastes  is  read  during  the  feast  of  Tabernacles 
and  Esther  they  read  when  they  celebrate  Purim. 

The  author  of  the  Book  of  Ruth  is  unknown.  The  con- 
clusion of  the  book  shows  that  it  must  have  been  written 
after  David  had  been  made  king.  However  the  late  date 
assigned  to  it  by  the  critics,  after  the  exile,  is  incorrect. 
We  do  not  enter  into  their  arguments.  Any  intelligent 
reader  must  see  at  once  that  its  place  between  Judges  and 
Samuel  is  the  right  place,  for  it  is  as  sequel  to  the  former 
and  an  introduction  to  the  latter.  If  we  read  the  books 
of  Samuel  we  discover  that  they  do  not  contain  any  refer- 
ence whatever  to  the  ancestors  of  the  house  of  David.  To 
supply  this  deficiency  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  this  book 
was  written.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  Samuel  is  the 
author. 

The  story  is  so  familiar  that  we  do  not  need  to  repeat  it 
in  this  brief  introduction.     Ruth  the  Moabitess  is  the  chief 

117 


118  THE  BOOK  OF  BUTE 

character  in  the  story.  She  who  was  cursed  by  the  law 
becomes  married  to  Boaz  and  as  we  learn  from  the  ending, 
Ruth  is  the  great-grandmother  of  David.  Her  name  ap- 
pears therefore  in  the  first  chapter  of  the  New  Testament 
in  the  list  of  ancestors  of  Him,  who  is  David's  son  and 
David's  Lord.  She  is  the  third  Gentile  woman  in  the 
genealogy  of  our  Lord.  The  two  Canaanitish  women, 
Tamar  and  Rahab,  precede  her.  The  promises  made  to 
Abraham  that  the  Gentiles  were  to  receive  blessing  through 
his  seed  are  confirmed  through  the  history  of  these  Gen- 
tile women  among  the  ancestors  of  David  and  our  Lord. 

The  typical  dispensational  meaning  of  the  story  of  Ruth 
is  interesting  and  has  many  blessed  lessons.*  Ruth  is 
often  given  as  a  type  of  the  church,  as  the  bride  of  Christ. 
This  application  is  difficult  to  make  and  leaves  much  of 
the  beautiful  story  unexplained.  Naomi  represents  Israel 
in  unbelief,  widowed  and  in  bitterness.  Ruth  is  the  type 
of  the  remnant,  who  is  called  and  received  back  by  grace 
(like  the  sinners  of  the  Gentiles)  identifying  itself  with 
Israel's  ruin,  as  Ruth  identified  herself  with  Naomi.  The 
Kinsman-Redeemer,  who  espouses  their  cause  and  through 
whom  Naomi's  bitterness  is  changed  to  joy,  who  marries 
Ruth,  is  the  type  of  the  Redeemer,  Christ,  We  shall  fol- 
low briefly  this  correct  dispensational  foreshadowing  in  the 
annotations.  A  special  division  of  this  little  book  is  not 
needed.  The  story  has  been  divided  into  four  chapters 
which  makes  another  division  unnecessary. 

*  The  best  application  we  have  soen  is  in  the  Numerical  Bible  to 
which  we  acknowledge  our  indebtedness. 


THE  BOOK  OF  ,RUTH  119 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

CHAPTER  I 

The  Story  of  Naomi.    Orpah  and  Ruth. 

1.  Naomi  and  Her  Sorrows.     Verses   1-5. 

2.  The  Return.     Verses   6-13. 

3.  Orpah   Turning  Back.     Ruth   Cleaving.     Verses    14-18. 

4.  Naomi  and  Ruth  in  Bethlehem.     Verses   19-22. 

The  story  begins  with  a  famine.  Elimelech,  "my  God 
is  king,"  and  Naomi,  "Pleasant,"  leave  Bethlehem,  "the 
house  of  bread,"  to  go  to  the  land  of  Moab,  the  heathen 
country.  The  story  ends  in  Bethlehem  with  a  marriage. 
Naomi  far  from  the  land,  in  unbelief  and  bitterness,  bereft 
of  Elimelech,  her  two  sons  also  dead,  Mahlon,  which  means 
"sick,"  and  Chilion  "pining,"  pictures  Israel's  condition, 
away  from  the  land,  no  longer  married  unto  Jehovah,  but 
forsaken.  Like  Naomi,  Israel  has  had  trouble  upon  trou- 
ble and  sorrow  upon  sorrow.  There  is  no  hope  for  Naomi 
amidst  the  Gentiles  in  Moab,  as  there  is  no  hope  for  Israel 
among  the  nations.  Hearing  that  Jehovah  had  visited  His 
people  with  bread,  she  arose  that  she  might  return  from 
Moab.  Then  Orpah  said  farewell  to  remain  in  Moab,  while 
Ruth,  the  Moabitess,  clave  unto  Naomi.  She  had  faith 
and  the  beautiful  words  she  addressed  to  Naomi  were  the 
expression  of  that  faith.  Not  alone  did  the  poor  Moabitish 
woman  say  "thy  people  shall  be  my  people,"  but  also 
"thy  God  my  God."  It  was  grace  which  had  drawn  her. 
She  thus  clung  closely  to  Naomi,  became  one  with  her  in  all 
her  misery,  yet  with  a  faith,  a  confidence  in  Naomi's  God, 
which  Naomi  did  not  possess.  When  Israel  sets  her  face 
homeward  once  more,  there  will  be  in  the  midst  of  the 


130  THE  BOOK  OF  RUTH 

unbelieving  nation  a  remnant,  searching  for  the  promised 
blessing,  longing  for  God,  a  remnant  *  which  ultimately  will 
come  in  touch  with  the  mighty  Kinsman-Redeemer  and  in- 
herit through  Him  the  promised  blessings.  This  remnant 
is  represented  in  Ruth,  cleaving  to  Naomi.  But  the  ob- 
jection may  be  raised  that  Ruth  was  a  Gentile.  How  can 
she  represent  the  remnant  of  Israel?  Israel  through  her 
unbelief  has  become  practically  the  same  which  the  Gentiles 
are.  They  are  "Lo-Ammi,"  not  my  people.  (Hosea  i:9.) 
The  grace  which  called  and  saved  Gentiles  will  call  and 
draw  them.  Therefore  this  remnant  is  called  "according 
to  the  election  of  grace."     (Romans  xi:5-6.) 

Naomi  is  back  in  Bethlehem,  empty  and  with  a  bitter 
spirit.  She  calls  herself  "Mara"  which  means  bitter. 
This  pictures  Israel's  return  in  unbelief.  And  it  was  at 
the  time  of  the  barley  harvest.  The  harvest,  as  our  Lord 
tells  us,  is  the  end  of  the  age.  When  that  end  comes,  after 
the  true  church  has  been  gathered  home,  Israel,  like  Naomi, 
with  a  believing,  trusting  remnant  cleaving  to  her,  repre- 
sented in  Ruth,  will  return. 

CHAPTER  II 

Gleaning  in  the  Field. 

1.  Ruth  Gleaning  in  the  Field  of  Boaz.     Verses  1-3. 

2.  Grace  Shown  to  Ruth  by  Boaz.     Verses  4-17. 

3.  Ruth  Hears  Concerning  Boaz.     Verses   18-23. 

Boaz  comes  now  upon  the  scene.  His  name  means  "in 
Him  is  strength."  He  is  called  "a  mighty  man  of 
wealth."  As  the  kinsman-redeemer  he  is  a  beautiful  type 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  One  in  whom  there 
is  strength,  the  rich  One.     Ruth  knows  at  first  little  of 

*  Of  this  remnant  called  through  the  Grace  of  God,  after  the  true 
church  has  left  this  earthly  scene,  the  Prophetic  Word  has  much  to 
say.  Read:  Is.  vi:13;  x:21-22;  xi:ll;  Mieah  iv:7;  Zeph.  iii:7; 
Ezek.  ix;  Matt.  iv:l-3  and  many  other  passages.  In  the  Psalms 
"we  read  the  future  prayers  of  this  remnant,  the  sorrows  and  suffer- 
ings they  will  have  and  the  glorious  deliverance  when  the  King 
comes. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  RUTH  121 

him  and  the  coming  relationship  with  the  wealthy  One. 
Boaz  is  related  to  Elimelech,  whose  name  *'my  God  is 
king"  is  typical  of  Israel's  faith.  Through  Elimelech 
only  Naomi  (the  nation  Israel)  has  a  claim  on  Boaz.  And 
she  can  only  lay  claim  through  Ruth.  Even  so  Israel  has 
a  claim  on  the  blessings  promised  to  her  through  the  rem- 
nant which  returns  to  Him  in  the  beginning  of  the  har- 
vest, the  end  of  the  age ;  that  remnant,  as  stated  before,  is 
represented  in  Ruth.  How  simple  and  beautiful  is  the 
story  which  follows.  The  mighty  man  of  valor  knows  evi- 
dently all  about  her,  though  he  does  not  act  at  once  in  her 
behalf.  He  appears  on  the  harvest  field.  Beautiful 
greeting  he  brings!  "The  Lord  be  with  you";  and  they 
answer  him,  "The  Lord  bless  thee."  Gracious  are  his 
words  to  her,  who  had  cast  herself  upon  his  grace,  for 
Ruth  had  said  to  Naomi,  "Let  me  now  go  to  the  field  and 
glean  ears  of  corn  after  him  in  whose  sight  I  shall  find 
grace."  She  anticipated  in  faith,  though  she  did  not  fully 
know  what  grace  was  awaiting  her.  Even  so  the  remnant 
of  Israel  in  the  last  days.  How  he  permits  her  to  continue 
in  the  humble  work.  He  provides  for  her.  She  is  only 
to  glean  in  his  field.  She  is  not  to  be  molested;  his  gra- 
cious power  shields  her.  She  can  also  drink  of  the  water 
he  provides.  Then  she  falls  on  her  face.  Beautiful  are 
her  words  of  humility,  "Why  have  I  found  grace  in  thine 
eyes,  that  thou  shouldst  take  knowledge  of  me,  seeing  I  am 
a  stranger  ? ' '  Then  she  hears  from  his  lips  that  he  knows 
all  about  her.  More  than  that.  He  assures  her  of  com- 
ing blessings,  blessings  Ruth  will  get  because  she  trusted; 
blessings  not  of  works,  the  law  covenant,  but  of  grace,  be- 
cause she  believed.  "The  Lord  recompense  thy  work,  and 
a  fuU  reward  be  given  thee  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel, 
under  whose  wings  thou  art  come  to  trust."  All  fore- 
shadows dispensationally  the  soul-exercise  of  the  believing 
remnant  of  Israel,  when  the  harvest  begins,  and  the  gra- 
cious dealing  of  the  Lord  with  that  remnant.  Another 
application  may  also  be  made  on  spiritual  lines  of  a  soul 
which  seeks  blessing  and  how  the  Lord  deals  in  His  grace 


122  TEE  BOOK  OP  RUTH 

■with  those  that  seek  Him.  This  we  cannot  follow  in  these 
brief  annotations.  Then  he  comes  closer  to  her.  She  re- 
ceives from  his  own  hands.  He  also,  unknown  to  her, 
gives  instructions  that  "handfulls  on  purpose"  are  to  be 
dropped,  just  for  her.  AVhat  evidences  that  the  mighty, 
wealthy  Boaz  loves  the  poor  stranger,  Ruth!  So  the  rem- 
nant will  gradually  learn  of  His  love.  And  we  also  find 
our  comfort  here.  We  glean  in  His  Word.  It  is  typified 
by  the  wheat,  the  barley  and  the  corn,  i  Then  when  we 
feel  our  need  and  dependence  on  Him,  and  plead,  as  we 
always  should,  our  ignorance.  He  drops  the  handsfuU  on 
purpose,  so  that  we  find  just  what  we  need  for  our  spiritual 
sustenance  and  comfort,  j 

And  Naomi  tells  her  something  about  Boaz.  But  sHe 
only  calls  him  "one  of  our  redeemers."  She  should  have 
said  he  is  the  redeemer.  The  secret  who  he  is  and  what 
He  will  do  for  her,  the  trusting  Ruth,  she  will  learn  only 
from  himself.  So  unbelieving  Israel  does  not  know  the 
full  story  of  Him,  who  is  the  Redeemer.  Boaz,  Christ 
Himself,  will  make  it  known  when  He  reveals  Himself  in 
His  Grace  and  Power  to  the  remnant  of  His  people. 

CHAPTER  in 

At  the  Feet  of  Boaz. 

1.  Naomi  Instructs  Ruth.    Verses  1-5. 

2.  At  His  Feet.     Verses  6-7. 

3.  The  Discovery.     Verses  8-13. 

4.  The  Six  Measures  of  Barley.     Verses  14-17. 

5.  He  Will  not  Rest  Until  He  Have  Finished  the  Thing.    Verse 

18. 

What  follows  in  the  realization  of  redemption  must  be 
connected  with  Leviticus  xxv:25,  the  law  concerning  the 
redemption  of  an  inheritance  and  the  other  law  about  the 
marriage  of  a  brother-in-law  as  given  in  Deut.  xxv:5-12. 
See  the  annotations  on  that  passage.*  Naomi  gives  in- 
structions to  Ruth  which  are  based  upon  that  law.    But 

*  Annotated  Bible.     Vol.  I.    Deut.  xxv. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  BUTE  123 

notice  it  is  the  question  of  rest.  "My  daughter,  shall  not 
I  seek  rest  for  thee,  that  it  may  be  well  with  thee?"  She 
then  is  seen  resting  at  his  feet.  Blessed  truth  indeed  which 
even  Naomi  realizes,  rest  can  only  be  found  at  the  feet  of 
the  redeemer.  This  truth  is  known  to  all  His  beloved  peo- 
ple. He  promises  rest  and  He  giveth  rest.  Like  Mary  it 
is  the  good  part  for  us  to  be  at  His  feet. 

But  what  is  Boaz's  occupation  when  Euth  seeks  him  to 
claim  her  full  blessing?  "Behold  he  winnoeth  barley  to- 
night in  the  threshing  floor."  The  winnowing  is  a  sifting 
process  by  which  the  wheat  is  separated  from  the  chaff. 
Read  Matthew  iii:12.  The  threshing  floor  is  Israel.  The 
dark  night  of  tribulation  is  coming  for  them,  when  the 
mighty  One  will  do  the  work  of  separating  among  His  peo- 
ple. * '  His  fan  is  in  His  hand. ' '  In  that  coming  night  the 
believing  remnant  will  seek,  like  Ruth,  the  place  at  His 
feet  and  claim  Him  as  their  own  redeemer.  Critics  and 
unbelievers  have  often  sneered  at  this  scene  and  suggested 
evil  motives.  They  do  the  same  with  other  portions  of 
the  Word  of  God.  Only  an  evil  mind  can  read  evil  into 
this  beautiful  scene.  It  was  at  midnight  when  Boaz  be- 
came conscious  of  her  presence  and  asked,  "Who  art 
thou?"  She  answered,  "I  am  Ruth."  She  owns  all  she 
is  and  prays  that  he  may  cover  her,  "for  thou  art  a  re- 
deemer." Notice  the  steps.  His  question — her  answer 
and  prayer  because  she  believed  in  him  as  the  kinsman 
redeemer. 

She  tarried  there  during  the  night.  "And  she  lay  at 
his  feet  till  the  morning."  Then  she  left  not  empty 
handed ! 

CHAPTER  IV 

The  Redemption  and  Marriagfe. 

1.  The   Other   Kinsman.     Verses    1-5. 

2.  His  Refusal.     Verses  G-8. 

3.  Boaz's  Redemption.     Verses  9-10. 

4.  The  Marriage.     Verses   11-13. 


124  THE  BOOK  OF  BUTE 

5.  Naomi's  Happiness.     Verses  14-17. 

6.  The  Ancestry  of  David.     Verses  18-22. 

And  now  the  other  redeemer,  who  cannot  redeem,  ap- 
pears. Boaz  sits  in  the  gate  and  hails  the  one  whom  he 
knew  as  he  passe th  by.  He  calls  him  not  by  name  but  said, 
"Ho,  such  a  one !  turn  aside,  and  sit  down  here."  If  Boaz 
had  not  called  him  he  would  surely  have  passed  by.  Then 
ten  men  also  sit  down.  The  case  is  stated  and  the  other 
redeemer  is  willing  to  redeem  the  land.  But  when  he 
hears  that  he  also  must  take  Ruth  the  Moabitess,  he  de- 
clares his  powerlessness  to  do  it.  "I  cannot  redeem  it  for 
myself,  lest  I  mar  mine  own  inheritance.  Redeem  thou 
my  right  to  thyself ;  for  I  cannot  redeem  it. ' '  Whom  does 
this  unnamed  redeemer  represent,  who  can  redeem  the 
land,  but  can  do  nothing  for  the  poor  stranger,  the  Mo- 
abitess? (^his  powerless  redeemer  is  the  law."])  Ten  wit- 
nesses are  there  confirming  his  inability  to  do  it.  These 
represent  the  ten  commandments.  The  curse  of  the  law 
rested  upon  the  Moabitess  for  it  is  written,  ' '  An  Ammonite 
or  Moabite  shall  not  enter  into  the  congregation  of  the 
Lord,  even  to  the  tenth  generation  forever."  (Deut. 
xxiii:3.)  Therefore  the  law  could  not  bring  in  Ruth,  but 
only  keep  her  out.  Her  case  is  indeed  hopeless  from  the 
point  of  the  law.  Grace  alone  can  help  her.  And  this 
grace  is  beautifully  seen  in  Boaz.  He  acquires  both  the 
land  and  Ruth,  the  Moabitess.  "And  Boaz  took  Ruth  and 
she  became  his  wife."  It  is  a  blessed  type  of  Him  who 
has  paid  the  redemption  price  for  the  land  and  the  people. 
The  great  day  is  coming  after  He  had  the  fan  in  His  hand, 
at  the  time  of  the  harvest,  when  He  will  redeem  both  by 
His  gracious  power.  Then  all  the  blessings  will  follow — 
which  are  but  faintly  seen  in  Ruth's  union  with  Boaz. 
"For  thou  shalt  break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the 
left;  and  thy  seed  shall  inherit  the  Gentiles,  and  make 
the  desolate  cities  to  be  inhabited.  Fear  not,  thou  shalt 
not  be  ashamed ;  neither  be  thou  confounded :  for  thou  shalt 
n6t  be  put  to  shame.    For  thou  shalt  forget  the  shame  of 


TEE  BOOK  OF  BUTE  125 

thy  youth,  and  shalt  not  remember  the  reproach  of  thy 
widowhood  any  more.  For  thy  Maker  is  thine  husband; 
the  Lord  of  hosts  is  His  name;  and  thy  Redeemer  the 
Holy  One  of  Israel;  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  shall  He 
be  called. '^  (Is.  liv :3-5. )  ' ' Thou  shalt  no  more  be  termed 
Forsaken;  neither  shall  thy  land  be  any  more  termed 
Desolate.  But  thou  shalt  be  called  Hephzi-bah,  and  thy 
land  Beulah ;  for  the  Lord  delighteth  in  thee,  and  thy  land 
shall  be  married."     (Is.  lxii:4.) 

The  conclusion  of  this  precious  little  book  are  the  gen- 
erations of  Pharez  ending  with  David.  Ruth  became  the 
great-grandmother  of  David. 


FIRST  SAMUEL 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction 131 

Division  of  tlie  First   Boole  of  Samuel 134 

Analysis  and  Annotations 136 


The  Books  of  Samuel 


Introduction 

The  two  Books  of  Samuel  and  the  two  Books  of  Kings  bear  in  the 
Greek  Version  of  the  Old  Testament  (the  Septuagint)  the  name 
First,  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Books  of  Kingdoms.  In  the  Latin 
Version,  known  as  the  Vulgate,  they  are  called  the  Books  of  Kings. 
In  Hebrew  manuscripts  and  the  earlier  printed  editions  of  the  Hebrew 
text,  both  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  appear  as  one;  the  same  is  true  of 
the  Book  of  Kings.  It  must  also  be  remembered  that  in  the  Hebrew 
Bible,  the  Books  of  Samuel  belong  to  that  section  which  Jewish  au- 
thorities have  named  "The  Former  Prophets."  The  Books  of  Samuel 
are,  therefore,  classed  by  the  Jews  with  the  writings  of  the  Prophets. 

THE  AUTHORSHIP 

The  books  bear  the  name  of  Samuel.  This,  however,  does  not  mean 
that  Samuel  is  the  author  of  these  books.  That  would  be  impos- 
sible, inasmuch  as  the  greater  part  of  them  contains  events  which 
transpired  after  the  death  of  Samuel.  The  only  hint  in  Scripture 
about  the  authorship  of  these  two  books  is  found  in  1  Chronicles 
xxix:29:  "Now  the  acta  of  David  the  King,  first  and  last,  behold, 
they  are  written  in  the  Book  of  Samuel  the  Seer,  and  in  the  Book 
of  Nathan  the  Prophet,  and  in  the  Book  of  Gad  the  Seer."  Ancient 
tradition  among  the  Jews  assigns  to  Samuel  the  authorship  of  the 
first  twenty-four  chapters  of  the  first  Book  of  Samuel.  These  chap- 
ters contain  what  may  be  termed  the  life  of  Samuel  up  to  the  time 
of  his  death.  The  twenty-fifth  chapter  begins  with  the  record  of 
his  death.  It  is  reasonable  that  Samuel  wrote  these  opening  chap- 
ters of  the  First  Book  which  bears  his  name.  That  Samuel  did  write 
is  fully  established  by  chapter  x:25:  "Then  Samuel  told  the  people 
the  manner  of  the  Kingdom,  and  wrote  it  in  a  book  and  laid  it  up 
before  the  Lord."  The  same  Jewish  tradition  credits  Nathan  the 
Prophet  and  Gad  the  Seer  with  having  written  the  remainder  of  the 
two  books.  The  passage  in  the  First  Book  of  Chronicles  seems  to 
support  this  view.  Evidently  Samuel  began  to  write  these  books, 
which,  for  this  reason,  were  called  by  his  name.  Modern  Criticism 
rejects  this  view  and  claims  that  the  Books  of  Samuel  could  not  be 
the  work  of  men  who  lived  during  the  reign  of  Saul  and  David.     We 

131 


132  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

do  not  give  their  speculative  theories  and  conflicting  opinions,  which 
are  of  no  value  whatever  in  the  spiritual  study  of  the  text.  The 
best  scholars  believe  that  these  books  belong  to  a  very  early  period, 
and  that  the  critical  view  of  a  compilation  of  certain  documenta  and 
fragments,  immediately  before  the  Exile,  cannot  be  sustained.  "The 
minute  sketches  and  vivid  touches  with  which  these  books  abound 
prove  that  their  author  speaks  what  he  knows  and  testifies  what  he 
has  seen."  *  Some  of  the  more  important  objections  Higher  Criticism 
has  raised  against  the  early  date  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  and  the 
alleged  discrepancies  we  shall  point  out  and  answer  in  our  annota- 
tions. 

THE  CONTINUATION  OF  ISRAEL'S  HISTORY 

These  books  contain  the  continuation  of  the  history  of  the  people 
Israel.  The  opening  chapters  cover  the  period  of  the  Philistine  op- 
pression, during  which  Samson  began  to  deliver  Israel  out  of  the 
hands  of  the  Philistine.  (Judges  xiii:5.)  As  stated  in  our  introduc- 
tion to  the  Book  of  Judges,  Samuel's  first  operations  fall  into  the 
same  time  when  Samson  was  acting  as  judge.  Samuel  assumed  the 
office  of  Judge  after  the  death  of  Samson.  In  the  beginning  of  the 
Philistine  oppression  these  two  boys  were  born,  both  devoted  to  the 
Nazariteship  and  both  to  a  definite  work.  There  is,  however,  a 
difference  between  the  two,  as  Edersheim  puts  it:  "Samuel  Avas  God- 
granted,  Samson  God-sent;  Samuel  was  God-dedicated,  Samson  was 
God-demanded.  The  work  of  Samson  ended  in  self-indulgence,  fail- 
ure and  death ;  that  of  Samuel  opened  up  into  the  royalty  of  David." 

The  final  statement  with  which  the  Book  of  Judges  closes  is  the 
following:  "In  those  days  there  was  no  king  in  Israel;  every  man 
did  that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes."  This  shows  that  Israel 
was  looking  forward  towards  having  a  king;  the  need  of  a  king  was 
recognized,  for  the  government  by  Judges  had  wrought  no  deliverance 
for  the  people.  The  ruin  into  which  Israel  had  fallen,  besides  being 
described  in  the  closing  chapters  of  Judges,  is  also  seen  in  the  open- 
ing chapters  of  Samuel.  The  priesthood  is  corrupted.  Eli  is  old 
and  weak;  his  sons,  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  were  wicked  men.  The 
Philistines  smite  them  again.  Then  they  used  the  ark  of  the  cove- 
nant to  overcome  the  foe ;  but  instead  there  is  more  defeat.  The  ark 
of  God  is  captured  by  the  Philistines  and  taken  to  Ashdod.  After 
the  return  of  the  ark  Samuel  called  the  people  to  repentance.  "Then 
the  children  of  Israel  put  away  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth,  and  served  the 
Lord."  (1  Sam.  vii:4.)  The  result  was  victory  over  the  Philistines. 
Samuel  then  judged  Israel ;  he  also  made  his  sons  judges.  Like  Eli's 
sons,  they  were  imgodly.  "They  turned  aside  after  lucre,  and  took 
bribes,  and  perverted  judgment."     (1  Sam.  viii:3.)     It  was  at  that 


•  John  Eadie. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  133 

time  that  the  elders  of  Israel  made  their  demand.  "Behold  thou  art 
old,  and  thy  sons  walk  not  in  thy  ways,  now  make  ua  a  king  to 
judge  us  like  all  nations."  (1  Sam.  viii:5.)  With  this  th&  crisis 
is  reached.  A  king  is  demanded  and  the  Lord  grants  their  request. 
They  had  rejected  Him  as  king  over  them. 

The  two  institutions  which  we  find  now  definitely  introduced 
among  Israel  are  the  Prophetic  Order  and  the  Monarchy.  Samuel 
heads  the  order  of  the  prophets  and  is  also  chosen  to  crown  the  first 
two  kings.  That  the  kingly  oflice  in  the  midst  of  Israel  had  been 
anticipated  is  learned  from  Deut.  xvii:  14-15.  "When  thou  art  come 
into  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee,  and  ehalt  possess 
it,  and  shall  dwell  therein,  and  shalt  say,  I  will  set  a  king  over  me, 
like  as  all  the  nations  that  are  about  me.  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise 
set  him  a  king  over  thee,  whom  the  Lord  thy  God  shall  choose;  one 
from  among  thy  brethren  shalt  thou  set  king  over  thee;  thou  mayest 
not  set  a  stranger  over  thee,  who  is  not  thy  brother."  Thus  the 
demand  was  anticipated  and  provision  made  for  it  in  the  Law. 

FORESHADOWING  THE  TRUE  KING  AND  HIS  KINGDOM 

Israel  had  to  have  a  monarchy  established  in  her  midst  to  fore- 
shadow the  true  King  and  His  Kingdom.  That  true  King  of  Israel, 
the  promised  One,  and  His  dominion  had  already  been  mentioned  by 
Balaanr.  "A  sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel" — "Out  of  Jacob  shall 
come  He  that  shall  have  dominion."  (Numbers  xxiv:  17-19.) 
Hannah  in  her  inspired  outburst  of  praise  and  her  prophetic  vision 
beheld  that  true  king.  "He  shall  give  strength  unto  his  King  and 
exalt  the  horn  of  his  Anointed."  ( 1  Sam.  ii :  10. )  It  is  Israel's  true 
King,  the  Anointed,  the  Christ,  she  beheld. 

Saul,  the  first  king,  is  the  people's  choice  and  ends  in  complete 
failure.  Then  David  comes  upon  the  scene;  he  is  God's  choice;  the 
king  after  His  own  heart.  But  he  also  fails.  However,  he  is  a  type 
of  Him  who  is  both  David's  Lord  and  David's  son,  the  root  and  off- 
spring of  David,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  true  King  of  Israel, 
David  and  Solomon  are  faint  shadows  of  the  true  King  and  His 
work  l)oth  in  judgment  and  in  the  Kingdom  of  peace.  The  historical 
records  in  the  Books  of  Samuel  are  especially  rich  in  typical  and 
dispensational  lessons  and  teach  many  spiritual  truths.  We  hope 
to  point  out  many  of  them  as  we  follow  the  text  in  the  aoaotationa. 


134  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 


The  Division  of  First  Samuel 

Inasmuch  as  the  first  Book  of  Samuel  contains  the  record 
of  Samuel 's  labors  and  the  anointing  of  the  two  first  Kings 
of  Israel,  Saul  and  David,  Saul's  reign  and  David's  exile, 
we  divide  the  Book  into  three  sections.  In  the  first  section 
we  find  the  birth,  childhood  and  judgeship  of  Samuel;  in 
the  second,  the  anointing  and  coronation  of  Israel's  first 
King,  Saul,  his  reign  and  rejection.  In  the  third  section 
David,  his  anointing  and  exile,  are  before  us.  We  give  these 
sections  and  subdivisions  as  we  shall  follow  them  in  our 
analysis  and  annotations. 

I.    SAMUEL  THE  PROPHET  AND  JUDGE.     Chapter 
i-viii  :3. 

1.  The  Birth  and  Childhood  of  Samuel.    Chap- 

ter i. 

2.  Hannah's  Prophetic  Song.     Chapter  ii:l-10. 

3.  The  Failure  of  Eli  and  His  Sons.    Chapter 

ii:12-36. 

4.  Samuel's  Call  and  Prophetic  Ministry.    Chap- 

ter iii. 

5.  The  Judgment  of  Eli  and  his  Sons.    Ichabod. 

Chapter  iv. 

6.  The  Ark  in  the  hands  of  Philistines  and  Its 

Eeturn.     Chapter  v-vii:2. 

7.  The  Return  unto  Jehovah  and  the  Deliverance. 

Chapter  vii:3-14. 

8.  Samuel  Exercising  His  Office.    His  Failure. 

Chapter  vii  :15-viii  :3. 

II.    KING    SAUL.     HIS    REIGN    AND    REJECTION. 

Chapter  viii  :4-xv  :35. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  135 

1.  The  King  Demanded.     Chapter  viii  :4-22. 

2.  The  Story  of  Saul  and  His  Anointing.    Chap- 

ter ix-x:16. 

3.  The  Open  Acclamation  of  Saul  as  King.    Chap- 

ter x:17-27. 

4.  The  King's  First  Victory;  the  Kingdom  Re- 

newed at  Gilgal.     Chapter  xi. 

5.  Samuel's  Witness  and  Warning.     Chapter  xii. 

6.  The  First  Failure  of  Saul  and  Its  Results. 

Chapter  xiii. 

7.  Jonathan's  Heroic  Deed  of  Faith.    Chapter 

xiv. 

8.  War  with  Amalek.    Saul's  Disobedience  and 

Rejection.     Chapter  xv. 

III.  DAVID,  THE  KING  AFTER  GOD'S  HEART.  HIS 
EXILE  AND  SUFFERING.  Chapter  xvi- 
xxxi. 

1.  David  Anointed  King.    The  Departure  of  the 

Spirit  from  Saul.     Chapter  xvi. 

2.  David  and  Goliath.     Chapter  xvii. 

3.  Jonathan  and  David.    Saul's  Jealousy.    Chap- 

ter xviii. 

4.  Saul's   Renewed   Attempt.    David's   Escape. 

Chapter  xix. 

5.  Jonathan  Protects  David.    Their  Separation. 

Chapter  xx. 

6.  David's    Varied    Experiences.    Chapter  xxi- 

xxvii. 

7.  Saul  and  the  Witch  at  Endor.     Chapter  xxviii. 

8.  David   and   Achish.    Ziklag   Destroyed   and 

Avenged.     Chapter  xxix-xxx. 

9.  The  Death  of  Saul.     Chapter  xxxi. 


136  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.     Samuel  the  Prophet  and  Judge 

Chapter  i-viii  :3 
1.    The  Birth  and  Childhood  of  Samuel. 

CHAPTER  I 

1.  Elkanah  and  his  wives.     1-8. 

2.  Hannah's  prayer  and  vow.     9-18. 

3.  The  Prayer  answered.     Samuel  born.     19-20. 

4.  The  Child  weaned  and  presented  unto  the  Lord.     21-28. 

The  descent  of  Samuel  opens  the  book.  The  names  are  of 
striking  significance.  Elkanah  means  "acquired  of  God." 
He  was  the  son  of  Jeroham  ("tenderly  loved"),  the  son 
of  Elihu  ("my  God  is  He"),  the  son  of  Tohu  ("prostra- 
tion"), the  son  of  Zuph  ("honeycomb").  They  were  pious 
generations  from  which  the  great  man  came.  Elkanah 
had  two  wives.  Hannah  ("Grace")  the  much  beloved  was 
barren;  Peninnah  ("Pearl")  had  children.  The  fact  that 
Hannah's  name  stands  first  makes  it  probable  that  her 
barren  condition  led  Elkanah  to  marry  a  second  wife. 
(See  Deut.  xxi:15.)  Elkanah  was  an  Ephraimite.  But 
from  1  Chronicles  vi:20-28i  we  learn  that  Samuel  and  his 
father  were  of  levitical  descent.  This  has  been  pointed  out 
as  a  discrepancy.  It  is  however  not  at  all  inconsistent  with 
the  statement  that  Samuel's  father  was  of  Ephraim.  He 
was  one  of  those  Levites  to  whom  cities  were  assigned  in 
the  portion  given  to  the  tribe  of  Ephraim.     (Josh,  xxi  :20.) 

Each  year  Elkanah  went  to  Shiloh  to  sacrifice  unto  the 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  137 

Lord  of  hosts.  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  name  of  God  as 
"Lord  of  Hosts"  (Jehovah  Zebaoth)  appears  here  for  the 
first  time  in  the  Bible.*  It  is  the  name  of  God  as  the  Lord 
of  power,  the  Lord  of  all  the  hosts  of  heaven  and  earth. 
That  it  is  used  the  first  time  in  the  Book  which  reveals  the 
Kingdom  is  especially  appropriate. 

Hannah  in  her  visits  to  Shiloh  presents  a  sorrowful  pic- 
ture. She  is  beloved  and  receives  a  double  portion  from 
Elkanah,  while  Peninnah,  her  adversary,  provoked  her  on 
account  of  her  childless  condition,  so  that  she  wept  and 
did  not  eat  at  the  feast.  Then  she  arose  from  the  sacrificial 
feast  which  she  had  not  tasted  and  sought  the  presence 
of  the  Lord.  There  she  wept  and  vowed  a  vow  that  if 
the  Lord  of  hosts  would  grant  her  a  man-child  she  would 
give  him  back  to  the  Lord  and  he  should  be  a  Nazarite. 
She  east  herself  upon  the  Lord  and  laid  hold  on  Him. 
Samuel  therefore  was  the  child  of  prayer,  asked  of  the 
Lord;  his  whole  life  afterwards  manifests  the  spirit  of 
prayer  and  dependence. 

Then  Eli  the  priest  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time.  He 
was  astonished  seeing  her  thus  engaged  in  silent  prayer  and 
accused  her  of  drunkenness.  His  astonishment  and  accusa- 
tion is  a  witness  to  the  sad  state  of  Israel.  Evidently  few 
ever  sought  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  and  his  reproof  makes 
it  evident  that  it  was  not  an  uncommon  thing  that  drunken- 
ness prevailed  during  the  feasts  at  Shiloh. 

Hannah's  prayer  was  answered.  The  son  is  born  and 
was  called  Samuel,  which  means  "heard  of  God."  Little 
did  she  know  of  the  mighty  work  her  son  was  called  to  do ; 
her  prayer  was  answered  far  beyond  her  thought.  She  did 
not  go  up  again  to  Shiloh  till  the  child  was  weaned.  Then 
she  went  up  to  fulfill  her  vow  and  presented  him  unto  the 
Lord.  Before  Samuel  could  begin  to  serve  the  Lord  he  had 
to  be  weaned.  "As  a  weaned  child  no  longer  cries,  frets, 
and  longs  for  the  breast,  but  lies  still  and  is  content,  be- 


*  It  is  found  281  times  in  the  Bible.  It  is  not  found  in  the  Penta- 
teuch; it  occurs  some  80  times  in  Jeremiah  and  50  times  in 
Zecbariah. 


138  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

cause  it  is  with  its  mother,  so  the  soul  must  be  weaned 
from  all  discontented  thoughts,  from  all  fretful  desires  of 
earthly  good,  waiting  in  stillness  upon  God,  finding  its  satis- 
faction in  His  presence,  resting  peacefully  in  His  arms, ' '  * 
He  began  to  minister  at  once  unto  the  Lord  before  Eli  the 
priest.  (Chapter  ii:ll.)  He  was  brought  up  in  the  sanc- 
tuary and  became  that  solid,  earnest,  prayerful  man  of 
God.  It  is  the  weaning  and  the  sanctuary  every  servant 
of  Christ  still  needs.  And  Hannah  had  given  back  to  the 
Lord  what  He  so  graciously  had  bestowed  upon  her.  This 
should  be  the  case  with  all  our  prayer-answers. 

2.    Hannah's  Prophetic  Song. 

CHAPTER  n:l-10 

1.  The  Praise  of  Jehovah— God.     1-3. 

2.  Jehovah's  Power  and  Grace  in  Deliverance.     4-8. 

3.  The  Prophetic  Outlook.     9-10. 

Hannah 's  heart  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit  overflows  with 
a  marvellous  utterance.  Higher  criticism  claims  * '  that  this 
beautiful  sacred  lyric  could  not  have  been  sung  by  Hannah 
in  the  circumstances  as  described.  The  words  of  verse  5 
alone  approach  her  situation,  and  doubtless  led  to  the  in- 
sertion of  the  psalm  in  its  present  context."  They  also 
say  "that  the  Virgin's  song  (Luke  i:46-55)  is  largely 
modelled  on  the  song  of  Hannah."  f  Such  statements  deny 
inspiration.  Hannah's  and  Mary's  song  are  so  much 
alike  because  the  same  Spirit  spoke  through  both.  Why 
should  it  be  thought  impossible  for  pious  Hannah  to  give 
forth  such  sublime  and  far  reaching  words  which  stand  so 
closely  related  to  all  subsequent  prophecy,  if  we  believe  that 
the  Holy  Spirit  inspired  her  as  He  did  Isaiah  and  other 
prophets  ? 

As  every  other  song  given  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  so  her 
song  begins  with  extolling  the  Lord,  glorifying  His  name. 


*  Perowne  on  the  Psalms. 
t  Prof.  A.  R.  S.  Kennedy. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  139 

The  first  four  stanzas  give  her  own  experience.  She  knows 
Jehovah  and  rejoices  in  His  salvation.  Especially  beautiful 
are  the  utterances  the  Spirit  of  God  makes  through  her  in 
describing  Jehovah's  power  and  grace  in  deliverance.  We 
must  think  here  first  of  all  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
He  went  down  into  the  dust  of  death  and  was  raised  from 
the  dead.  He  was  brought  down  to  the  grave  and  brought 
up;  He  became  poor  and  is  made  rich;  He  was  made  low 
and  is  lifted  up.  (Verse  6-7.)  And  therefore  He  reaches 
down  to  our  misery  and  raiseth  the  poor  out  of  the  dust,  and 
lifteth  the  beggar  from  the  dunghill  to  set  them  among 
princes  to  inherit  the  throne  of  glory.  What  a  glimpse  she, 
whose  name  means  "Grace,"  had  of  grace  which  stoops  so 
low  and  lifts  so  high !  Her  words  came  nearest  in  the  Old 
Testament  to  the  Gospel  of  Grace  as  revealed  in  the  New. 
With  the  middle  of  the  eighth  verse  she  speaks  of  the  future. 
The  day  of  the  Lord  with  its  judgment  bursts  into  view. 
The  feet  of  His  Saints  will  be  kept;  the  wicked  will  be  in 
darkness;  the  adversaries  broken  to  pieces.  Then  heaven 
is  no  longer  silent.  The  Lord  judges.  The  King,  Israel's 
true  and  once  rejected  King,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  will 
be  exalted.  In  the  beginning  of  the  Books  of  Kingdoms 
heaven's  true  King  is  seen  in  prophetic  vision. 

The  ministering  child  Samuel  before  the  Lord  is  a  most 
beautiful  and  sweet  picture.  Faithfully  his  little  hands  did 
whatever  they  could  do,  and  Jehovah  was  well  pleased  with 
it. 

3.    The  Failure  of  Eli  and  His  Sons. 

CHAPTER  11:12-36 

1.  The  wicked  sons  of  Eli.     12-17. 

2.  Samuel  before  Jehovah;  Hannah  blessed.     18-21. 

3.  The  empty  warning  of  Eli.     22-26. 

4.  Judgment  announced.     27-36. 

The  corruption  of  the  sons  of  aged  Eli  is  next  exposed. 
They  were  sons  of  Belial ;  they  knew  not  Jehovah,  and  yet 
they  ministered  in  the  outward  things  of  the  sanctuary. 


140  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

It  could  result  only  in  the  worst  corruption.  They  handled 
holy  things  and  were  wicked  in  heart  and  life.  It  has 
been  well  said  ' '  a  holiness  that  is  but  external  is  the  worst 
unholiness."  It  is  so  to-day  in  Christendom.  Men  who 
know  not  Jehovah,  who  are  not  serving  the  Lord  but  them- 
selves and  are  thus  under  the  control  of  Satan,  the  god 
of  this  age,  minister  in  the  things  of  God.  It  results  in 
all  kinds  of  departures  and  corruption.  It  is  the  curse  of 
Christendom.  * '  The  sin  of  the  young  men  was  very  great 
before  the  Lord,  for  the  men  despised  the  offering  of  Je- 
hovah." Beholding  such  wicked  conduct  in  the  priests  men 
became  disgusted  with  all  religious  performances  and  the 
truth  they  foreshadowed.  They  turned  away  from  the  of- 
fering of  Jehovah.  It  is  so  still.  An  unholy,  selfish  min- 
istry is  the  greatest  stumbling  block  to  the  great  mass  of 
the  people. 

And  then  the  contrast!  The  child  Samuel  in  his  little 
ministry  is  mentioned  once  more.  What  a  charming  picture 
he  must  have  been  in  his  little  ephod  and  the  little  robe 
furnished  by  his  loving  mother !  Upon  him  a  mere  child, 
so  innocent  and  simple,  the  white  linen  robe  had  been  be- 
stowed.    Everything  else  in  Shiloh  was  corrupted, 

Eli  makes  an  attempt  to  warn  his  sons  of  their  immoral 
and  wicked  conduct.  His  weak  effort  but  reveals  the  state 
of  his  own  soul.  The  law  demanded  as  a  penalty  the  death 
of  the  offenders.  The  lack  of  zeal  in  Eli's  remonstrance 
made  no  impression  upon  his  wicked  sons.  Then  an  un- 
named man  of  God  came  to  Eli  and  carried  to  him  the 
message  of  judgment.  Hophni  and  Phinehas  are  to  die 
both  in  one  day.  Then  there  is  the  promise  of  the  raising 
up  of  a  faithful  priest.  Such  a  priest  was  Zadok,  but  the 
promise  finds  its  ultimate  fulfillment  in  Him  who  is  the 
King-Priest,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  141 

4.    Samuel's  Call  and  Prophetic  Ministry. 

CHAPTER  III 

1.  Samuel's  Call.     1-9. 

2.  The  Message  from  Jehovah.     10-18. 

3.  Samuel  the  Prophet.     19-21. 

After  the  priesthood  had  so  completely  failed  and  divine 
judgment  had  been  pronounced,  Samuel  receives  his  call 
to  the  prophetic  office.  He  continued  his  ministrations  as 
a  Levite  during  the  time  that  the  Word  of  the  Lord  was 
precious  (literal:  rare)  ;  there  was  no  vision.  Up  to  this 
time  Samuel  had  not  known  the  Lord  nor  had  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  been  revealed  to  him.  (Verse  7.)  It  must  have 
been  near  the  hour  of  dawn,  for  the  tabernacle  lamp  was 
not  yet  gone  out,  when  the  voice  of  Jehovah  called  Samuel 
by  name.  He  knew  him,  as  He  knows  all  His  own  by  name. 
Three  times  the  voice  called  and  three  times  he  ran  unto 
Eli.  Then  Eli  understood  that  Jehovah  called  the  child  and 
he  instructed  him  to  answer  at  the  next  call — "Speak,  Je- 
hovah, for  thy  servant  heareth."  Jehovah  then  appeared 
and  stood  and  called  again.  Samuel  in  answering  omits 
the  word  "Jehovah"  Eli  had  told  him  to  use.  He  may 
have  omitted  the  name  Jehovah  out  of  reverential  fear.  He 
hears  thus  from  Jehovah 's  lips  the  message  of  doom  for  Eli 
and  his  house,  which  he  faithfully  transmitted  to  Eli  in  the 
morning.  He  kept  nothing  back  and  Eli  bowed  to  it  in 
resignation;  however,  he  did  not  repent.  "By  the  faithful 
discharge  of  a  commission  so  painful,  and  involving  such 
self-denial  and  courage,  Samuel  had  stood  the  first  test  of 
his  fitness  for  the  prophetic  office.  Henceforth  ' '  the  Word 
of  the  Lord"  was  permanently  with  him.  Not  merely  by 
isolated  commissions,  but  in  the  discharge  of  a  regular 
office,  Samuel  acted  as  Prophet  in  Israel.  A  new 
period  in  the  history  of  the  Kingdom  of  God  had  com- 
menced, and  all  Israel,  from  Dan  to  Beer-sheba,  knew  that 
there  was  now  a  new  link  between  them  and  their  God.  a 


142  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

living  centre  of  guidance  and  fellowship,  and  a  bond  of 
anion  for  all  who  were  truly  the  Israel  of  God."  * 

5.    The  Judgment  of  Eli  and  His  Sons.    Ichabod. 

CHAPTER  IV 

1.  The  fulfilled  prediction.     The  death  of  Eli's  sona.     1-11. 

2.  The  death  of  Eli.     12-18. 

3.  Ichabod.     19-22. 

Israel  then  renewed  the  conflict  with  the  Philistines  and 
suffered  defeat.  It  seems  that  they  acted  in  self-confidence, 
and  when  the  battle  was  lost  they  readily  acknowledged  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  in  the  disaster:  "Wherefore  has  the  Lord 
smitten  us  to-day  before  the  Philistines?"  But  there  was 
no  self-judgment,  no  repentance,  no  crying  unto  the  Lord. 
The  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  is  brought  out  of 
Shiloh,  They  trust  in  the  ark  instead  of  Jehovah;  they 
expect  salvation  from  the  ark  of  gold  and  wood:  "it  may 
save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies."  Alas!  "the  two 
sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phinehas,  were  there  with  the  ark 
of  the  covenant  of  God."  (Verse  4.)  They  forgot  Jeho- 
vah whom  they  had  offended  and  insulted.  How  could  He 
bless  and  deliver  His  people  when  such  sons  of  Belial  were 
associated  with  the  sanctuary?  A  worse  defeat  followed. 
Thirty  thousand  Israelites  fell,  among  them  the  sons  of 
Eli.  The  Philistines  t  first  terrified  by  the  presence  of 
the  ark  gain  a  great  victory  and  capture  the  ark. 

The  tidings  of  the  awful  disaster  reach  Eli,  ninety-eight 
years  old  and  totally  blind.  "When  he  heard  that  the  ark  of 
God  was  taken,  he  fell  backward,  broke  his  neck  and  died. 
Significant  is  the  final  paragraph  of  this  chapter.    The  wife 


*  Edersheim,  Bible  History. 

t  On  the  words  "these  are  the  gods  that  smote  the  Egyptians  with 
every  plague  in  the  wilderness"  Wellhausen,  the  well  known  critic, 
remarks:  "Either  an  excusable  inaccuracy,  or  a  copyist's  slip."  He 
meant  that  the  Egyptians  Av^ere  not  smitten  in  the  wilderness,  but  in 
their  own  land.  However,  Wellhausen  did  not  see  that  the  Philis- 
tines said  this.  They  expressed  their  inaccurate  knowledge  of  what 
had  happened  and  Samuel  reports  it  as  if  it  was  spoken  by  the 
Philistines. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  143 

of  Phinehas  in  child-birth  also  hears  of  the  capture  of  the 
ark  and  the  death  of  Eli,  her  father-in-law,  the  death  of 
her  husband  and  his  brother.  Dying,  she  named  her  baby 
son  "Ichabod,"  which  means  "no  glory."  The  glory  had 
departed  from  Israel.  Israel  had  indeed  brought  forth, 
by  her  departure  from  God,  the  condition  of  "Ichabod." 
The  ark  as  the  glorj^  of  God's  manifest  presence  among 
His  people  was  gone.  "He  forsook  the  tabernacle  of  Shi- 
loh,  the  tent  which  he  placed  among  men;  and  delivered 
his  strength  into  captivity,  and  His  glory  into  the  enemy's 
hand."  (Ps.  lxxviii:60-6.)  In  a  higher  sense  the  word 
"Ichabod"  is  written  over  that  which  professes  to  be  the 
church,  but  which  has  departed  from  the  Truth.  The 
power  and  the  manifest  presence  of  Jehovah  is  lost.  And 
many  individual  Christians  have  drifted  into  the  same 
conditions  by  their  sinful  and  worldly  ways. 

6.    The  Ark  in  the  Hands  of  the  Philistines  and  Its 
Return. 

Chapter  v-vii:2. 

CHAPTER  V 

1.  The  Ark  in  the  house  of  Dagon.     1-5. 

2.  The  Philistines  smitten  by  Jehovah.     6-12. 

The  ark  was  brought  to  Ashdod,  the  leading  city  of  the 
Philistines,  and  set  up  in  the  temple  dedicated  to  Dagon, 
the  chief  god  of  the  people.  It  was  half  fish  and  half  man, 
the  symbol  of  fertility.  Before  this  idol  the  ark  was  set 
up.  In  their  blindness  they  imagined  that  Dagon  had  con- 
quered the  God  of  Israel.  The  next  morning  they  found 
Dagon  fallen  with  his  face  to  the  earth  before  the  Ark. 
It  was  the  Lord  who  did  it  and  not  an  accident.  The  next 
morning  the  whole  idol-image,  except  the  fish-part,  is  fallen 
upon  the  ground.  "The  head  of  Dagon  and  both  the  palms 
of  his  hands  lay  cut  oft'  upon  the  threshold."  The  God 
of  Israel  demonstrated  His  power  over  the  gods  of  the 
Philistines,  yet  they  continued  to  reverence  even  the  thres- 


144  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

hold  where  the  fragments  of  their  idol  had  lain.     Such 
is  the  darkness  of  fallen  man. 

A  severer  visitation  came  upon  the  Philistines ;  they  were 
smitten  with  malignant  boils.  At  the  same  time  a  plague 
of  field  mice  destroyed  the  fields  and  the  harvest.  (Chap- 
ter vi:4,  11,  18.)  It  reminds  us  of  the  plagues  of  Egypt. 
Yet  the  Philistines  did  not  repent  of  their  sins,  but  carried 
the  ark  of  God  about,  but  wherever  it  was  carried  the  same 
punishment  came  upon  the  people.  Yet  there  was  no  re- 
pentance from  the  side  of  the  Philistines.  All  this  becomes 
still  more  interesting  if  we  consider  what  the  Philistines 
as  the  enemies  of  the  people  of  God  represent.*  The 
world  is  to  experience  the  judgments  and  plagues  of  God 
in  a  future  day  foreshadowed  in  these  plagues  which  came 
upon  the  land  of  the  Philistines;  and  there  will  be  no 
turning  to  God.  In  the  Book  of  Revelation,  where  these 
final  judgments  upon  a  wicked  world  and  an  apostate 
world-church  are  described,  we  hear  not  a  word  of  re- 
pentance. The  answer  God  receives  will  be  blasphemy  of 
His  name.  "And  they  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven  be- 
cause of  their  pains  and  sores,  and  repented  not  of  their 
evil  deeds,"     (Rev.  xvi:ll.) 

CHAPTER  VI-VII:a 

1.  The  Counsel  of  the  Philistines.     1-9. 

2.  The  Ark  at  Beth-shemesh.     10-20. 

3.  The  Ark  at  Kirjath-jearim.     21-vii:2. 

The  ark  had  remained  among  the  Philistines  seven 
months.  For  them  they  were  months  of  suffering  and 
deadly  destruction.  Now  they  plot  to  get  rid  of  the  ark 
and  of  Him  whose  hand  rested  so  heavily  in  judgment 
upon  them.  The  advice  of  the  heathen  priests  and  divin- 
ers is  that  the  ark  should  be  sent  away  with  votive  offer- 
ings of  gold,  representing  that  which  had  plagued  them. 
This  was  a  heathen  custom;  which  has  also  been  adopted 
and  is  practiced  by  Roman  Catholicism,  the  great  Philistine 


See  Annotations  on  "Judges. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  145 

system  of  Christendom.  In  Romish  churches,  especially  at 
shrines,  one  can  find  hundreds  of  votive  offerings  to  God  by 
those  who  are  suffering  affliction  to  appease  the  wrath  of 
God.  It  is  heathenish  and  denies  Him  who  shed  His  blood 
for  our  redemption.  And  as  these  Philistine  priests  had 
some  knowledge  of  God's  judgment  upon  Egypt  they  added 
to  their  counsel  a  warning  reminding  them  of  Pharaoh  and 
Egypt.  Their  unbelief  and  superstition  is  manifested  by 
the  way  they  returned  the  ark.  But  the  power  of  the 
Creator  is  seen  in  the  incident. 

"In  result  it  is  proved  conclusively  that  Jehovah  is  the 
God  of  Creation,  supreme  above  all  the  natural  instincts: 
the  kine,  though  unaccustomed  to  a  yoke,  take  the  cart  with 
its  sacred  burden  directly  away  from  where  their  calves  are 
shut  up,  even  while  lowing  after  them,  and  take  the  straight 
road  to  Bethshemesh,  a  priestly  city  near  the  Israelite 
border.  There,  at  the  border,  they  stop,  still  under  the  eyes 
of  the  Philistine  lords,  at  a  great  stone  upon  which  the 
Levites  place  the  ark,  and  where  the  kine  are  offered  up 
a  burnt-offering  to  Jehovah. 

''Thus  the  Philistines  have  Jehovah's  sovereignty  demon- 
strated to  them  in  the  precise  terms  which  they  have  them- 
selves chosen, — the  goodness  of  God  thus  meeting  them  with 
what  should  have  turned  them  from  idolatry  forever  and 
brought  them  to  His  feet.  But  they  go  back,  after  all,  to 
worship  instead  the  humbled  Dagon. ' '  * 

The  ark  reaches  Beth-shemesh  ("house  of  the  Sun")  the 
nearest  point  across  the  border.  It  is  welcomed  with  much 
rejoicing,  but  they  forgot  the  holiness  of  God  and  looked 
into  the  ark,  and  the  people  of  Beth-shemesh  were  smitten. 
As  Beth-shemesh  was  only  a  small  town  it  is  generally 
taken  that  the  number  of  the  slain  as  given  in  verse  19 
was  changed  by  the  mistake  of  a  copyist.  Various  read- 
ings give  smaller  numbers;  but  that  is  immaterial. 

The  ark  is  removed  from  Beth-shemesh  to  Kirjath-jearim, 
"the  city  of  the  woods."  It  was  an  humble  place  where 
the  ark  abode  for  twenty  years.     It  was  brought  into  the 

*  Numerical  Bible. 


146  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

house  of  Abinadab;  his  son  Eleazar  ("my  God  is  help") 
was  set  aside  to  keep  it.  David  found  it  there.  (Psalm 
exxxii  :6.)     The  ark  never  returned  to  Shiloh  again. 


7.    The  Return  Unto  Jehovah  and  the  Deliverance. 

CHAPTER  VII:  3-14 

1.  Samuel's  Message  and  the  Response  of  the  People.     3-4. 

2.  Gathered  at  Mizpah.     5-6. 

3.  The  Deliverance.     7-14. 

Samuel  now  is  seen  beginning  his  great  national  ministry. 
The  message  he  brings  is  the  message  of  repentance  and 
the  assurance  of  faith.  In  simple  words  he  addressed  the 
people,  who  no  doubt  were  prepared  for  it  by  their  long 
period  of  humiliation.  He  demands  that  their  true  return 
to  the  Lord  must  be  practical ;  the  strange  gods  and  Ashta- 
roth  must  be  put  away.  If  they  serve  the  Lord  only  de- 
liverance out  of  the  hands  of  the  Philistines  would  come. 
The  message  was  at  once  obeyed.  Every  true  return  to 
the  Lord  must  manifest  itself  in  the  same  way.  True  re- 
pentance without  self-judgment  and  self-surrender  is  im- 
possible. The  earnest  appeal  and  whole-hearted  response 
by  the  people  led  to  the  great  gathering  at  Mizpah  ("the 
watchtower").  It  was  a  day  of  humiliation  and  prayer. 
Samuel  said  "I  will  pray  the  Lord  for  you."  He  was 
the  child  of  prayer  and  the  man  of  prayer.  ( Chapter  viii : 
6;  xii:19;  23.)  "Samuel  among  them  that  call  upon  His 
name ;  they  called  upon  the  Lord  and  He  answered  them. ' ' 
(Ps.  xeix:6.)  There  was  confession  of  sin  and  they  drew 
water,  and  poured  it  out  before  Jehovah.  It  was  a  sym- 
bolical act  showing  the  undone  and  helpless  condition  of 
Israel.  "We  must  needs  die,  and  are  as  water  spilt  on  the 
ground. "  (2  Sam.  xiv  :14, )  When  the  Philistines  came  up 
against  them  they  were  afraid  and  acknowledged  prayer 
as  their  only  refuge  and  help.  "Cease  not"  they  appealed 
to  Samuel  "to  cry  for  us  unto  the  Lord  our  God."  And 
afterwards  he  offered  a  whole  burnt  offering  unto  the  Lord. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  147 

This  offering  represents  Christ.  Then  Samuel  cried  unto 
the  Lord  and  the  Lord  answered  him.  The  elements  of  a 
true  return  unto  the  Lord  and  a  true  revival  among  God's 
people  are  found  in  this  great  national  movement.  While 
Samuel  offered  the  burnt-offering  and  interceded  for  Israel 
the  Philistines  drew  near.  Then  came  the  interference 
from  the  Lord.  It  was  a  supernatural  thundering  which 
discomfited  the  Philistines,  and  they  were  smitten.  Israel 
gains  a  great  victory.  They  pursue  the  enemy  to  Beth-car 
("house  of  the  lamb").  Between  Mizpali  and  Shen  thie 
stone  called  by  Samuel  "Ebenezer"  is  put  up  as  a  memorial. 
Ebenezer  means  ''stone  of  help."  "Helped — but  only 
'hitherto'!  For  all  Jehovah's  help  is  only  'hitherto' — 
from  day  to  day,  and  from  place  to  place — not  uncondi- 
tionally, nor  wholly,  nor  once  for  all,  irrespective  of  our 
bearing. ' '  * 

8.    Samuel  Exercising  His  Office.    His  Failure. 

CHAPTER  VII:15-VIII:3 

1.  Samuel  the  Prophet-Judge.     15-17. 

2.  His   Failure.     viii:l-3. 

Samuel 's  activity  as  the  great  Prophet- Judge  is  now  seen. 
He  had  a  blessed  circuit  of  ministry,  which  has  its  spiritual 
lessons  for  us.  He  first  visited  Bethel  ("the  house  of 
God").  Judgment  must  begin  there.  When  Jacob  was 
obedient  to  the  divine  call  "Arise  and  go  up  unto  Bethel" 
he  buried  the  strange  gods,  the  household  gods  under  the 
oak  of  Shechem.  So  the  evil  things  must  be  put  away. 
Then  came  Gilgal  (rolling).  There  the  reproach  of  Egypt 
was  rolled  away.  (Joshua  V.)  This  is  what  we  need,  to 
be  freed  from  the  world,  dead  to  it  and  the  world  dead  to 
us.  Mizpah  ("watch  tower")  was  his  third  station.  This 
is  our  constant  need  to  be  on  our  guard  and  watch  against 
the  foe,  as  well  as  look  upward  and  forward  from  Mizpah 
to  that  blessed  home  where  He  is  and  which  we  shall  surely 

•Edersheim:  Bible  History. 


148  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

share  with  Him.  This  is  represented  in  Ramah 
("Heights")  where  Samuel  had  his  home.  But  there  is 
failure.  Samuel  makes  the  mistake  in  making  his  sons 
judges.  Because  he  was  a  Judge  and  a  Prophet  and  had 
success  in  it,  his  sons  are  to  follow  him  in  the  same  capacity. 
God  does  not  work  by  succession,  nor  does  He  transmit  gift 
and  power  from  father  to  son.  The  so-called  '^Apostolic 
succession"  and  traditional  authority  is  an  invention  and 
one  of  the  greatest  factors  in  the  corruption  of  the  Chris- 
tianity. The  Lord  alone  can  call  to  service  and  give  gifts 
for  the  ministry.  Joel  and  Ahiah  were  judges  in  Beer- 
sheba,  but  walked  not  in  his  ways,  but  turned  aside  after 
lucre,  and  took  bribes,  and  prevented  judgment.  And 
this  opened  the  way  for  the  introduction  of  the  monarchy 
in  Israel. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  149 


II.     King  SauL     His  Reign  and  Rejection 

Chapter  viii  :4 ;  xv  :35 
1.    The  King  Demanded. 

CHAPTER  VIII: 4-22 

1.  The  King  demanded.     4-9. 

2.  The  Rights  of  the  King.     10-22. 

The  kingly  government  is  now  to  be  established  through 
the  deliberate  and  untheocratic  self-determination  of  the 
people.  Jehovah  was  their  invisible  King,  and  Him  they 
rejected  by  requesting  a  King  like  all  the  nations.  The 
motives  for  the  demand  of  a  King  are  three:  1.  The  old 
age  of  Samuel  and  the  unfitness  of  his  sons.  2.  The  de- 
sire to  be  upon  the  same  footing  with  other  nations.  3. 
To  have  a  leader  and  fight  their  battles.  (Verse  20.)* 
Samuel  was  displeased  by  the  request,  but  the  man  of 
prayer  turned  to  the  Lord  and  received  from  Him  the 
needed  direction.  The  Lord  comforts  the  heart  of  His 
servant  **for  they  have  not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  re- 
jected me,  that  I  should  not  reign  over  them."  As  they 
did  to  Jehovah,  so  the  Lord  told  His  servant,  do  they  also 
unto  thee.  The  servant  is  identified  with  His  Master.  It 
reminds  us  of  the  words  of  our  Lord:  "If  they  have 
persecuted  Me,  they  will  persecute  you  also."    We  are 


*  The  state  or  political  organization  reaches  its  highest  develop- 
ment when  royalty  is  introduced.  The  King  of  Israel  is  not.  how- 
ever, intended  to  be  an  autocratic  but  a  theocratic  king;  the  prophet 
and  the  priest,  in  their  official  capacity,  did  not  occupy  a  subordinate, 
but  a  co-ordinate  rank.  As  men  and  as  citizens,  they  were  under  an 
obligation,  like  all  other  subjects,  to  obey  the  king;  but  with  respect 
to  their  prophetic  and  priestly  oflBces,  they  were  dependent  on  God 
alone,  and  by  no  means  on  the  king." — Sacred  History  by  Kurtz. 


150  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

called  to  share  His  reproach.  And  they  were  to  have  a 
King  according  to  their  own  choice.  Later  the  Lord  re- 
minded Israel  through  Hosea  of  this  event.  ' '  I  will  be  thy 
King;  where  is  any  other  that  may  serve  thee  in  all  thy 
cities  ?  and  thy  judges  of  whom  thou  saidst,  give  me  a  king 
and  princes?  I  gave  thee  a  King  in  mine  anger,  and  took 
him  away  in  my  wrath. "  (Hos.  xiii  :10-11.)  Then  Samuel 
describes  the  manner,  literally  the  rights,  of  the  King. 
Military  service,  harsh  and  compulsory,  forced  labour  and 
other  evils  are  spread  before  them.  Yet  they  refused  to 
hearken  and  the  Lord  said  again:  "Hearken  unto  their 
voice,  and  make  them  a  king," 


2.     The  Story  of  Saul  and  His  Anointing. 

CHAPTER  IX-X:16 

1.  Saul  the  son  of  Kish  and  the  lost  asses.     1-10. 

2.  Samuel  and  Saul.     11-24. 

3.  Saul  anointed  King.     25-x:16. 

And  now  the  Lord  gives  them  a  King  according  to  their 
choice.  "He  should  possess  all  the  natural  attractions  and 
marital  qualities  which  the  people  could  desire  in  their 
king;  he  should  reflect  their  religious  standpoint  at  their 
best;  but  he  should  also  represent  their  national  failings 
and  the  inmost  defects  of  their  religious  life ;  that  of  com- 
bining zeal  for  the  religion  of  Jehovah,  and  outward  con- 
formity to  it,  with  utter  want  of  real  heart  submission  to 
the  Lord,  and  of  true  devotedness  to  Him. ' '  *  They  ob- 
tained exactly  what  they  wanted.  God's  choice  for  them 
would  have  been  a  different  character,  one  who  seeks  Him 
and  is  in  subjection  to  Him,  as  we  shall  find  in  the  king 
after  God's  heart,  King  David.  But  now  He  gives  to  the 
people  what  they  had  asked  for. 

Saul  means  "asked."  The  genealogy  of  Saul  is  given; 
the  five  names  in  their  original  meaning  suggest  the  pride 
and  self-glorification  of  the  natural  man.     Saul  is  described 


*  Ed^skeim. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  151 

as  an  ideal  man,  "a  young  man"  (literal:  "in  the  prime  of 
manhood")  and  goodly;  and  there  was  not  among  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel  a  goodlier  person  than  he ;  from  his  shoulders 
and  upward  he  was  higher  than  any  of  the  people.  Saul, 
ignorant  of  the  divine  purpose,  sets  out  to  seek  the  lost 
she-asses  of  his  father.  Little  did  he  know  how  the  search 
would  end  and  that  he  would  soon  become  the  head  of  the 
nation,  which  had  gone  more  astray  than  the  lost  asses. 
(Is.  i:3.)  A  small  matter  it  was  going  forth  to  look  for 
animals  which  had  strayed  away ;  but  the  guiding  hand  of 
Jehovah  was  there.  The  search  is  futile.  The  servant 
then  suggests  a  visit  to  the  man  of  God,  none  other  than 
Samuel.  Saul  seems  to  have  no  knowledge  of  Samuel. 
He  is  willing  enough  to  seek  the  man  for  council  but  he  is 
troubled  about  the  present  for  the  man  of  God.  It  shows  the 
tendency  of  the  natural  man  to  give  in  order  to  get  from 
God.  The  servant  has  the  fourth  part  of  a  shekel  of  silver 
which  he  offers  to  give  to  the  man  of  God.  Verse  9,  contain- 
ing a  parenthetical  statement,  is  not  a  gloss  by  a  later  hand, 
as  tlie  critical  school  maintains.  The  difference  between  seer 
and  prophet  is  an  interesting  one.  A  prophet  is  one  who 
speaks  for  God  being  moved  by  God ;  he  is  the  mouthpiece 
of  the  Lord.  The  term  seer  suggests  the  knowledge  the 
prophet  had.  The  people  were  more  concerned  about  the 
seer  than  the  prophet.  Thus  Saul  shows  the  state  of  his 
heart.  lie  does  not  seek  God,  nor  the  prophet  as  the  man 
and  mouthpiece  of  God ;  only  the  seer. 

Then  Samuel  and  Saul  meet  for  the  first  time.  First 
Saul  and  the  servant  meet  maidens  going  out  to  draw 
water,  and  they  directed  them  to  the  heights  where  a  sacri- 
ficial feast  was  to  be  held.  And  the  Lord  had  spoken  into 
Samuel's  ear  the  day  before  that  the  man  of  Benjamin 
would  come.  All  had  been  ordered  by  the  Lord  and  Samuel, 
knowing  the  expected  one  would  come  had  reserved  the 
shoulder  of  the  peace  offering*  for  him.  (Verse  23-24.) 
What  the  Lord  had  said  to  Samuel  concerning  Saul  reveals 
His  gracious  purpose  of  love  towards  Saul.     Though  he  was 

*  See  Annotations  in  Leviticus. 


152  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

the  people's  choice  yet  the  Lord  was  willing  to  make  him 
much  more,  even  the  saviour  of  this  people  Israel.  (Verse 
16.)  Samuel  tells  Saul  that  the  asses  were  found,  so  that 
he  was  relieved  of  the  anxiety.  And  when  Samuel  acquaints 
him  that  all  Israel  desires  him,  he  speaks  of  his  own  little- 
ness. (Verse  21.)  It  reminds  us  of  that  other  Saul  of  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin,  the  Apostle  Paul.*  However  Saul,  the 
son  of  Kish,  knew  nothing  of  real  self -judgment.  It  was 
rather  the  language  of  surprise  than  the  expression  of  a 
deep,  heartfelt  humility.  Then  we  see  them  in  communion, 
and  afterwards  Samuel  anoints  him  with  the  holy  anointing 
oil  and  kissed  him.  The  anointing  is  the  symbol  of  power 
conferred  upon  him  and  also  implies  dependence  upon  the 
Holy  Spirit,  typified  by  the  oil.  The  kiss  was  given  in 
token  of  homage.  Thus  Saul  became  the  first  King  in  Is- 
rael. Samuel  also  gave  him  three  significant  signs,  which 
all  came  to  pass.  They  were  given  to  Saul  to  assure  him 
of  all  which  had  taken  place  and  to  teach  him  certain 
spiritual  lessons.  He  was  assured  that  God  is  with  Him. 
(X:7.)  The  Spirit  of  God  also  came  upon  him  and  he 
prophesied. 

"By  this,  as  in  the  case  of  judges,  we  are,  however,  not 
to  understand  the  abiding  and  sanctifying  Presence  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  the  heart  as  His  temple.  The  Holy 
Ghost  was  peculiarly  ' '  the  gift  of  the  Father ' '  and  ' '  of  the 
Son,"  and  only  granted  to  the  Church  in  connection  with 
and  after  the  Resurrection  of  our  Blessed  Lord.  Under  the 
Old  Testament,  only  the  manifold  influences  of  the  Spirit 
were  experienced,  not  His  indwelling  as  the  Paraclete. 
This  appears  not  only  from  the  history  of  those  so  in- 
fluenced, and  from  the  character  of  that  influence,  but  even 
from  the  language  in  which  it  is  described.  Thus  we  read 
that  the  Spirit  of  Elohim  ''seized  upon"  Saul,  suddenly 
and  mightily  laid  hold  on  him, — the  same  expression  being 
used  in  Judg.  xiv  :6, 19 ;  xv  :14  j  1  Sam.  xvi  :13 ;  xviii  :10. ' ' 


Paul  means,  Little. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMVEL  153 

3.    The  Open  Acclamation  of  Saul  as  King. 

CHAPTER  X:  17-27 

1.  The  Lot  at  Mizpah.     17-21. 

2.  The  Acclamation  of  the  King.     22-27. 

Samuel  called  once  more  a  national  gathering  at  Mizpah. 
The  lot  is  now  to  be  cast.  But  before  this  is  done  the  Lord 
through  Samuel  reminds  them  once  more  of  their  serious 
mistake:  "And  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,  who 
himself  saved  you  out  of  all  your  adversities  and  your 
tribulations;  and  ye  have  said  unto  Him,  Nay  but  set  a 
King  over  us."  They  had  not  heeded  this  warning  before 
and  now  they  are  to  receive  what  they  had  asked  in  their 
self-will.  The  lot  was  therefore  but  an  outward,  empty 
ceremony.  It  fell  on  Saul,  the  son  of  Kish.  He  could  not 
be  found.  Why  did  he  hide?  Some  say  it  was  humility 
and  modesty.  It  was  not  that,  but  rather^  fear  of  the  re- 
sponsibility he  was  now  to  assume.  And  that  revealed  lack 
of  confidence  in  God  of  whose  power  he  had  received  such 
evidences.  All  foreshadows  the  coming  failure  of  the  peo- 
ple's king.  When  he  is  presented  before  the  people  it  was 
seen  that  he  towered  above  them  all.  When  Samuel  intro- 
duced him,  ' '  See  ye  him  whom  the  Lord  hath  chosen, ' '  there 
was  a  wave  of  fleshly  enthusiasm.  And  all  the  people 
shouted  and  said,  God  save  the  King.*  Now  they  had  a 
king  like  the  other  nations,  a  king  who  reflected  their  own 
carnal,  unspiritual  condition.  How  his  heart  must  have 
been  lifted  up  with  pride  even  then !  Once  more  Samuel 
tells  them  the  manner  of  the  kingdom ;  it  was  undoubtedly 
a  restatement  of  Deut.  xvii:14:-20.  And  Saul  did  not  as- 
sume leadership  at  once.  He  went  home  to  Gibeah.  A 
faithful  company  whom  God  had  touched  accompanied 
the  king,  while  the  sons  of  Belial  despised  him  and  brought 
no  present.  There  was  opposition  to  him.  He  showed  the 
wisdom  of  the  natural  man  by  holding  his  peace.  He  was 
as  a  deaf  man. 


*  Literal:  Live  the  King! 


164  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

4.    The  King 's  First  Victory ;  the  Renewal  of  the  Kingdom 

at  Gilgal. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1.  The  Victory  over  Ammon.     1-11. 

2.  The  Kingdom  Eenewed.     12-15. 

Nahash  the  Ammonite  encamped  against  Jabesh-Gilead. 
Nahash  means  "the  Serpent."  This  invasion  took  place 
before  Saul  had  been  made  king.  From  chapter  xii  :12  we 
learn  that  it  really  was  the  occasion  why  Israel  demanded 
a  king.  In  despair  the  inhabitants  of  Jabesh-Gilead  offered 
to  make  a  covenant  with  this  old  foe  of  Israel,  whom  Jephtah 
had  so  successfully  fought.  Ammon  represents  typically 
the  enemy  of  God's  people  characterized  by  evil  doctrines 
and  perversions  of  the  truth  of  God.  How  often  compro- 
mise is  made  with  the  most  subtle  errors  which  emanate 
from  Nahash,  the  Serpent!  But  he  makes  his  condition, 
their  right  eyes  are  to  be  plucked  out.  We  speak  of  the 
eye  of  faith,  and  typically  we  may  apply  it  in  this  way.  All 
errors  and  false  doctrines  blind  the  eyes  of  faith  and  rob 
God 's  people  of  their  true  vision. 

Then  Saul  acts  for  the  first  time»  However  his  actions 
are  characteristic  of  his  spiritual  condition.  We  read 
nothing  of  prayer ;  he  did  not  seek  the  presence  of  the  Lord. 
It  is  true,  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  but  that  does 
not  mean  that  he  was  right  with  God.  The  Spirit  of  God 
came  also  upon  Belaam  to  prophesy.  Even  so  the  Spirit 
came  upon  King  Saul  with  external  power  in  the  same  sense 
as  He  came  upon  the  Judges.  The  anger  which  he  mani- 
fested, the  methods  he  employed  to  stir  up  the  people,  the 
threat  he  makes  and  his  leaning  on  Samuel  for  authority 
(verse  7)  all  show  again  the  lack  of  true  faith.  He  is  but 
the  man  in  the  flesh  who  knows  not  the  Lord. 

At  Gilgal  the  kingdom  is  renewed.  The  people  are  united 
and  suggest  the  killing  of  the  sons  of  Belial  mentioned  in 
the  previous  chapter.  Saul  forbids  it  and  acknowledges 
that  the  Jjord  had  wrought  salvation  that  day.     But  there 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  155 

is  no  real  outburst  of  praise.  They  were  at  Gilgal,  the  place 
which  typifies  death  to  the  flesh.  Here  Saul  is  made  king 
before  the  Lord.  But  while  Saul  and  the  people  rejoiced 
nothing  is  said  of  Samuel's  joy.  The  man  of  God  looked 
deeper,  for  he  knew  that  all  was  only  skin  deep  and  that 
the  Lord,  whom  they  had  rejected  from  being  king  over 
them,  could  not  be  pleased  with  their  outward  joy. 

5.    Samuel's  Witness  and  Warning. 

CHAPTER  XII 

1.  Hia  Witness  to  his  own  Integiity.     1-5. 

2.  His  Warning.     6-15. 

3.  Heaven's  Answer.     16-19. 

4.  His  Words  of  Comfort.     20-25. 

"What  a  scene !  The  man  of  God,  the  man  of  prayer,  now 
advanced  in  years,  stands  before  them.  '*I  have  walked 
before  you  from  my  childhood  unto  this  day."  Here  was 
not  a  Nazarite  who  had  failed  like  Samson,  but  one  who 
had  lived  out  his  Nazariteship  in  the  fullest  sense  of  the 
word.  What  unselfish  service  he  had  rendered  and  how 
he  loved  his  own  people !  In  all  this  he  is  a  type  of  that 
greatest  servant  who  came  in  the  fulness  of  time  not  to  be 
ministered  unto,  but  to  minister  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom 
for  many.  His  witness  to  his  own  integritj^  reminds  us  also 
of  Paul's  words  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  (2  Cor. 
xi:6-9;  xii:14-17.)  The  w^hole  nation  acknowledged  Sam- 
uel's integrity.  A  brief  historical  retrospect  follows  in 
which  Samuel  points  out  their  sin  of  forgetting  Jehovah.* 
Their  present  condition  was  like  that  of  their  fathers,  un- 
belief and  disobedience. 

It  was  the  time  of  the  wheat  harvest.  Samuel  prayed 
for  a  witness  from  heaven  upon  his  words.  Then  it  thun- 
dered and  rained.  It  never  thunders  and  rains  in  Palestine 
at  that  time  of  the  year  (May  and  June).  A  guilty  fear 
seized  upon  them  and  they  requested  intercession.     This 


*Bedan  in  Verse  11  should  be  "Barak." 


156  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

reminds  us  of  that  coming  harvest,  the  end  of  the  age. 
(Matth.  xiii:39.)  Then  Jehovah  will  thunder  in  judgment 
and  the  repentance  of  the  people  of  Israel  will  follow. 
However  true  repentance  did  not  take  place  here  when 
Samuel  prayed.  Beautiful  are  his  words  of  comfort.  How 
he  manifests  the  work  and  character  of  a  true  prophet! 
Here  is  also  the  assurance  for  Israel.  "For  Jehovah  for 
His  great  name's  sake  will  not  forsake  His  people,  because 
it  hath  pleased  Jehovah  to  make  you  His  people."  His 
gifts  and  oalling  are  without  repentance. 

6.    The  First  Failure  of  Saul  and  Its  Results. 
CHAPTER  xin 

1.  The  Failure  of  Saul.     1-9. 

2.  Samuel's  Sentence.     10-14. 

3.  Israel's  Deplorable  Condition.     15-23. 

Omit  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter  as  it  does  not  belong 
into  the  text.  In  self-confidence  Saul  has  dismissed  the 
greater  part  of  the  people;  only  2000  remained  with  him 
and  1000  Math  his  son  Jonathan.  Saul  is  now  passing 
through  a  test.  Hath  he  true  faith  which  counts  and  de- 
pends on  God?  Is  he  obedient  to  His  word  as  given  by 
the  Prophet?  Jonathan  appears  here  for  the  first  time. 
His  name  means  ' '  the  Lord  hath  given. ' '  He  is  the  opposite 
from  his  poor  father  ^  the  son  is  a  man  of  real  faith  and 
zeal  for  God.  In  smiting  the  garrison  of  the  Philistines  he 
manifested  that  faith.  He  counted  on  God  and  in  de- 
pendence on  Him  he  acted.  And  what  did  Saul  do?  "And 
Saul  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the  land,  saying,  let 
the  Hebrews  hear."  It  was  not  the  action  of  faith  but 
the  result  of  his  own  proud  heart.  Significant  it  is  that 
he  avoids  the  word  Israel.  The  Lord  never  speaks  of  "ray 
people  the  Hebrews,"  their  original,  national  name;  it  is 
always  "my  people  Israel."  He  leaves  out  the  God  of 
Israel.  It  all  reveals  the  character  of  Saul.  Then  Saul 
gets  the  credit  of  having  smitten  the  garrison  of  the  Philis- 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  157 

tines,  and  when  they  gathered  in  all  their  strength  the  peo- 
ple are  paralysed  by  fear,  and  instead  of  advancing  in  the 
name  of  Jehovah  they  seek  the  caves,  the  thickets,  the 
rocks,  the  high  places  and  the  pits.  And  some  of  the 
Hebrews  even  crossed  the  Jordan.  Saul  remains  in  these 
demoralized  conditions  at  Gilgal,  followed  by  some  of  the 
people  trembling.  It  is  all  unbelief ;  like  king,  like  people. 
They  fear  the  Philistines  and  distrust  Jehovah.  And  Saul 
at  Gilgal !  He  might  have  remembered  the  captain  of  the 
Lord's  hosts  and  sought  His  presence  and  help.  All  shows 
the  chosen  king  knew  not  the  Lord.  Samuel's  word  to 
him  (chapter  x:8)  was  not  forgotten  by  Saul.  He  wails, 
but  not  long  enough.  The  test  is  on.  The  people  stay  a 
few  days  and  then  begin  to  scatter.  They  have  no  faith; 
neither  has  the  king.  True  faith  waits  on  God  and  trusts 
in  Him.  Faith  knows  that  man's  extremity  is  God's  op- 
portunity. Saul  makes  an  outward  effort  to  be  obedient, 
while  in  his  soul  he  knows  no  subjection  to  the  Lord  and 
to  His  way.  At  last  the  breaking  point  is  reached.  He 
intrudes  into  the  priestly  office.  The  burnt  offering,  with- 
out any  meaning  under  these  circumstances,  is  brought  by 
Saul  and  immediately  after,  perhaps  before  the  seven  days 
had  fully  expired,  Samuel  appears. 

The  king's  own  words  reveal  once  more  his  character 
and  they  are  his  condemnation.  He  was  tested  and  the 
test  revealed  a  heart  which  did  not  fear  the  Lord,  had  no 
confidence  in  Him  and  is  disobedient  to  His  word.  And 
Samuel  delivers  his  message.  Sentence  is  pronounced. 
Another,  a  man  after  the  Lord's  own  heart,  is  to  take  his 
place.  And  the  deplorable  condition  of  Israel !  The  Philis- 
tines speak  also  of  them  as  Hebrews.  Instead  of  being  de- 
pendent upon  the  Lord  for  everything,  they  were  the  slaves 
of  their  oppressors,  dependent  upon  them.  This  is  the 
place  into  which  unbelief  can  put  the  people  of  God. 


158  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 


7.    Jonathan's  Heroic  Deed  of  Faith. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

1.  Jonathan's  Victory.     1-23. 

2.  Saul's  adjuration  and  Jonathan's  deed.     24-32. 

3.  Saul's  first  altar  and  unanswered  inquiry.     33-37. 

4.  Jonathan  condenmed  and  saved.     38-45. 

5.  Saul's  battle  and  success.     46-48. 

6.  Saul's  family.     49-52. 

Jonathan,  one  of  the  most  beautiful  characters  of  the 
Bible,  with  a  kindred  spirit,  his  armour  bearer,  goes  for- 
ward to  attack  once  more  the  outpost  of  the  Philistines. 
Saul  knew  nothing  of  it.  The  King  is  surrounded  by  a 
small  company,  among  them  the  relations  of  Eli.  They 
had  an  ephod,  needed  for  inquiry  from  Jehovah,  but  we  do 
not  read  of  its  use.  Jonathan  and  his  armour  bearer  and 
their  conversation  are  blessed  illustrations  of  true  faith. 
What  simplicity  it  reveals !  Jonathan  knew  the  Lord  and 
knew  that  He  loves  His  people  and  therefore  would  over- 
throw their  enemies.  He  tells  the  armour  bearer  "it  may 
be  that  the  Lord  will  work  for  us,  for  there  is  no  restraint 
to  the  Lord  to  save  by  many  or  by  few. ' '  And  the  armour 
bearer,  whose  name  we  do  not  know,  but  known  to  God, 
answered  him:  "Do  all  that  is  in  thine  heart;  turn  thee; 
behold  I  am  with  thee  according  to  thy  heart."  They 
were  in  blessed  unity.  They  cast  themselves  upon  the 
Lord  and  let  Him  decide  what  they  were  to  do.  And  the 
Lord,  as  He  always  does,  answers  to  their  faith.  In  spite 
of  the  difficulties,  the  sharp  rocks,  which  they  had  to 
ascend,*  difficulties  which  are  always  connected  with  true 
faith,  they  overcome  the  foe.  The  Lord  was  there,  for  it 
was  His  battle  and  the  earth  quaked.  But  twenty  men 
were  slam  by  the  two.  A  great  confusion  folloAved.  The 
multitude  melted  away  as  they  beat  each  other,  and  the 
Hebrews  which  had  been  with  the  Philistines  turned  against 


*  "They  climb  on  hands  and  knees  to  the  attack ;  knees  as  well  as 
hands  are  a  great  necessity  in  climbing  spiritual  heights." 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  159 

them.  It  was  the  Lord  who  saved  Israel  that  day. 
(Verse  23.) 

Then  Jonathan  and  his  armour  bearer  were  missed. 
Saul  made  an  attempt  in  consulting  the  Lord,  which  did  not 
succeed.  Saul's  adjuration  was  unnecessary  and  made  in 
self-will.  His  oath  is  but  the  working  of  the  natural  man. 
In  his  blindness  he  thinks  he  can  help  along  the  complete 
defeat  of  the  enemy  by  his  legal  injunction.  On  account 
of  this  foolish  oath  the  people  were  in  distress;  legalism 
always  puts  burdens  and  distress  upon  the  people  of  God. 
His  own  son  Jonathan,  ignorant  of  his  father's  command- 
ment, takes  a  little  honey  on  the  end  of  the  rod  and  receives 
refreshment  by  it.  Honey  is  the  type  of  natural  things 
and  their  sweetness.  Their  use  in  the  right  way  is  not  for- 
bidden. Like  Jonathan  we  must  touch  them  only  with  the 
end  of  the  rod  and  take  a  little.  If  Jonathan  had  gone 
down  on  his  knees  and  filled  himself  with  all  the  honey  he 
could  eat,  it  w^ould  not  have  refreshed  but  incapacitated 
him  for  the  conflict.  Jonathan  was  revived  by  the  little 
honey  he  had  taken,  while  the  people  fainted.  But  a  worse 
result  of  Saul's  commandment  happened.  The  famished 
people  ate  meat  with  the  blood.  Thus  Saul's  restriction 
of  a  lawful  thing  led  to  the  breaking  of  a  divine  command- 
ment. 

Saul  erects  his  first  altar,  for  he  feels  the  need ;  perhaps 
less  than  that,  he  only  fears  the  judgment  of  God.  There 
is  no  answer  from  God  when  he  inquired  ' '  Shall  I  go  down 
after  the  Philistines?"  What  follows  shows  us  again  the 
impetuous  and  stubborn  heart  of  Saul.  Self-righteous 
and  self-willed  he  is  ready  to  slay  his  own  son ;  the  people 
rescued  him  from  his  own  hands.  What  humiliation  for 
King  Saul! 


160  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

8.    War  with  Amalek.    Saul's  Disobedience  and 
Rejection. 

CHAPTER  XV 

1.  The  commission  to  destroy  Amalek.     1-9. 

2.  Saul's  Disobedience  and  Kejection.     10-23. 

3.  Saul's  Confession.     24-31. 

4.  The  Doom  of  Agag.     32-35. 

From  verse  48  in  the  previous  chapter  we  learn  that  Saul 
smote  the  Amalekites.  Samuel  is  sent  by  Jehovah  with  a 
new  message  to  Saul  telling  him  to  smite  Amalek  again  and 
to  destroy  utterly  all  that  they  have.  It  involves  another 
task  for  Saul.  He  had  been  fully  established  as  King  and 
is  therefore  called  upon  to  discharge  his  responsibilities  and 
prove  that  he  is  fit  for  the  position  which  he  held.  Amalek 
is  the  great  foe  of  God 's  people  and  typifies,  as  we  have  seen 
in  our  annotation  on  Exodus  (chapter  svii),  the  flesh  and 
its  lusts.  Israel  should  have  war  with  Amalek  from  genera- 
tion to  generation,  and  the  remembrance  of  Amalek  was  to 
be  completely  blotted  out.  Even  so  the  flesh  is  always  the 
enemy  of  the  children  of  God.  "The  flesh  lustetli  against 
the  Spirit  and  the  Spirit  against  the  flesh."  It  is  enmity 
against  God.  With  this  enemy  Saul  was  to  war  and  to  de- 
stroy them  utterly.  But  Saul  at  heart  was  nothing  but  an 
Amalekite.  He  gathers  his  army  to  do  what  Jehovah  had 
demanded.  The  Lord  gives  Amalek  into  his  hands.  Then 
comes  the  significant  "but." — "But  Saul  and  his  people 
spared  Agag,  and  the  best  of  the  sheep,  and  of  the  oxen, 
and  of  the  fatlings,  and  the  lambs,  and  all  that  was  good 
and  would  not  utterly  destroy  them,  but  everything  that 
was  vile  and  refuse,  that  they  destroyed  utterly." 

"The  lesson  is  a  deeply  solemn  one,  and  wider  in  appli- 
cation than  perhaps  we  would  easily  allow.  If  Amalek 
stand  here  as  elsewhere  for  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  alas,  is  it 
not  true  that  we  measure  our  judgment  of  these  often  more 
by  our  own  tastes  than  by  the  simple  letter  of  the  Word  of 
God?  How  easy  it  is  to  judge  the  multitude  of  things, 
and  spare  the  worst  of  all,  the  Agag!    And  things  which 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  161 

minister  to  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  are  unhesitatingly  allowed, 
if  only  they  are  not  what  to  common  estimate  would  be 
considered  vile.  Our  judgments,  how  apt  are  they  to  be 
those  of  the  world  at  large  rather  than  of  God, — in  the  light 
of  nature  rather  than  of  the  sanctuary ! "  * 

Then  the  Lord,  who  had  been  the  silent  witness  of  all  this, 
told  Samuel  about  it.  A  night  of  sorrow  and  of  prayer 
followed  for  the  man  of  God.  How  he  must  have  pleaded 
with  the  Lord  for  unhappy  Saul !  Samuel  and  Saul  meet. 
Strange  words  which  came  from  the  lips  of  disobedient 
Saul:  "Blessed  be  thou  of  the  Lord!  I  have  performed 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord."  It  was  a  falsehood.  He 
then  hears  the  sentence.  "AVhen  thou  wast  little  in  thine 
own  sight  thou  becamest  the  head  of  the  tribes  of  Israel, 
and  the  Lord  anointed  thee  King  over  Israel ! ' '  And  now 
he  had  become  great  in  his  own  sight  and  little  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord.  Solemn  are  the  Prophet's  words  to  him. 
"Behold  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
than  the  fat  of  rams.  For  rebellion  is  as  the  sin  of  witch- 
craft, and  stubbornness  is  as  iniquity  and  idolatry.  Be- 
cause thou  hast  rejected  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  He  hath 
also  rejected  thee  from  being  King."  This  was  the  irrev- 
ocable sentence  of  Jehovah.  Alas!  Saul's  confession  but 
reveals  his  true  character  once  more.  He  sinned  and  trans- 
gressed against  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  because  he  feared 
the  people  and  hearkened  to  their  voice.  Such  a  one  was 
unworthy  to  be  King  over  the  Lord's  people.  It  is  a  sad 
spectacle,  the  unrelenting  Samuel  and  the  deposed  King. 
And  Samuel  deals  with  Agag  in  judgment  as  he  deserved  it. 

The  statement  "and  Samuel  saw  Saul  no  more  until  the 
days  of  his  death"  is  taken  by  critics  in  connection  with 
chapter  xix:24  as  an  indication  of  the  diversity  of  the 
sources  from  which  the  Books  of  Samuel  have  been  derived. 
But  it  is  incorrect.  Samuel  did  not  come  to  see  Saul  again, 
though  Saul  prophesied  before  Samuel.  However  Chapter 
xxviii:ll-19  must  be  connected  with  Samuel's  final  word  to 
Saul  in  this  chapter. 


*  Numerical  Bible, 


162  TEE  B00E8  OF  SAMUEL 


III.     David,  the  King  After  God's  Heart.     His 
Exile  and  Suffering 

Chapter  xvi-xxxi 

1.    David  Anointed  King.    The  Departure  of  the  Spirit 
from  Saul. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  David  anointed  King.     1-13. 

2.  The  Spirit  departs  from  Saul.     David  with  Saul.     14-23. 

The  King  after  the  people's  heart  has  failed  and  is  set 
aside,  and  now  Jehovah  brings  forth  His  king  after  His 
own  heart.  That  King  is  like  Jonathan,  a  man  of  faith,  is 
devoted  to  Jehovah  and  in  perfect  subjection  unto  Him. 
Furthermore  from  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Judah  means 
"Praise")  he  is  a  worshipper  through  whom  the  Spirit  of 
God  pours  forth  the  sweetest  strains  of  praise  and  worship. 
He  prospers  into  a  great  kingdom  and  Jehovah  makes  an 
oathbound  covenant  with  Him.  (2  Sam.  vii.)  That  cov- 
enant points  us  to  the  true  King,  who  according  to  the  flesh 
is  of  the  seed  of  David.  Saul  could  not  foreshadow  that 
King.  There  is  absolutely  nothing  in  Saul  which  could  re- 
mind us  of  the  King,  who  is  yet  to  rule  over  this  earth  in 
righteousness.  It  is  different  with  the  life  and  reign  of 
David.  Everywhere  we  may  discover  most  blessed  types  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David.  Because  this  King 
after  God 's  own  heart  is  to  give  a  typical  vision  of  the  com- 
ing true  King,  David  had  to  pass  through  suffering  first 
before  he  could  receive  the  kingdom  and  its  glory.  From 
now  on  in  this  book  we  shall  follow  the  sufferings  of  the 
Kinff  after  God's  heart. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  163 

Samuel  was  interrupted  in  his  mourning  for  Saul  by  a 
new  command  to  fill  his  horn  with  oil  for  the  anointing  of 
another  King.  That  King  is  to  be  chosen  from  the  sons  of 
Jesse  the  Bethlehemite.  A  sacrificial  feast  is  appointed  in 
connection  with  the  approaching  anointing  of  the  son  of 
Jesse,  and  Samuel  is  obedient  and  went  to  Bethlehem. 
Then  he  called  Jesse  and  his  sons  to  the  feast.  Then  the 
seven  sons  of  Jesse  pass  by,  but  the  chosen  one  is  not 
among  them.  Only  one  was  left,  the  youngest  who  kept 
the  sheep.  He  is  brought  in.  Now  he  was  ruddy  *  and 
withal  of  a  beautiful  countenance  and  goodly  to  look  upon ; 
and  the  Lord  said,  Arise,  anoint  him,  for  this  is  he.  David 
the  son  of  Jesse  was  anointed  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord 
came  upon  him.  And  so  David  became  the  Lord's  anointed. 
David  means  ''Beloved";  he  is  a  shepherd,  typifying  the 
Beloved  One,  the  good,  the  great  and  the  chief  Shepherd. 
What  a  contrast  with  Saul! 

An  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  began  then  to  trouble  Saul 
after  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  him.  What 
a  sad  spectacle  he  now  presents!  When  he  had  been 
anointed  the  Spirit  also  came  upon  him  and  he  became 
another  man.  His  pride,  self-will,  disobedience  and  stub- 
bornness we  have  followed,  and  now  the  Spirit  departs  and 
in  judgment  upon  the  deposed  King  an  evil  spirit' was  per- 
mitted to  come  upon  Saul.  "Evil  as  well  as  good  has  its 
commission  from  God, — not  its  existence,  but  its  liberty  to 
act,  and  the  limits  of  its  action."  It  was  no  doubt  a  case 
of  demon  possession.  He  had  rejected  the  Word  of  God 
and  was  given  over  into  the  hands  of  a  demon.  Such  is 
also  the  case  in  the  days  of  apostasy  which  are  now  upon 
Christendom.  They  depart  from  the  faith  and  follow 
seducing  spirits  and  doctrines  of  demons.  Doctrinal  apos- 
tasy and  the  moral  evils  followdng  such  an  apostasy  is  the 
work  of  demons.  God  still  permits  as  an  act  of  judgment 
that  demons  possess  those  who  are  disobedient  and  rebel 
against  Him.  Then  David  is  called  in  to  sing  to  the  af- 
flicted King  and  to  soothe  him.     And  he  loved  him  greatly 


Ruddy  is  literally  reddish  and  may  refer  to  auburn  hair. 


164  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

and  David  became  his  armour  bearer.  ''And  it  came  to 
pass,  when  the  evil  spirit  from  God  was  upon  Saul,  that 
David  took  an  harp,  and  played  with  his  hand ;  so  Saul  was 
refreshed,  and  was  well,  and  the  evil  spirit  departed  from 
him."  Here  we  have  a  beautiful  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  His  sweet  words,  the  ministrations  of  His  Spirit 
refresh  the  soul  and  drive  out  the  evil  spirit.  When  the 
unhappy  King  had  been  quieted  and  the  ministry  of  the 
young  Shepherd-King  was  no  longer  needed,  he  returned 
to  his  home  and  to  his  shepherd  life;  to  feed  his  father's 
sheep.     (xvii:15.)  * 

2.    David  and  Goliath. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1.  Goliath  of  Gath,  the  Philistine.     1-11. 

2.  David's  Errand  and  inquiry.     12-30. 

3.  David's  Oflfer  to  fight  Goliath.     31-40. 

4.  David's  Victory.     41-54. 

5.  Saul's  Inquiry.     55-58. 

Modern  critics  are  practically  unanimous  in  regarding 
the  story  of  this  chapter  as  unhistorical.  One  of  the  lead- 
ing arguments  they  advance  is  the  statement  found  in 
2  Sam.  xxi:19  that  the  slayer  of  Goliath  was  Elhanan  the 
son  of  Jair-oregim,  a  Bethlehemite.  But  if  we  consult  still 
another  passage  we  find  that  Elhanan  slew  the  brother  of 
Goliath.  "And  Elhanan  the  son  of  Jair  smote  Lahmi  the 
brother  of  Goliath  the  Gittite."  (1  Chron.  xx:5.)  It  is 
therefore  no  discrepancy  at  all.  A  closer  examination  into 
this  matter  we  cannot  undertake  here.  If  the  account  in 
1  Sam.  xvii  were  unhistorical  the  jealousy  of  Saul  against 
David  would  be  inexplicable. 


*  No  discrepancy  exists  between  1  Sam.  xvi:19-23  and  the  question 
which  Saul  subsequently  asks:  "Whose  son  is  this  youth?"  (xvii: 
55-58.)  The  king  had  not  been  previously  anxious  to  become  in- 
timately acquainted  with  the  urigiu  and  family-connections  of  one 
who  merely  bore  his  arms  iiri'I  served  ;is  his  harper;  but  when  the 
latter  is  on  the  point  of  becoming  his  son-in-law,  it  is  natuiuUy  a 
matter  cf  interest  to  him  to  acquire  a  more  accurate  knowledge  of  the 
personal  history  of  David." 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  165 

David,  tlie  Lord's  anointed,  in  his  great  deed,  is  consti- 
tuted the  deliverer  of  Israel,  The  deed  of  the  young 
shepherd  is  one  of  the  greatest  recorded  in  the  Bible.  It 
was  simple  trust  in  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  the  armies 
of  Israel,  which  won  the  overthrow  of  the  boasting  Philis- 
tine. In  typical  application  the  story  of  David  and  Go- 
liath is  especially  rich;  we  can  pass  on  but  a  little  of  it. 
A  prayerful  and  diligent  search  will  reveal  much  more. 
Goliath,  the  giant,  is  the  type  of  Satan,  the  prince  of  this 
world,  who  has  the  power  of  death.  He  also  typifies  that 
which  is  connected  with  the  enemy  of  God,  which  is  under 
the  leadership  of  Satan.  This  is  suggested  by  the  number 
"six."  Six  is  in  Bible  numerics  the  number  of  man  in 
opposition  to  God.  His  height  was  six  cubits.  He  had  also 
six  pieces  of  armour  (verses  5-7).  The  number  six  is  also 
prominent  in  another  giant,  who  was  slain  by  Jonathan,  the 
son  of  Shimeah.  He  had  six  fingers  on  each  hand  and  six 
toes  on  each  foot.  (2  Sam.  xxi:20.)  Nebuchadnezzar's 
image  of  gold  also  has  the  number  six  connected  with  it. 
(Dan.  iii:l.)  In  Revelation  we  find  the  number  of  the 
beast,  that  coming  man  of  sin,  and  his  number  is  666 ;  it 
represents  the  utmost  defiance  of  God,  the  fullest  mani- 
festation of  sin.  The  bold  and  defiant  language  Goliath 
used,  the  terror  he  inspired  among  the  people  of  God,  find 
easy  application  to  Satan  and  his  power. 

And  David  is  the  type  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  His 
father  sent  David  on  a  mission  to  his  brethren.  It  reminds 
us  of  Joseph  who  was  sent  to  seek  for  his  lost  brethren. 
Both  are  types  of  Him  whom  the  Father  sent  into  the 
world.*  He  came  to  the  camp  in  lowliness  and  then  was 
misunderstood  and  wrongly  accused  by  his  own  brethren. 
And  thus  our  Lord  was  treated  by  His  own.  We  must  not 
overlook  the  prominence  given  to  the  reward  which  he  is  to 
receive  who  slays  Goliath,  "The  King  will  enrich  him 
with  great  riches,  and  will  give  him  his  daughter,  and  make 
his  father's  house  free  in  Israel."  "Well  may  we  see  here 
a  type  of  the  reward  of  Him  who  became  poor  for  our 


Jesse  means  "Jehovah  is  living." 


166  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

sake.  And  David  took  the  stones  from  the  brook,  out  of 
the  water,  the  type  of  death.  Then  after  he  struck  the 
giant  with  the  stone,  he  took  Goliath's  sv/ord  and  slew  him 
and  cut  off  his  head.  Even  so  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by 
death  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  this  is, 
the  devil.  (Hebr.  ii:14.)  And  now  Israel  and  Judah,  the 
types  of  the  true  people  of  God,  can  arise  and  shout  for 
joy  and  gain  a  complete  victory  over  the  conquered  foe. 
(Verse  52.)  And  this  took  place  at  Ephes-dammim  ("the 
boundary  of  blood")  and  the  valley  of  Elah  ("the  mighty 
one").  It  speaks  of  the  blood  and  the  power,  death  and 
resurrection.  What  evidences  we  have  in  these  historical 
events  and  their  typical  application  of  the  inspiration  of 
the  Bible!  And  David  had  said  to  Goliath  that  the  vic- 
tory Jehovah  would  give  him  should  bring  about  ' '  that  all 
the  earth  may  know  there  is  a  God  in  Israel."  All  the 
earth  will  yet  see  and  know  His  salvation. 

The  alleged  difficulty  of  verses  55-58  we  have  already  ex- 
plained in  a  foot  note  at  the  close  of  the  previous  chapter.* 

3.    Jonathan  and  David.    Saul's  Jealousy. 

CHAPTEE  XVIII 

1.  Jonathan's  love  for  David.     1-4. 

2.  The   Beginning   of   Saul's  Jealousy.     5-16. 

3.  David's  Marriage.     17-30. 

A  beautiful  scene  opens  this  chapter.  Jonathan,  the  man 
of  faith,  loves  David.  He  was  about  40  years  old  and 
David  about  17.  Jonathan  made  a  covenant  with  David 
and  loved  Mm  as  his  own  soul.  He  showed  also  his  great 
devotion  by  giving  to  David,  his  robe,  his  garments,  his 
sword,  his  bow  and  his  girdle.  Thus  he  stripped  himself 
of  all  for  David's  sake.     Such  devotion  and  love  should  we 


*  Note  objections  made  by  critics  to  verse  54.  They  say  it  is 
"curious  anachronism,  since  David's  future  capital  was  still  in  the 
hands  of  the  Jebusites."  However,  Jerusalem,  west  of  Moriah,  had 
been  taken  by  .Judah.  The  Jebusites  only  held  Jebus,  or  Zion,  south 
of  Moriah.  See  Judges  i:7-8.  Higher  Criticism  abounds  in  mis- 
statements of  the  Scriptures. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  167 

manifest  towards  Him,  who  is  greater  than  David.  No 
doubt  Jonathan's  devotion  was  kindled  by  the  deed  young 
David  had  done  in  slaying  Goliath.  And  when  we  think 
of  what  our  Lord  has  done  for  us  the  devotion  to  Him 
increases. 

And  David  the  anointed  is  the  obedient  servant  and  con- 
ducts himself  wisely.  The  days  of  suffering  and  exile  are 
now  rapidly  approaching.  The  song  of  the  women,  "Saul 
hath  slain  his  thousands,  and  David  his  ten  thousands," 
angers  the  rejected  King.  Again  the  demon  possesses  him 
because  he  gave  way  to  his  temper.  He  nourished  the  feel- 
ing of  hatred  against  David.  "He  eyed  David  from  that 
day  forward."  When  the  evil  spirit  came  upon  him  he 
prophesied.  This  has  been  hard  to  understand  to  some. 
Several  translators  have  translated  "raved";  but  that  can- 
not be  done,  for  the  word  prophesy  is  the  same  as  in  Chap- 
ter x:5.  Prophesying  means  to  speak  by  inspiration;  it 
does  not  always  mean  the  prediction  of  future  events. 
Now  there  is  besides  a  divine  inspiration,  also  a  satanic 
inspiration.  Certain  cults  which  claim  restoration  of  cer- 
tain gifts  claim  inspiration,  which  has  often  been  traced 
to  the  influence  of  demons.  Saul  uttered  words  which  were 
the  result  of  the  indwelling  evil  spirit.  Then  he  attempted 
twice  to  kill  David  with  the  javelin.  This  was  no  doubt 
an  attempt  from  the  side  of  Satan  to  do  away  with  him 
from  whose  loins  the  promised  seed,  the  Redeemer,  was  to 
come.  The  Lord  shielded  David  and  Saul  was  afraid  of 
him,  because  the  Lord  was  with  him. 

And  now  David  has  also  gained  the  love  of  all  Israel  and 
Judah.  Saul  then  offers  to  make  David  his  son-in-law. 
Underneath  it  all  was  the  mad  King 's  plotting  to  get  rid  of 
David  and  have  the  Philistines  kill  him.  How  blinded 
Saul  had  become !  The  Lord 's  anointed  was  in  the  Lord 's 
own  hands  and  his  life  was  precious  in  His  sight.  It  has 
its  precious  lessons  for  us  likewise. 

Merab  is  promised  to  him  to  become  his  wife,  but  Achiel 
receives  her  instead.  (See  2  Sam.  xxi :8  and  read  "Merab" 
instead  of  ' '  Michal. ")     Then  he  received  Michal,  who  loved 


168  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

David.  "We  shall  meet  her  again  later  when  she  was  re- 
stored to  the  King  by  Abner  and  later  mocked  the  King  of 
Israel.  And  Saul,  after  his  scheme  failed,  became  David's 
enemy  continually. 


4.    Saul's  Renewed  Attempt.    David's  Escape. 

CHAFTEB,  XIZ 

1.  Saul  and  Jonathan.     1-7. 

2.  Saul's  new  Attempt  to  Kill  David.     8-10. 

3.  David's  Escape.     11-18. 

4.  Saul's  Pursuit  and  his  helplessness.     19-24. 

The  lost  King  goes  from  bad  to  worse.  First  he  tried  to 
spear  David;  then  he  attempted  his  life  through  having 
him  killed  by  the  Philistines,  and  now  he  speaks  openly  to 
his  own  son  and  to  all  his  servants  that  David  must  be 
killed.  Therefore  loving  Jonathan  warned  David  and  he 
hid  himself.  Then  Jonathan  persuades  his  father  to  de- 
sist and  Saul  uttered  a  meaningless  oath  "As  the  Lord 
liveth,  he  shall  not  be  slain."  And  Jonathan  brought 
David  to  Saul. 

Thus  Jonathan  is  seen  as  a  peacemaker. 

But  David's  great  victory  (verse  8)  starts  the  King's 
hatred  again  and  the  javelin  flies  once  more,  but  only  strikes 
the  wall  from  where  he  had  slipped  away.  Then  David 
fled  and  when  he  comes  to  his  house  his  faithful  wife  tells 
him  of  the  great  danger  and  let  him  down  through  a  win- 
dow. They  watehe'd  the  house  to  kill  him.  The  fifty-ninth 
Psalm  throws  interesting  light  upon  this  part  of  David's 
history  and  has  of  course  prophetically  a  wider  application. 

And  Michal  practised  a  deception.  Like  Rachel  she  pos- 
sessed teraphim,  the  idol-images  in  so  much  use  among  the 
Chaldeans  and  other  nations.  These  were  forbidden  b}*^ 
Jehovah  and  yet  they  were  secretly  used.  (Judges  xvii:5 ; 
xviii:14.)  Michal 's  image  must  have  been  of  considerable 
size;  she  arranged  it  in  the  bed  and  then  said  to  messen- 
gers **he  is  sick."    When  the  deoeption  ia  discovered  ake 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  1B9 

lies  again  and  said  that  David  threatened  her  life.  That 
the  Scriptures  record  these  misdeeds  is  but  an  evidence  of 
their  genuineness,  however  the  Holy  Scriptures  never  sanc- 
tion these  things.  In  all  these  attempts  on  David  we  see  a 
foreshadowing  also  of  the  attempts  which  were  made  on  the 
life  of  our  Lord. 

And  David  fled  to  Samuel,  who  had  a  kind  of  a  school 
for  prophets  at  Naioth  in  Ramah.*  Saul's  pursuit  is  in 
vain  and  he  is  helpless  to  touch  the  Lord's  anointed. 
Divine  power  was  engaged  in  behalf  of  David,  and  Saul 
himself,  stripped  and  naked,  lying  down  all  night  and  all 
day  has  to  bear  witness  to  it. 


5.    Jonathan  Protects  David.    Their  Separation. 

CHAPTER  XX 

1.  David  with  Jonathan.     1-10. 

2.  The  strengthened  Bonds  and  the  Token.     11-23. 

3.  Saul's  Attempt  to  Kill  Jonathan.     24-34. 

4.  David  separated  from  Jonathan.     35-42. 

We  do  not  need  to  enlarge  upon  this  beautiful  story  of 
the  further  devotion  of  Jonathan  to  David.  What  friend- 
ship and  affection  is  here!  Indeed  the  chapter  contains 
one  of  the  most  charming  incidents  in  this  book.  When 
David  told  Jonathan  of  his  great  danger,  Jonathan  refused 


*  "The  'schools  of  the  prophets,'  which  were  placed  under  the  direc- 
tion of  experienced  and  approved  prophets,  afforded  to  younger  men 
an  opportunity  of  becoming  qualified  to  perform  the  duties  of  the 
prophetic  calling.  The  selection  and  the  admission  of  individuals 
who  were  suited  for  the  prophetic  oflBce  by  their  personal  character, 
and  who  had  a  divine  call,  undoubtedly  depended  on  the  prophetic 
judgment  of  those  who  presided  over  these  institutions.  As  prophecy 
was  a  gift  and  not  an  art,  the  instructions  which  were  imparted, 
probably  referred  merely  to  the  study  of  the  law,  and  were  intended 
to  awaken  and  cultivate  theocratical  sentiments,  as  well  as  promote 
a  growth  in  spiritual  life,  for  herein  a  suitable  preparation  for  the 
prophetic  office  necessarily  consisted.  There  are  also  indications 
found  which  authorize  us  to  conclude  that  the  revival  of  sacred 
poetry,  as  an  art,  and  that  theocratico-historieal  composition  also, 
are  to  be  ascribed  to  these  religious  communities  as  their  source. 
Such  schools  existed  in  Ramah,  Jei-icho,  Beth-el,  and  Gilgal.  ( 1  Sam, 
xSxaS;  2  Kings  ii:3,  &;  iv:  38.)  "—Kurtz. 


170  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

to  believe  it.  But  David  knew  there  was  but  a  step  be- 
tween him  and  death.  The  conversation  which  took  place 
in  the  field  is  most  pathetic.  Both  were  men  of  faith  put- 
ting their  trust  in  Jehovah  and  hence  this  great  affection. 
Jonathan  also  was  deeply  conscious  of  David's  destiny  as 
the  Lord's  anointed.  Verses  14  and  15  bear  witness  to 
this.  ''And  thou  shalt  not  only  while  I  live  show  me  the 
kindness  of  the  Lord,  that  I  die  not.  But  also  thou  shalt 
not  cut  off  thy  kindness  from  my  house  for  ever,  no,  not 
when  the  Lord  hath  cut  off  the  enemies  of  David  every  one 
from  the  face  of  the  earth. ' '  Then  Jonathan  caused  David 
to  make  a  covenant  with  him,  for  he  loved  him  as  he  loved 
his  own  soul.  And  Jonathan  had  to  taste  his  father's 
anger.  Vicious  are  Saul's  words  to  his  own  son,  and  in 
wrath  he  threw  a  javelin  at  him  to  smite  him.  How  this 
illustrates  Satan's  hatred,  both  against  Christ  and  those 
who  are  one  with  Him,  as  David  and  Jonathan  were 
one. 

Then  comes  the  parting.  They  kissed  one  another,  and 
wept  one  with  another  till  David's  weeping  exceeded.* 
Jonathan  went  into  the  city  and  David  into  the  suffering 
of  the  exile.  They  met  but  once  more.  (Chapter  xxiii:16- 
18.) 

6.    David's  Varied  Experiences. 

Chapter  xxi-xxvii 

CHAPTEE  XXI 

1.  David  at  Nob  with  Ahimelech.     1-9. 

2.  David's  Flight  to  Achish,  King  of  Gath.     10-15. 

With  this  chapter  begins  the  record  of  David's  wan- 
derings as  an  exile.  A  number  of  Psalms  were  written  by 
him  during  this  period  of  the  rejection  of  the  Lord's 
anointed.  We  shall  point  out  some  of  them.  These 
Psalms  are  prophetic  also  foreshadowing  the  rejection  and 


T.iterally  "till  David  wept  loudly." 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  171 

the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  well  as  the  tribulations  of  the 
pious  remnant  of  Israel  during  the  closing  years  of  the  age, 
preceding  the  coming  and  enthronement  of  the  King  of 
Israel,  our  Lord.  He  reached  Nob  after  his  separation 
from  Jonathan.  At  Nob  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  had 
been  established  and  Ahimeleeh  ("my  brother  is  King") 
the  son  of  Ahitub  (xxii:9)  and  great-grandson  of  Eli,  was 
now  exercising  the  priesthood.  Nob  was  not  far  from 
Jerusalem,  north  of  the  city.     (Isaiah  x:32.) 

He  appeared  before  Ahimeleeh  in  a  deplorable  condition. 
It  was  on  a  Sabbath  when  the  King's  son-in-law  appeared 
unarmed  and  hungry.  Aliimelech  became  afraid  and  sus- 
picious, but  David  invented  a  falsehood  to  allay  the  sus- 
picions of  the  high  priest.  The  truthfulness  of  the  Word 
of  God  is  demonstrated  in  this  faithful  report  of  David's 
failure.  He  was  not  fully  trusting  in  his  God  and  the  re- 
sult was  the  exercise  of  an  endeavour  to  protect  himself 
which  led  to  the  deception.  How  different  the  actions  of 
Him  who  according  to  the  flesh  was  the  son  of  David! 
"Who  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth; 
who  when  He  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again."  (1  Pet. 
ii:22.)  Then  he  and  his  companions  ate  the  hallowed 
bread.  Our  Lord  called  the  attention  of  the  Pharisees  to 
this  when  they  murmured  because  His  disciples  had 
plucked  the  ears  of  corn  on  the  Sabbath.  (Matth.  xii:l-8; 
Mark  ii:23-28;  Luke  vi:l-5.)  There  are  no  discrepancies 
between  the  account  in  Samuel  and  the  words  of  our  Lord. 
Our  Lord  speaks  of  David  and  they  that  were  with  him, 
while  in  the  record  here  we  read  that  Ahimeleeh  asked 
David  "Why  art  thou  alone,  and  no  man  with  thee?" 
The  young  men  who  are  mentioned  later  (verses  4  and  5) 
may  have  at  first  kept  out  of  sight.  In  Mark  ii:26,  our 
Lord  mentions  Abiathar  as  high  priest.  This  is  not  a  dis- 
crepancy, for  Abiathar  was  the  son  of  Ahimeleeh  and  exer- 
cised priestly  function  and  also  was  high  priest.  (1  Sam. 
XXX  :7.)  The  story  of  eating  the  shewbread  which  was  not 
lawful  for  him  to  eat  is  full  of  interest  if  compared  with 
the  words  of  our  Lord.     There  was  an  inquiry  of  the  Lord 


172  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

and  then  Aliimeleeh  gave  him  the  hallowed  bread.  (See 
xxii:10.)  On  account  of  the  ruin  in  Israel  everything  had 
become  common  and  David  and  his  companions  did  not  sin 
in  eating  the  shewbread;  the  "bread  of  presence"  as  it  is 
called.  And  so  our  Lord  was  rejected,  as  David  was,  and 
justifies  the  conduct  of  His  disciples  by  referring  the  Phari- 
sees to  David's  action.*  "We  can  see  in  David  rejected 
the  type  of  a  greater,  who  as  such  has  abrogated  Jewish 
and  legal  ordinances  in  order  to  give  to  His  people  the  true 
communion  with  Himself  of  which  the  shewbread  speaks." 
Thus  the  shewbread  typifies  the  true  bread,  which  we  use 
for  our  sustenance,  as  David  needed  it  for  his  physical 
keeping. 

Then  Doeg  ("the  fearful")  is  mentioned.  He  was  an 
Edomite  and  a  prominent  servant  of  Saul.  David  knew 
with  the  presence  of  Doeg  that  his  secret  was  now  discov- 
ered and  Doeg  later  told  Saul  about  it.  (xxii  :9.)  He  also 
received  the  sword  of  Goliath.  With  it  he  had  slain  the 
giant  and,  as  we  showed  before,  it  is  the  type  of  Him  who 
by  death  has  destroyed  him  who  has  the  power  of  death. 
The  victory  our  Lord  has  won  through  death  is  the  weapon 
against  all  our  enemies. 

Then  we  find  David  in  Gath  among  the  Philistines, 
Strange  place  he  had  selected  for  his  protection!  Why 
should  he  have  gone  to  the  strongest  enemies  of  God  and 
of  His  people  ?  He  had  acted  in  unbelief  and  unbelief  was 
dragging  him  down  lower  and  lower.  Instead  of  fleeing  to 
God,  he  turned  to  Gath.  And  then  for  self-preservation, 
because  he  had  been  discovered,  he  feigned  madness.  The 
King  of  Gath  drove  him  away.  The  Lord  was  far  better 
than  his  fears.  This  gracious  deliverance  set  his  heart- 
strings vibrating  with  praise.  Here  we  would  ask  the 
reader  to  turn  to  Psalm  xxxiv,  which  David  wrote,  accord- 
ing to  the  inscription,  when  Ahimelech  f  drove  him  away 
and  when  he  departed. 


*  For   a   complete   exposition   see   our    Commentary    on    Matthew, 
Chapter  xii. 

t  Xo  clisv:ivi;tt.iry  bere.     The  Philii-itifiv.-   llings  were  called  "Abime- 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  173 

CHAPTER  XXII 

1.  In  the  cave  of  Adullam.     1-2. 

2.  In  Moab  and  Gad's  message.     3-5. 

3.  Saul's  discovery  of  David's  visit  to  Nob.     6-10. 

4.  The  murder  of  the  Priests.     11-19. 

5.  David  and  Abiathar.     20-23. 

Next  we  find  him  in  the  cave  of  AfMlam  ("a  witness"). 
Here  a  strange  company  gathers  around  the  rejected  King. 
It  consisted  of  400  men.  He  became  their  captain.  Some 
of  them  were  in  distress,  others  in  debt,  and  discontented. 
Such  were  attracted  to  the  rejected  David.  It  was  a 
blessed  scene  foreshadowing  Him  to  whom  all  can  gather 
who  are  in  distress,  who  feel  their  debt,  their  sinfulness, 
their  sorrow  and  their  need.  And  a  greater  One  than 
David  is  here.  Our  Lord  rejected,  but  owned  by  those 
who  acknowledge  their  need,  has  power  to  meet  it  all  in  the 
riches  of  His  Grace.  They  with  their  captain,  the  Lord's 
anointed  were  "outside  of  the  camp."  Such  a  place  there 
is  to-day  for  all  who  know  Him,  who  is  rejected  of  men  and 
so  much  dishonored  in  that  which  claims  and  bears  His 
name.  "Let  us  go  forth  therefore  unto  Him  without  the 
camp,  bearing  His  reproach."  (Heb.  xiii:13.)  And  later 
those  who  had  gathered  around  David  in  the  cave,  and  suf- 
fered with  him,  were  specially  remembered.  (2  Sam. 
xxiii:8-39.)  "If  we  suffer  we  sliall  reign  with  Him." 
(2  Tim.  ii:12.)  Psalm  Ivii  was  written  by  David  when  lie 
fled  to  the  cave.  And  when  he  was  in  the  cave  he  prayed. 
This  prayer  is  embodied  in  Psalm  cxlii.  It  was  answered 
too  when  the  Lord  sent  to  him  the  400  men.  "What  food 
for  meditation  and  reflection  is  here! 

Then  he  came  to  Moab.  His  father  and  mother  were 
there  with  him.  He  thought  of  making  his  nest  there, 
yea,  more  than  a  nest,  "a  hold";  it  was  not  according  to 
the  mind  of  the  Lord.  His  ancestress  of  blessed  memory, 
Ruth,  the  Moabitess,  had  left  the  land  of  Moab  to  dwell  in 
Israel;  her  great-grandson  David  leaves  the  land  to  dwell 


lech"  as  the  rulera  of  Russia  are  called  "Czar,"  the  rulers  of  Turkey, 
"Sultan."     Achish  was  Abimelech  of  the  Philistines. 


174  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

in  Moab.  Again  it  was  unbelief.  He  tried  to  escape  the 
troubles  which  were  in  store  for  him.  He  had  to  learn 
patience  and  endurance.  Therefore  the  Lord  sent  the 
prophet  Gad  with  the  message  to  depart.  In  all  his  un- 
belief and  failures  the  Lord  did  not  forsake  him,  but  His 
watchful,  loving  eye  followed  His  rejected  servant.  He 
cared  and  provided  for  him.  No  harm  could  reach  him. 
He  was  not  in  Saul's  hands  but  in  the  hands  of  the  Lord. 
And  this  is  our  happy  lot.  In  a  psalm  he  saith  '  *  Thou  tell- 
est  all  my  wanderings." 

A  frightful  scene  follows.  Doeg  the  Edomite  tells  Saul 
of  what  happened  at  Nob.  Saul,  demonized  Saul,  orders 
the  slaughter  of  the  priests  and  while  the  servants  of  Saul 
refused  the  bloody  work,  the  Edomite  executed  the  com- 
mand. Abiathar  the  son  of  murdered  Ahimelech  told 
David.  He  knew  of  Doeg's  words  to  Saul  about  the  shelter 
Ahimelech  had  given  to  him.  At  that  time  David  wrote 
Psalm  lii.  Prophetically  Doeg,  the  Edomite,  is  the  type  of 
that  cunning  maji  of  sin. 

Beautiful  are  David's  words  to  Abiathar.  (Verse  23.) 
They  suggest  the  blessed  assurance  of  salvation  and  pre- 
servation all  receive  who  in  faith  turn  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ. 

CHAPTER  XXni 

1.  The  Victory  over  the  Philistines  at  Keilah.     1-13. 

2.  In  the  wilderness  of  Ziph.     14-26. 

3.  Saul's  Ketiirn.     27-29. 

Keilah  was  about  six  miles  southeast  of  Adullam.  David 
heard  of  the  invasion  of  the  Philistines  that  they  were  fight- 
ing against  this  walled  city.  And  he  inquired  of  the  Lord, 
through  Abiathar,  who  had  an  ephod.  (Verse  6.)  David's 
inquiry  of  the  Lord  shows  the  man  of  faith  in  his  submis- 
sion to  the  Lord.  He  had  his  lapses,  but  at  heart  he  owned 
the  Lord  and  wanted  to  glorify  Him.  Twice  he  asked  the 
Lord;  the  second  time  evidently  to  quiet  the  fears  of  the 
six  hundred  men  who  were  now  with  him.     The  Lord  gave 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  175 

him  the  victory.  Then  poor,  blinded  Saul  thought  David 
was  now  shut  up  in  Keilah  and  could  not  escape.  lie  knew 
not  the  Lord  and  His  power  to  protect  His  own.  While 
Saul  plotted  David  prayed  and  depended  on  the  Lord,  who 
told  him  that  Saul  would  come  to  Keilah  and  that  the  men 
of  Keilah  would  deal  treacherously  with  him  and  his  men. 
In  the  wilderness  of  Ziph  Saul  sought  him  every  day,  but 
God  did  not  deliver  him  into  his  hands.  And  David 
learned  by  experience  what  the  name  of  Ziph  means;  it 
means  "refining."  In  the  refining  process  of  suffering 
and  endurance  the  Shepherd-King  was  fitted  for  his  com- 
ing exaltation.  In  this  he  is  not  a  type  of  our  Lord,  but 
we  can  read  our  own  experience  here.  For  the  last  time 
Jonathan  and  David  met.  He  came  to  strengthen  David's 
hand  in  God.  This  is  the  true  purpose  of  the  fellowship 
of  the  Saints.     What  a  noble  character  was  Jonathan! 

"It  is  difficult  to  form  an  adequate  conception  of  the 
courage,  the  spiritual  faith,  and  the  moral  grandeur  of  this 
act.  Never  did  man  more  completely  clear  himself  from 
all  complicity  in  guilt  than  Jonathan  from  that  of  his 
father.  And  yet  not  an  undutiful  word  escaped  the  lips 
of  this  brave  man.  And  how  truly  human  is  his  fond  hope 
that  in  the  days  to  come,  when  David  would  be  king,  he 
should  stand  next  to  his  throne,  his  trusted  adviser,  as  in 
the  days  of  sorrow  he  had  been  the  true  and  steadfast  friend 
of  the  outlaw !  As  we  think  of  what  it  must  have  cost  Jona- 
than to  speak  thus,  or  again  of  the  sad  fate  which  was  so 
soon  to  overtake  him,  there  is  a  deep  pathos  about  this  brief 
interview,  almost  unequalled  in  Holy  Scripture,  to  which 
the  ambitious  hopes  of  the  sons  of  Zebedee  form  not  a 
parallel  but  a  contrast. ' '  * 

The  Ziphites  after  Jonathan's  visit  discovered  David's 
hiding  place  to  Saul  but  Saul  could  not  reach  him  nor 
touch  the  Lord's  anointed.  But  David  at  that  time  cried 
mightily  to  God,  "Save  me,  0  God" — "Hear  my  prayer, 
0  God;  give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth";  these  were 

*  Edersheim. 


176  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

some  of  his  utterances  recorded  in  Psalm  liv,  which  was 
written  at  that  time. 

CHAPTER  XZIV 

1.  In  the  wilderness  of  En-gedi.     1-8. 

2.  David's  words  to  Saul.     9-15. 

3.  Saul's  answer  to  David.     16-22. 

Saul  continues  in  the  pursuit  of  David  and  with  3Q00 
chosen  men  he  sought  David  at  the  rocks  of  the  wild  goats. 
In  was  in  En-gedi,  which  means  ' '  the  fountain  of  the  young 
goat."  There  were  ^^■ild  rocks  and  the  fountains  of  water 
and  here  David  had  found  his  refuge  and  strongholds.  God 
trained  him  also  amidst  the  hardships  and  difficulties  sug- 
gested by  the  rocks,  while  the  fountain  suggest^  the  re- 
freshing which  was  also  his  blessed  portion.  Perhaps  in 
that  trying  wilderness  he  poured  out  his  heart  in  the  way 
as  recorded  in  Psalm  Ixiii.  It  is  certain  that  he  developed 
constantly  in  his  faith  and  trust  in  God.  And  a  test  is  now 
permitted  to  come  upon  him.  Saul  had  entered  a  cave. 
David  and  his  men  were  in  the  sides  of  the  cave.  But  a 
few  steps  between  him  and  the  unsuspecting  Saul !  An  uP" 
lifted  sword,  one  stroke  and  Saul's  career  would  have  been 
ended.  Is  he  going  to  do  it?  Will  he  take  his  case  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  Lord  and  become  his  own  avenger?  And 
his  men  remind  him  of  an  unrecorded  word,  which  the 
Lord  had  spoken  to  David  (verse  4)  w^hich  David  might 
have  used  to  justify  the  slaying  of  Saul.  Faith  conquers. 
He  looks  upon  Saul  as  being  still  the  Lord's  anointed  and 
only  cut  off  a  part  of  the  skirt  of  Saul's  garment.  What 
magnanimity  it  was!  And  even  for  this  his  tender  con- 
science smote  him.  A  marvellous,  eloquent  address  to  King 
Saul  was  delivered  by  David.  He  tells  him  all  what  he  had 
done  and  what  is  in  his  heart  and  thus  shows  the  purpose  of 
his  soul  to  leave  it  all  with  the  Lord.  This  is  faith's  lan- 
guage. The  Man  of  God  who  walks  by  faith  can  await  the 
Lord's  own  time.  And  thus  the  case  was  not  Saul  against 
David,  but  Saul  fighting  David's  Lord.     The  outcome  is 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  177 

obvious.  And  Sau]  ?  His  reply,  given  in  the  voice  of  weep- 
ing, acknowledged  the  wrong  he  had  done  and  the  righteous 
cause  of  David  as  well  as  the  future  of  David,  that  he 
would  receive  the  Kingdom  of  Israel.  He  also  made  David 
swear  not  to  cut  off  his  seed.  He  is  broken  down  and 
deeply  moved.     Yet  his  heart  is  unchanged. 

CHAPTER  XXV 

1.  The  Death  of  Samuel.     Verse  1. 

2.  Nabal  and  his  Refusal.     2-13. 

3.  Abigail's  deed  and  her  prayer.     14-31. 

4.  David's  Answer  to  Abigail.     32-35. 

5.  Nabal's   death.     36-38 

6.  Abigail  becomes  David's  wife.     39-44. 

After  the  death  of  Samuel,  briefly  mentioned  in  the  be- 
ginning of  this  chapter,  David  went  still  further  south  into 
the  wilderness  of  Paran.  An  interesting  story,  the  story 
of  Nabal  and  Abigail,  is  told  in  this  chapter.  David  had 
won  a  great  victory  over  himself  and  over  Saul.  The  next 
event  records  a  great  failure.  He  loses  his  self-control  com- 
pletely, and  instead  of  manifesting  the  magnanimity  he 
showed  towards  Saul,  he  breaks  out  in  a  rage  and  in  the 
violence  of  his  temper  he  was  ready  to  kill  Nabal  and  his 
entire  household.  God  alone  in  His  gracious  intervention 
saved  him  from  committing  a  crime  as  heinous  as  the  one 
Saul  committed  when  he  slew  Ahimelech,  his  fellow-priests 
and  the  inhabitants  of  Nob.  How  he  failed!  How  dif- 
ferent He  was,  whose  rejection  and  suffering  David  fore- 
shadowed, our  Lord !  What  a  contrast  with  His  meekness ! 
David  was  out  of  touch  with  the  Lord  and  we  read  nothing 
here  of  David  asking  the  Lord  about  sending  the  ten  young 
men  to  Carmel,  nor  did  he  enquire  of  the  Lord,  when  in 
the  heat  of  his  spirit  he  ordered  the  four  hundred  men  to 
proceed  on  their  dreadful  eiTand. 

It  is  true  the  provocation  was  great.  He  had  sent  the 
young  men  with  a  message  of  peace  to  Nabal,  requesting 
the  rich  man  for  a  little  help.  David  had  regarded  the 
property  of  Nabal  and  his  shepherds  were  not  molested. 


178  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

The  exiled  King  had  a  right  to  expect  the  little  help  he 
asked.  And  Nabal  was  an  unbeliever.  He  did  not  believe 
in  David  as  the  Lord's  anointed  King,  but  looked  upon  him 
as  a  slave  who  had  left  his  master.  He  refused  and  in- 
sulted the  King's  messengers.  Nabal  means  "fool."  He 
is  a  type  of  natural  man  and  especially  those  who  reject  the 
Lord  and  His  message  of  peace.  His  words  ' '  my  bread ' ' — 
"my  water" — "my  flesh" — "my  shearers"  and  the  whole 
story  reminds  us  of  that  other  fool  of  whom  our  Lord  spoke. 
He  also  spoke  of  "my  barns" — "my  fruits" — "my  goods." 
(Luke  xii:16-21.) 

David  was  restrained  from  his  evil  purpose  by  the  inter- 
vention of  beautiful  Abigail,  the  ^vife  of  Nabal.  When  she 
heard  what  her  husband  had  done  she  at  once  prepared  a 
magnificent  present  for  David  and  his  men.  It  was  a 
princely  gift,  including  two  skins  filled  with  wine.  All 
this  she  did  without  consulting  her  husband.  And  the 
place  she  takes  before  David,  her  supplications,  her  confes- 
sion, her  humble  prayer  for  forgiveness,  her  delicate  refer- 
ence to  the  King's  sinful  haste  to  shed  blood,  her  faith  in 
David's  coming  exaltation  and  her  concluding  request, 
"then  remember  thine  handmaid" — all  is  so  ricn  and  beau- 
tiful. Abigal  the  woman  with  understanding  and  of  a 
beautiful  countenance  typifies  the  true  believer  and  may 
also  be  taken  as  a  type  of  the  church.  Nabal  to  whom  she 
is  bound  as  wife  is  typical  of  the  old  nature,  the  flesh.  But 
Nabal  died  and  Abigail  was  married  to  David ;  even  as  the 
believer  is  dead  to  sin,  dead  to  the  law  and  is  now  married 
to  another,  even  to  Christ.  (Rom.  vii:4.)  We  leave  it  to 
the  reader  to  follow  these  hints  in  their  application. 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

1.  The  Ziphites  and  Saul's  pursuit.     1-4. 

2.  David  again  spares  Saul.     5-12. 

3.  David's  words  to  Abner.     13-16. 

4.  David's    words    to    Saul.     17-20. 

5.  Saul's  Confession  and  David's  Reply.     21-25. 

Hachilah,  where  we  find  David  now,  was  six  miles  east  of 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  179 

Ziph  and  about  half-way  to  En-gedi.  The  Ziphites  once 
more  reveal  his  hiding  place  to  Saul.  And  Saul  was  rushing 
forward  to  his  doom  when  with  his  three  thousand  chosen 
men  he  took  up  the  hunt  again.  The  two,  the  rejected 
King  and  God's  true  King,  are  close  together  and  David 
finds  Saul  in  the  trench  and  the  people  round  about.  With 
David  were  Ahimelech,  the  Hittite  and  Abishai,  the  son  of 
Zeruiah,  the  sister  of  David.  They  creep  up  to  sleeping 
Saul.  Once  more  his  enemy  is  given  into  his  hands  and 
once  more  David  does  not  want  to  take  his  case  out  of  the 
Lord's  hands.  He  is  true  to  his  own  words.  (Chapter 
xxiv  :15.)  Abishai,  David's  own  nephew,  counsels  the  smit- 
ing of  Saul.  But  David  does  not  want  to  touch  the  Lord's 
anointed.  He  declares  "the  Lord  shall  smite  him" — or 
"his  day  shall  come  to  die."  He  leaves  him  in  the  Lord's 
hands  to  deal  with  him  as  it  pleases  Him.  He  acts  in  faith. 
Would  to  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  would  act  at  all 
times  in  the  same  manner,  when  they  suffer  persecution. 
The  sleep  which  had  fallen  upon  the  company  was  of  the 
Lord.  He  can  keep  awake  (Esther  vi:l)  and  He  can  put 
to  sleep,  to  suit  His  own  will  and  purpose.  Then  David 
took  Saul 's  spear,  perhaps  the  same  he  had  cast  at  him  and 
his  water-cruse.  Alas!  poor,  apostate  Saul  had  been  de- 
prived before  of  what  these  two  things  mean  spiritually; 
he  had  lost  his  weapon  to  fight  in  faith  and  righteousness, 
he  knew  no  longer  the  water,  which  refreshes  the  soul.  How 
the  spear  and  the  water-cruse  are  lost  to-day  to  nominal, 
disobedient,  apostate  Christendom ! 

The  sleeping  company  is  aroused.  He  ridicules  and 
chides  Abner  for  his  unwatchfulness.  Saul  recognized 
David's  voice  and  the  last  discourse  between  the  two  kings 
follows.  We  call  attention  to  two  statements.  David  wit- 
nesses to  his  faith  and  trust  in  the  Lord.  He  trusts  Him 
that  He  will  deliver  him  out  of  all  tribulation.  Saul's  last 
words  to  David  are  prophetic.  "Thou  shalt  both  do  great 
things,  and  also  shall  prevail."  David  did  not  hear  Saul's 
voice  again  after  this,  nor  did  Saul  see  David  again.     The 


18©  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

sad  history  of  poor,  lost  Saul  will  soon  be  consummated  in 
his  visit  to  the  witch  at  Endor  and  his  miserable  end. 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

1.  David's  Unbelief.     1-2. 

2.  With  Achish,  King  of  Gath.     3-7. 

3.  His  Slaughter  and  Deception.     8-12. 

David  became  despondent.  After  all  the  gracious  6%^- 
dences  that  the  Lord  was  with  him,  shielded  him  and 
guarded  his  very  footsteps,  he  relapses  in  unbelief.  Such 
is  the  heart  of  man !  He  fears  for  his  life  and  then  takes 
once  more  his  case  out  of  the  Lord's  hands  and  fiees  to 
Achish  the  king  of  Gath.  He  had  been  there  before  and  at 
that  former  visit  he  feigned  insanity  and  the  Philistinian 
Ahimelech  Achish  of  Gath  had  driven  him  away.  Now  he 
is  welcomed  by  Achish,  for  he  brings  a  small  army  of  600 
young  men  with  him  and  receives  Ziklag  to  dwell  in  with 
his  two  wives  and  his  household.  And  Saul  after  this  sought 
him  no  more. 

David  abode  there  one  year  and  four  months;  a  long 
time  to  be  away  from  the  Lord.  And  at  the  same  time 
he  made  raids  upon  the  enemies  of  God  and  his  people. 
He  invaded  the  Geshurites,  the  Girzites  and  the  Amalekites. 
It  was  not  a  real  work  for  God,  but  the  result  of  a  self- 
centered  heart  and  its  aim  was  selfishness.  It  shows  how  a 
person  whose  heart  is  out  of  touch  with  God  may  outwardly 
be  engaged  in  fighting  evil  for  selfish  reasons.  Achish 
shared  in  the  spoils,  yet  he  deceived  the  King  of  the  Philis- 
tines. And  the  road  leads  down.  Unbelief  drags  down, 
lower  and  lower.  David,  as  we  learn  from  the  beginning 
of  the  next  chapter,  became  the  body  guard  of  Achish  and 
with  liis  men  is  to  fight  Israel.  A  sad  record  it  is.  How 
often  God's  people  followed  the  same  road. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  181 

7.    Saul  and  the  Witch  at  Endor. 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

1.  David  fully  joined  to  Achish.     1-2. 

2.  Forsaken  Saul.     3-6. 

3.  The  Command  to  seek  a  Witch.     7. 

4.  Saul's  Visit  to  Endor.     8-14. 

5.  Samuel's  solemn  Message.     15-20. 

6.  Saul's  despair  and  departure.     21-25. 

Saul's  final  plunge  towards  his  awful  end  is  the  main 
topic  of  this  chapter.  Israel  had  adopted  necromancy,  ask- 
ing the  dead,  and  other  occult  and  wicked  practices  of  the 
Canaanitish  nations.  They  had  those  who  were  possessed  by 
demons;  the  so-called  mediums  of  spiritism  and  the  mod- 
ern day  psychical  research  endeavors  follow  the  same  paths. 
Saul  had  cleared  the  land  of  these  necromancers.  Saul 
became  frightened  by  the  advancing  Philistines.  But  when 
he  asked  the  Lord  there  was  no  answer.  Then  in  despair 
he  sought  the  woman  with  the  familiar  spirit  at  Endor. 
Disguised  he  sneaked  away  to  the  woman.  And  he  swears 
unto  her  in  the  Lord's  name  to  exempt  her  from  all  pun- 
ishment in  breaking  the  law.  What  presumption !  He  de- 
mands to  see  Samuel.  The  woman  no  doubt  had  the  power 
to  communicate  with  wicked  spirits,  who  represented  them- 
selves as  those  who  had  died.  It  is  the  same  in  spiritualism. 
The  messages  which  are  transmitted  through  the  women 
mediums  in  that  cult  do  not  emanate  from  the  dead  at  all, 
but  from  lying  spirits,  who  impersonate  the  dead.  More 
than  once  has  this  been  practically  demonstrated.  When 
this  woman  at  Endor  saw  Samuel  *  she  cried  out  in  fear  and 
at  the  same  time  she  recognized  the  King,  who  told  her  not 
to  be  afraid.  She  had  not  expected  the  return  of  Samuel 
from  the  realms  of  death.  Was  it  really  Samuel  or  only  an 
apparition?     There  can  be  no  doubt  whatever  that  it  was 


*  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  word  "Samuel"  should  be  Saul  in 
verse  12.  The  woman,  it  is  said,  recognized  Saul,  which  would  ex- 
plain the  second  half  of  that  verse.  However,  there  is  no  reason 
wky  Buck  a  chaage  skould  be  made. 


182  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

Samuel  who  came  up.  It  was  by  God's  own  power  and 
permission  that  he  appeared  to  pronounce  the  final  doom 
upon  Saul.  And  what  a  message  it  M^as!  "The  Lord  is 
departed  from  thee  and  become  thine  enemy ; ' ' — ' '  the  Lord 
hath  rent  the  kingdom  out  of  thine  hand;" — "the  Lord 
will  deliver  Israel  with  thee  into  the  hands  of  the  Philis- 
tines. ' '  Then  came  the  announcement  of  his  death  and  the 
death  of  his  sons.  "Tomorrovf  shalt  thou  and  thy  sous  be 
with  me. ' '  This  means  that  they  were  to  die.  Perhaps  the 
more  correct  rendering  is  given  in  the  Septuagint  version, 
which  reads :  ' '  Tomorrow  shalt  thou  and  thy  sons  with  thee 
be  fallen." 

Solemn  is  the  record  of  Saul  as  given  in  1  Chronicles 
X :  13.  "So  Saul  died  for  his  transgressions  which  he  com- 
mitted against  the  Lord,  even  against  the  Word  of  the 
Lord,  which  he  kept  not,  and  also  for  asking  counsel  of  one 
that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  to  enquire  of  it. ' '  Such  was  the 
condition  and  doom  of  the  People's  King,  before  God's  King 
came  into  power.  Here  is  a  striking  and  significant  typa 
of  the  conditions  on  the  earth  before  God 's  King,  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  son  of  David  and  Israel's  King  is  en- 
throned. The  kings  of  the  earth  and  nominal  Christendom 
are  disobedient  to  the  Word  of  God.  They  like  Saul  com- 
mit transgressions  against  the  Lord  and  follow  seducing 
spirits  and  doctrines  of  demons.  (1  Tim.  iv:l.)  It  is  said 
that  a  number  of  European  rulers  have  their  own  mediums 
and  necromancers.  But  the  kings  of  the  earth  defying  God 
and  His  laws  will  be  dragged  lower  still.  The  spirits  of 
demons,  working  miracles,  will  yet  go  forth,  during  the 
closing  years  of  this  present  age,  and  possess  the  kings  of 
the  earth  and  the  whole  world  and  gather  them  together  to 
the  battle  of  that  great  day  of  God  Almighty,  the  battle  of 
Armageddon.  (Rev.  xvi:13-16.)  This  is  foreshadowed  in 
Saul 's  apostasy  and  in  Saul 's  end. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  183 

8.    David  and  Achish.    Ziklag  Destroyed  and  Avenged. 

Chapter  xxix-xxx 

CHAPTER  XXIX 

1.  The  objections  of  the  Philistine  lords.     1-6. 

2.  Achish  dismisses  David.     6-11. 

While  David 's  enemy,  Saul,  heard  his  coming  doom,  David 
was  still  with  the  enemies  of  God's  people.  The  Philistines 
were  gathered  against  Israel  and  David  was  with  Achish 
ready  to  fight  against  the  Lord's  people.  The  lords  of  the 
Philistines  however  object  to  his  presence.  They  still  re- 
member the  song  of  bygone  days  and  fear  treachery.  Then 
follows  the  description  of  how  Achish  and  David  parted, 
David's  words  expressing  his  great  willingness  to  stay  with 
the  enemies  of  God  show  how  deep  a  believer  may  fall  when 
he  has  wandered  away  from  God.  He  calls  wicked  Achish 
"my  lord  the  King"  and  his  own  people  Israel,  whose 
anointed  king  he  was,  "the  enemies."  God's  mercy  kept 
him  from  plunging  deeper  than  that. 

CHAPTER  XXX 

1.  The  Amalekites  destroy  Ziklag.     1-5. 

2.  David's  Distress  and  Return  unto  the  Lord.     6-8. 

3.  David  pursues  the  Amalekites.     9-10. 

4.  The  young  Egyptian  and  the  defeat  of  the  enemy.     11-20. 

5.  The  threatening  dissension  and  David's  decision.     21-25. 

6.  The  spoil  sent  to  Judah.     26-31. 

The  chastening  hand  of  the  Lord  now  rests  heavily  upon 
wayward,  backsliding  David.  The  Amalekites  had  de- 
stroyed Ziklag.  The  entire  city  was  burned  to  the  ground 
and  the  women  and  children  were  taken  away  captive  by  the 
Amalekites.  The  people  rose  up  against  David  and  were 
ready  to  stone  him.  He  reaps  the  fruit  of  his  sowing.  He 
had  gone  into  an  alliance  with  the  enemies  of  God  and  His 
people,  and  now  he  finds  that  the  Lord  permitted  the  enemy 
to  touch  his  possessions.  The  Lord  through  affliction,  loss 
and  sorrow  spoke  to  the  heart  of  David.    How  humiliating 


184  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

that  his  followers  were  ready  to  stone  him !  They  under- 
stood that  his  behaviour  had  brought  upon  them  the  dis- 
aster, that  he  was  another  Achan  (Joshua  vii) .  It  was  theu 
that  he  turned  to  the  Lord.  ' '  David  encouraged  himself  in 
the  Lord  his  God."  Here  we  see  the  difference  between 
him  and  Saul,  Affliction  and  sorrow,  the  chastenings  of 
the  Lord,  recall  the  true  believer  and  bring  him  back  to  the 
Lord.  He  sought  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  once  more 
through  Abiathar,  who  had  the  ephod,  enquired  of  the  Lord. 
And  here  graciously  the  Lord  met  His  servant  who  had 
failed  Him !  There  is  no  word  of  rebuke  on  account  of 
the  16  months  David  had  wandered  from  the  Lord,  but  in- 
stead the  Lord  assures  His  servant  that  he  would  recover  all. 
The  incident  of  the  young  Egyptian  is  very  interesting. 
David  appears  now  once  more  as  a  type  of  our  Lord.  He 
did  not  foreshadow  the  Lord  Jesus  during  the  months  he 
was  with  the  Philistines,  The  Egyptian  is  a  type  of  the 
unsaved.  He  is  an  Egyptian  (the  type  of  the  world)  ;  he 
was  found  in  the  field  ("the  field  is  the  world" — Matth. 
xiii).  He  was  the  slave  of  an  Amalekite.  Amalek  as  we 
have  seen  in  the  annotations  of  Exodus  (Chapter  xvii)  and 
in  Judges,  is  a  type  of  the  flesh.  Behind  it  stands  Satan, 
Thus  the  unsaved,  the  one  who  is  not  born  again,  is  of  the 
world  and  a  slave  of  Amalek,  serving  the  flesh  under 
Satan's  dominion.  The  physical  condition  of  this  young 
Egyptian  also  typifies  the  spiritual  condition  of  the  un- 
saved. And  David  in  showing  him  mercy  is  a  type  of 
Christ.  The  young  man's  confession,  the  bread  and  water 
given  to  him,  can  easily  be  applied  in  the  Gospel.  The  story 
of  the  Egyptian  reminds  us  of  the  parable  of  the  Good 
Samaritan  in  the  Gospel  of  Luke.  The  young  Egyptian  is 
assured  of  his  safety ;  the  slave  of  the  Amalekite  becomes  the 
servant  of  the  King.  The  company  to  which  he  belonged 
is  eating  and  drinking  and  dancing.  They  rest  secure 
dreaming  of  no  danger,  when  all  at  once  the  battle  cry  of 
the  King  is  upon  them.  It  is  the  picture  of  the  world. 
Thus  sudden  destruction  will  come  upon  them.  And  David 
recovered  all. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  185 

How  differently  the  dissension,  which  threatened  among 
David's  men,  would  have  turned  out  had  he  still  been  away 
from  the  Lord.  But  now  he  acts  in  the  sweetness  of  grace. 
The  great  spoil  is  distributed  among  the  different  cities  of 
Judah.  Well  may  we  think  here  of  the  victory  of  our  com- 
ing King  in  which  His  people  will  share  through  His  in- 
finite Grace. 

9.    The  Death  of  Saul. 

CHAPTER  XXZI 

1.  Saul  wounded  in  battle.     1-3. 

2.  Saul  a  suicide.     4-6. 

3.  The  victorious  Philistines.     7-10. 

4.  The  bodies  recovered  and  burnt.     11-13. 

A  sad  ending  to  one  of  the  saddest  stories  of  the  Bible. 
Jonathan,  Abinadab  and  Melchi-shua,  Saul's  sons,  fall  first. 
Then  Saul  is  wounded.  He  asks  his  armour  bearer  to  make 
an  end  of  his  sufferings.  There  is  no  evidence  whatever  of 
his  repentance  and  turning  unto  the  Lord.  He  died  as  he 
had  lived  in  rebellion  against  Jehovah.  The  armour-bearer 
refused  to  kill  Saul;  then  he  fell  upon  his  own  sword  and 
committed  suicide.  He  is  the  first  suicide  mentioned  in  the 
Bible.  Ahithopel  (2  Sam.  xvii  :23)  ;  Zimri  (1  Kings  xvi  :18) 
and  Judas  Iscariot  (Matth.  xxvii:5)  are  other  suicides  re- 
corded in  the  Word.*  The  first  chapter  of  the  Second  Book 
of  Samuel  tells  us  of  an  Amalekite  who  slew  Saul.  This  is 
not  a  contradiction  at  all  as  some  have  declared.  First 
Saul  asked  his  armour-bearer  to  slay  him;  he  refused. 
Then  he  fell  upon  his  sword  but  was  not  wholly  successful. 
In  anguish  he  leaned  upon  his  spear  and  when  the  Amalek- 
ite came  along,  he  told  him  that  his  life  was  still  in  him 
(2  Sam.  i:9)  and  he  slew  him.  His  end  is  sad  and  has  its 
solemn  lessons.  His  sin  was  the  sparing  of  Amalek,  we  say 
again,  the  type  of  the  flesh.     Of  this  sin  Samuel  had  re- 

*  What  an  awful  sign  of  the  times  is  the  constantly  increasing 
numbers  of  people  who  take  their  own  lives! 


186  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

minded  him  in  his  message  of  doom.  (xxviii:18.)  His 
disobedience  ended  in  self-destruction.  Such  is  sin.  And 
an  Amalekite  made  the  end  of  him.  Sin  allowed  and  fol- 
lowed will  do  its  dreadful  work  in  the  end,  as  this  Amalek- 
ite, spared  by  Saul,  ends  his  life. 

The  triumph  of  the  Philistines  is  complete.  Saul's  body 
is  held  up  to  scorn  in  the  idol-house  of  the  Philistines  and 
afterward  his  body  and  the  bodies  of  his  sons  are  recovered 
and  buried  by  Jabesh.  The  people 's  choice,  King  Saul,  has 
gone  down  in  ruin  and  shame.  All  looks  hopeless  now. 
Israel's  hope  centers  now  in  the  coming  King  after  God's 
own  heart,  David  the  son  of  Jesse.  How  he  foreshadows 
the  true  King  and  his  coming  kingdom,  He  who  is  the  hope 
of  Israel,  the  hope  of  the  world,  as  well  as  the  hope  of  the 
church,  we  shall  find  in  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel. 


SECOND  SAMUEL 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Division  of  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel 189 

Analysis  and  Annotations 191 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  189 


The  Division  of  Second  Samuel 

The  second  Book  of  Samuel  contains  the  history  of  David 
after  Saul 's  death,  his  reign  over  Judah  and  over  all  Israel, 
as  well  as  the  great  events  which  transpired  during  his 
reign.  The  center  of  the  book  is  the  record  of  his  fall,  the 
chastisements  which  he  had  to  pass  through  as  a  result  of 
his  sin  and  his  subsequent  restoration  after  the  rebellion  of 
his  son  Absalom.  The  last  four  chapters  form  an  appendix 
in  which  various  episodes  in  David's  life  are  recorded;  it 
tells  us  of  the  victories  of  the  King.  Much  in  this  book,  even 
more  so  than  in  the  previous  history,  has  a  typical  meaning, 
which  we  shall  follow  as  far  as  the  purpose  of  our  annota- 
tions permits.     We  make  the  following  division : 

I.    DAVID  KING  OF  JUDAH  AND  THE  EVENTS  OF 
HIS  REIGN.     Chapter  i-iv. 

1.  David's  Lamentation  for  Saul  and  Jonathan. 

Chapter  i. 

2.  David  Anointed  King  over  Judah.     Chapter 

ii  :l-7. 

3.  Abner's  Revolt  and  the  War  which  Followed. 

Chapter  ii  :8-32. 

4.  Abner's  Deeds  and  End.     Chapter  iii. 

5.  The  Death  of  Ishbosheth.     Chapter  iv. 

II.     DAVID  KING  OVER  ALL  ISRAEL  AND  THE 
EVENTS  OF  HIS  REIGN.     Chapter  v-x. 

1.  David  Anointed  King  Over  All  Israel.    Chap- 

ter v:l-5. 

2.  David's  Conquest  of  Zion  and  Victory  Over 

the  Philistines.     Chapter  v  :6-25. 

3.  The  Ark  Brought  to  Zion.     Chapter  vi. 


190  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

4.    The  Lord's  Promise  to  David  and  the  Oove- 

nant.     Chapter  vii. 
6.    The  Extension  of  His  Kingdom.    Chapter  viii. 

6.  David  and  Mephibosheth.    Chapter  ix. 

7.  The  War  with  Ammon  and  Syria.    Chapter  x. 

m.    DAVID'S  SIN,  CHASTISEMENTS  AND  RESTOR- 
ATION.     Chapter  xi-xx. 

1.  David's  Great  Sin.     Chapter  xi. 

2.  The  Message  of  God  and  David's  Confession. 

The  Beginning  of  the  Chastisements.    Chap- 
ter xii. 

3.  Further   Chastisement;   Amnon,   Tamar  and 

Absalom.     Chapter  xiii. 

4.  David  and  Absalom.     Chapter  xiv. 

5.  Absalom's    Conspiracy   and   David's  Plight. 

Chapter  xv. 

6.  The  Sorrows  and  Testings  of  the  King.    Chap- 

ter xvi. 

7.  Absalom,    Ahithophel   and   Hushai.    Chapter 

xvii. 

8.  The  Civil  War  and  Absalom's  Death.     Chap- 

ter xviii. 

9.  The  Return  of  the  King.     Chapter  xix. 
10.     The  Revolt  of  Sheba.    Chapter  xx. 

IV.    THE  APPENDIX  TO  THE  HISTORY  OF  DAVID. 

Chapter  xxi-xxiv. 

1.  The  Famine.    The  Wars  with  the  Philistines. 

Chapter  xxi. 

2.  David's  Song  of  Deliverance.     Chapter  xxii. 

3.  The  Last  Words  of  David  and  the  Record  of 

the  Mighty  Men.     Chapter  xxiii. 

4.  David's  Failure;  the  Altar  on  the  Threshing 

Floor  of  Araunah.     Chapter  xxiv. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  191 


The  Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.     David  King  of  Judah  and  the  Events  of  His 

Reign 

Chapter  i-iv 
1.    David's  Lamentation  for  Saul  and  Jonathan. 

CHAPTER  I 

1.  The  Death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  announced  to  David.     1-10. 

2.  David's  great  Grief.     11-12. 

3.  The  Amalekite  slain.     13-16. 

4.  David's  Lamentation.     17-27. 

David  heard  of  the  death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  from  the 
lips  of  the  Amalekite,  who  also  brought  him  the  crown  and 
the  bracelet  of  the  dead  king.  The  story  of  this  young  man 
has  been  branded  by  some  as  a  falsehood,  invented  to  gain 
favor  from  David.  It  is  not  necessary  to  reconcile  the 
supposed  contradiction  of  the  Amalekite 's  story  with  the 
account  of  Saul 's  death  in  the  last  chapter  of  the  preceding 
book,  by  saying  the  Amalekite  lied  to  David.  We  have  ex- 
plained this  in  the  annotations  of  chapter  xxxi.  When  the 
Amalekite  said  to  David,  ''So  I  stood  upon  him,  and  slew 
him,  because  I  was  sure  that  he  could  not  live  after  that  he 
was  fallen,"  he  referred  to  the  fact  that  Saul  had  fallen 
upon  his  own  sword,  in  committing  suicide  and  was  in  great 
suffering.  And  great  was  David's  grief  when  he  hears  the 
sad  news.  He  and  his  companions  wept  and  fasted  in 
mourning  over  Saul,  Jonathan  and  the  people  of  the  Lord. 
Then  he  commanded  the  Amalekite  to  be  slain  because  he 


192  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

had  smitten  the  Lord's  anointed;  thus  he  honored  Saul 
in  his  death,  while  the  Amalekite  received  the  punishment 
for  his  deed.  Then  David  broke  out  in  his  great  lamenta- 
tion over  Saul  and  Jonathan.  The  eighteenth  verse  as 
given  in  the  authorized  version  is  unintelligible.  The 
Hebrew  reads  "and  he  bade  them  teach  the  children  of 
Judah  the  bow;"  the  words  "the  use  of"  are  supplied. 
Others  read  instead  ' '  the  song  of  the  bow ' '  and  claim  it  has 
reference  to  this  lamentation,  which  David  taught  Judah. 
(See  verse  22.)  The  book  of  Jasher  ("the  upright")  is 
here  mentioned  again.  (Joshua  x:12-14.)  The  lamenta- 
tion of  David  is  a  wonderful  outpouring  of  soul.  First 
he  speaks  of  the  calamity  which  has  come  to  Israel  in  the 
death  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  (verse  19-22)  ;  then  he  extols 
the  virtues  of  both.  What  grace  this  manifests  if  we  con- 
sider that  Saul  had  hunted  David  and  put  upon  him  so 
many  afflictions !  He  does  not  refer  to  it  in  a  single  word. 
Beautiful  beyond  description  are  his  loving  words  on  Jon- 
athan. 

I  am  distressed  for  thee,  my  brother  Jonathan: 
Very  pleasant  has  thou  been  unto  me. 
Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful. 
Passing  the  love  of  women. 

But  there  is  one  whose  love  is  greater  than  David 's  love  for 
Jonathan,  even  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

2.    David  Anointed  King^  over  Judah. 

CHAPTER  11:1-7 

1.  David's  inquiry  of  the  Lord.     1-3. 

2.  Anointed  King  over  Judah.     4. 

3.  His  Message  to  the  Men  of  Jabesh-Gilead.     5-7. 

The  first  thing  mentioned  of  David  after  his  lamentation 
over  Saul  and  Jonathan  is  that  he  inquired  of  the  Lord. 
He  would  not  do  a  single  step  towards  claiming  the  rights 
which  belonged  to  him  without  consulting  the  Lord.     It 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  193 

shows  how  David,  with  all  his  faults,  was  in  submission  to 
the  Lord.  He  waits  on  the  Lord  ready  to  follow  His  guid- 
ance and  in  this  David  acknowledged  his  complete  depen- 
dence on  Him  who  had  chosen  him  as  His  King  over  His 
people.  In  this  he  is  a  type  also  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  The 
answer  came  to  him  at  once  that  he  was  to  go  up  into 
the  cities  of  Judah.  Then  the  men  of  Judah  came  and 
anointed  him  King  over  the  house  of  Jadah.  There  is 
nothing  ostentatious  about  it  nor  does  he  take  any  steps 
whatever  to  extend  his  God-given  rights  beyond  the  tribe  of 
Judah.  His  first  act  as  King  was  to  thank  the  men  of 
Jabesh-gilead  for  the  kindness  they  had  done  in  the  burial 
of  Saul.  He  also  exhorted  them  to  be  strong  and  announced 
his  kingship  over  Judah. 

3.    Abner's  Revolt  and  the  War  which  Followed. 

CHAPTER  11:8-32 

1.  Abner  makes  Ish-bosheth  King  over   Israel.     8-11. 

2.  The  defeat  of  Abner.     12-17. 

3.  Abner  and  Joab;  Joab's  victory.     18-32. 

God's  King  began  his  reign  in  quietness,  and  opposition 
and  open  revolt  followed  at  once.  Abner,  who  had  been  the 
captain  of  Saul's  host,  took  a  son  of  Saul  by  the  name  of 
Ish-bosheth  and  made  him  King  in  Gilead.  The  original 
name  of  this  son  was  ''Esh-baal,"  which  means  "the  fire  of 
Baal."  (1  Chronicles  viii:33.)  "Ish-bosheth"  was  his 
other  name;  it  means  "man  of  shame."  He  seems  to  have 
been  a  weakling  and  a  tool  in  Abner's  hand.  Ish-bosheth 's 
influence  was  soon  extended  over  all  Israel  and  the  false 
King  ruled,  while  David  was  only  acknowledged  by  the 
faithful  men  of  Judah,  David's  reign  over  Judah  was 
seven  years  and  six  months.  Here  are  faint  hints  of  what 
will  be  repeated  in  the  future  history  of  Israel,  Another 
Ish-bosheth,  a  pretender  to  the  throne  of  Israel,  the  false 
King,  will  be  in  the  earth.  He  comes  in  his  own  name,  with 
no  claim  whatever  to  the  throne.    And  the  true  King,  like 


194  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

David,  will  only  be  acknowledged  by  a  faithful  remnant  of 
his  people.  The  seven  years  and  a  half  remind  us  of  the 
last  period  of  Israel 's  history  when  these  things  come  to  pass. 
However,  Ish-bosheth's  weakness  and  especially  his  end 
makes  a  fuller  application  on  these  lines  impossible. 

The  other  prominent  person  is  Joab,*  the  son  of  Zeruiah, 
who  went  out  with  the  servants  of  David.  They  met  Ab- 
ner's  force  about  six  miles  northwest  of  Jerusalem  by  the 
pool  of  Gibeon.  Then  followed  at  Abner's  suggestion  a 
conflict  between  twelve  young  men  of  Benjamin,  the  sub- 
jects of  Ish-bosheth,  and  twelve  of  David's  servants.  A 
wicked  scene  followed.  They  slaughtered  each  other  at 
Helkath-hazzurim,  ' '  the  field  of  sharp  swords, ' '  after  which 
there  was  a  severe  battle  which  ended  with  the  defeat  of 
Abner.  All  this  shows  the  sorrowful  conditions  which  ex- 
isted among  Israel,  foreshadowing  again  the  worse  condi- 
tions throughout  this  age  and  especially  at  the  close  of  it. 
Then  follows  the  record  of  the  three  sons  of  Zeruiah,  Joab, 
Abishai  and  Asahel.  Asahel  followed  hard  after  Abner  and 
though  repeatedly  warned  by  Abner,  continued  in  his  pur- 
suit till  Abner  in  self  defence  slew  him.  The  battle  ended 
with  the  loss  of  nineteen  servants  of  David  and  Asahel,  while 
Abner  lost  360  men.  ''Shall  the  sword  devour  forever?" 
was  Abner 's  question.  As  long  as  God 's  true  King  does  not 
occupy  the  throne,  ruling  in  righteousness  and  in  peace, 
wars  and  bloodshed  will  continue.  The  sword  cannot  be 
stopped  till  He  reigns.  In  His  coming  Kingdom  nations 
will  learn  war  no  more  and  beat  their  swords  into  plow- 
shares. 

*  Joab  was  David's  nephew.     See  1  Sam.  xxvi:6;  1  Chronicles  ii:16. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  195 


4.    Abner's  Deeds  and  End. 

CHAPTER  III 

1.  The  long  War  and  its  Results.     1. 

2.  David's  family.     2-5. 

3.  Abner's  defiant  deed.     6-7. 

4.  Abner  and  Ish-bosheth.     8-11. 

5.  Abner's  Defection  to  David.     12. 

6.  David's  Request.     13-16. 

7.  Abner  with  David.     17-22. 

8.  Abner's  end.     23-30. 

9.  David's  lamentation  over  Abner.     31-39. 

The  first  verse  speaks  of  the  long  war  between  the  house 
of  Saul  and  the  house  of  David.  And  David  waxed  stronger 
and  stronger.  The  weakness  of  the  King  in  giving  way  to 
the  flesh  is  next  faithfully  recorded;  his  self-indulgence 
in  his  different  marriages.  Alas !  he  began  his  sowing  in  the 
flesh  from  which  later  he  was  to  reap  such  a  sad  harvest. 
Six  sons  are  mentioned,  bom  to  David  by  his  six  wives. 
Three  of  these  sons  became  a  source  of  sorrow  and  grief  to 
him.  Amnon's  vile  deed  is  found  in  chapter  xiii.  Absalom 
was  a  still  greater  trial  to  him.  Adonijah  became  the  rival 
of  Solomon.  (1  Kings  i  :4.)  In  this  record  of  taking  these 
different  women  as  wives,  in  this  gross  indulgence  of  the 
flesh,  he  prepared  himself  for  the  great  sin  of  his  life.  Dis- 
order and  nwich  confusion  followed.  Abner 's  deed  in  taking 
Rizpali  insulted  Saul 's  house  and  Ish-bosheth  protested  and 
Abner's  fury  came  upon  the  weakling  whom  he  had  made 
King.  Then  suddenly  Abner  professed  belief  in  David's 
God-given  kingdom.  His  arrogant  pride  is  seen  in  verse 
10 ;  as  if  it  was  in  his  power  to  set  up  the  throne  of  David 
over  all  Israel,  from  Dan  to  Beer-sheba.  The  poor  counter- 
feit king  was  silenced.  Then  we  see  Abner  entering  nego- 
tiations with  David.  Had  David  again  relapsed  that  he 
fell  in  with  Abner?  We  do  not  hear  a  word  that  he  in- 
quired of  the  Lord.  He  makes  a  condition  under  which 
Abner  is  to  see  his  face.     Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  the  first 


196  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

wife  he  had,  who  was  now  the  wife  of  Phaltiel,  is  to  be 
brought  to  him.  He  then  received  her  after  his  request  to 
Ish-bosheth,  while  her  husband  accompanied  her  as  far  as 
the  border  of  Judah.  The  subsequent  history,  Michal's 
mockery,  shows  that  it  was  a  mistake  for  David  to  take  her 
back.  How  different  all  would  have  been  if  David  had  in- 
quired of  the  Lord. 

Abner,  the  shrewd  schemer,  was  then  entertained  by 
David  in  a  great  banquet  at  which  occasion  he  offered 
to  make  David  ruler  over  all  Israel.  And  David  listened 
and  sent  him  away  in  peace.  But  was  it  God's  way  and 
God's  plan  to  have  His  anointed  made  King  through  such 
an  instrument?  Abner 's  death  frustrating  his  plans  gives 
the  answer.  Joab,  moved  by  envy,  jealousy  and  bitter 
hatred,  slew  Abner  in  the  same  way  as  he  had  slain  his 
brother  Asahel.  He  died  for  the  blood  of  Asahel  he  had 
shed.  An  insinuation  is  made  as  if  Joab's  deed  was  justi- 
fied as  the  avenger.  This  however  could  not  be  sustained 
by  the  law  for  Abner 's  deed  in  slaying  Asahel  was  in  self- 
defence.  But  David  cleared  himself  from  so  abominable 
a  deed.  ' '  I  and  my  kingdom  are  guiltless  before  the  Lord 
forever  from  the  blood  of  Abner."  A  public  mourning  is 
instituted  in  which  Joab  is  forced  to  partake  and  the  King 
lamented  over  Abner.  "And  all  the  people  took  notice  of 
it,  and  it  pleased  them,  as  whatsoever  the  King  did  pleased 
all  the  people."  The  King's  wise  behaviour  had  its  effect 
upon  the  people  and  thus  his  kingdom  was  strengthened. 

5.    The  Death  of  Ish-bosheth. 

CHAPTER  IV 

1.  Ish-bosheth  in  despair.     1-3. 

2.  Mephibosheth,  the  lame  son.     4. 

3.  The  End  of  Ish-bosheth.     5-8. 

4.  The  punishment  of  the  murderers.     9-12. 

Abner 's  death  meant  the  speedy  end  of  Ish-bosheth 's  pre- 
tentious reign.  Baanah  and  Keehab  were  his  captains  and 
became  his  murderers.    While  Ish-bosheth  was  resting  in 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  197 

the  heat  of  the  day  they  sneaked  in  and  murdered  the 
sleeping  son  of  Saul,  then  brought  the  head  to  David. 
They  claimed  to  be  instruments  of  God  in  the  execution  of 
the  wicked  deed,  expecting  approval  and  a  reward  from 
David.  But  the  King  received  them  in  a  different  way. 
Here  David's  trust  in  Jehovah  breaks  through  the  dark 
clouds  and  the  King's  heart  is  revealed.  ''As  the  Lord 
liveth,  who  hath  redeemed  my  soul  out  of  all  adversity." 
He  acknowledges  the  Lord's  gracious  help  in  the  past  and 
his  present  confidence  in  Him.  His  case  had  rested  in 
Jehovah 's  hands  and  in  the  ghastly  deed  of  the  two  captains 
the  King  did  not  see  Jehovah's  intervention  in  his  behalf, 
but  he  looked  upon  them  as  murderers.  Swift  judgment 
was  executed  upon  them.  David  is  now  through  these  cir- 
cumstances the  sole  and  undisputed  claimant  of  the  throne 
of  Israel  and  his  anointing  as  King  over  all  Israel  must 
speedily  follow.  Through  all  the  sad  occurrences  since 
Abner  had  made  Ish-bosheth  King,  David  had  maintained 
his  integrity.  In  all  the  evil  deeds,  the  bloodshed  and  cold- 
blooded murders  he  had  no  part.  He  acted  in  justice.  In 
this  at  least  he  is  a  type  of  Him  who  will  reign  over  the 
earth  in  righteousness. 

We  must  not  overlook  verse  4  in  which  Jonathan's  son 
Llephibosheth  is  mentioned  for  the  first  time.  He  was  the 
only  representative  of  Saul's  line,  a  helpless  cripple.  His 
story  and  David's  kindness  to  him  we  shall  soon  follow. 


198  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 


II.     David  King  Over  All  Israel  and  the  Events 
of  His  Reign 

Chapter  v-x 
1.     David  Anointed  King  over  all  Israel. 

CHAPTER  V:l-5 

1.  David  anointed.  I^ng  over  all  Israel.     1-3. 

2.  Duration  of  his  Reign.     4-5. 

The  events  of  the  reign  of  David  over  Judah  had  a 
henefieial  effect  upon  all  Israel.  After  Ish-bosheth 's  death 
all  the  tribes  of  Israel  came  to  David  at  Hebron.  It  is  a 
blessed  scene  when  they  appear  to  anoint  him  King  over  all 
Israel.  1  Chronicles  xii  should  here  be  consulted.  In  that 
chapter  the  names  of  those  are  given  who  stood  by  Da^dd. 
In  verse  38  we  read :  ' '  All  these  men  of  war,  that  could 
keep  rank,  came  with  a  perfect  heart  to  Hebron,  to  make 
David  King  over  all  Israel;  and  all  the  rest  also  of  Israel 
were  of  one  heart  to  make  David  King."  The  coming  of 
all  Israel  to  Hebron  was  one  of  the  most  magnificent  spec- 
tacles in  the  history  of  the  nation.  One  onh'  needs  to  take 
a  pencil  and  add  the  numbers  mentioned  in  1  Chron.  xii  :24- 
37  to  find  what  a  great  army  had  gathered  to  make  David 
King.  There  were  1222  chiefs  and  339,600  men.  Here  we 
see  a  united  Israel  swept  by  a  tremendous  enthusiasm. 
Now  they  own  him  as  their  own  bone  and  flesh ;  the  victories 
of  the  past  are  remembered  as  well  as  the  divine  promise 
that  he,  David  the  Bethlehemite,  should  be  the  Shepherd  of 
Israel  as  well  as  their  captain. 

But  there  is  coming  for  Israel  a  greater  day  than  the 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  199 

day  in  Hebron,  when  they  anointed  David  King.  It  fore- 
shadows but  faintly  the  glorious  day  when  their  long  re- 
jected King-Messiah,  the  Son  of  David,  comes  again.  Then 
they  will  own  Him  and  He  will  own  them.  They  will  also 
know  and  remember  all  God  has  done  through  Him.  He 
will  then  indeed  be  the  Shepherd  and  King  of  Israel.  All 
this  and  much  more  is  foreshadowed  in  David's  coronation 
and  his  reign.  David  is  the  type  of  the  coming  reign  of 
our  Lord  as  ''King  of  Righteousness"  while  Solomon  and 
his  reign  typify  Him  as  "King  of  Peace."  And  David 
made  a  covenant  with  them  in  Hebron  as  the  Lord  Jesus  will 
enter  into  covenant  relation  with  the  nation  in  the  day  of 
His  Eeturn. 

Then  the  duration  of  David 's  reign  is  given.  Seven  years 
and  six  months  he  reigned  over  Judah  and  over  all  Israel 
and  Judah  33  years.  The  record  here  does  not  speak  of 
the  great  feast  which  was  made  at  Hebron,  We  find  this 
also  mentioned  in  1  Chronicles  xii:39-40.  It  is  typical  of 
the  time  of  joj^  and  rejoicing  in  Israel  and  throughout  the 
world,  when  the  true  King  has  come.  Then  the  great  feast 
of  which  Isaiah  speaks  will  take  place.     (Is.  xxv:6-10.) 


2.    David's  Conquest  of  Zion  and  Victory  over  the 

Philistines. 

CHAPTER  V:6.25 

1.  David's  Conquest  of  Zion.     6-10. 

2.  Hiram  King  of  Tyre.     11-12. 

3.  David's  additional  concubines  and  wives.     13-16. 

4.  The  Victory  over  the  Pliilistines.     17-25. 

Zion  is  closely  linked  with  David 's  anointing  as  King  over 
all  Israel.  Here  1  Chronicles  xi  must  be  read  for  a  more 
complete  account  of  what  took  place.  Jerusalem  is  now 
to  become  the  capital  of  the  great  kingdom.  The  oldest 
name  was  Salem ;  the  name  of  Jebus  was  given  to  it  by  the 
Jebusites  (Judges  xix :10) .  After  David's  conquest  the  an- 
cient name  was  restored  and  it  became  knov/n  as  Jerusalem 


200  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

(''habitation  of  peace")-  The  town  had  previously  been 
taken  (Judges  i:8)  but  the  stronghold  of  the  upper  city, 
Mount  Zion,  remained  in  the  hands  of  the  Jebusites.  David 
took  the  stronghold.  Jebusite  means  ''the  one  who  treads 
down."  It  reminds  us  of  the  words  of  our  Lord,  "Jerusa- 
lem shall  be  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles  until  the  times 
of  the  Gentiles  are  fulfilled."  (Lul^e  xxi:24.)  Jerusalem 
and  Zion  are  still  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles.  The  day 
is  coming  when  the  King  will  end  all  this.  Jerusalem  is  yet 
to  be  "  the  city  of  the  great  King. "  (Ps.  xlviii.)  Here  we 
have  once  more  a  prophetic  foreshadowing  of  what  will  take 
place,  only  on  a  larger  scale,  when  He,  who  is  greater  than 
David,  begins  His  long  promised  reign  in  the  midst  of  His 
people.  After  this  we  shall  find  much  more  about  Zion, 
especially  in  the  prophets  and  in  the  psalms.  It  is  the  place 
Jehovah  has  chosen.  (Ps.  cxxxii:13-14.)  To  this  place, 
where  his  throne  was,  David  also  brought  the  ark.  When 
our  Lord  establishes  His  kingdom,  Zion  will  be  the  glorious 
and  the  beautiful  place.  "This  is  my  rest  forever;  here 
will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired  it. "  (Ps.  oxxxii  :14.)  Then 
He  will  bless  out  of  Zion  (Ps.  cxxviii:5)  ;  and  out  of  Zion 
shall  go  forth  the  law  (Is.  ii  :3) .  He  will  be  enthroned  upon 
the  holy  hill  of  Zion  (Ps.  ii:6)  ;  the  rod  of  His  strength 
Cometh  out  of  Zion  (Ps.  cx:2)  ;  Zion  will  be  the  joy  of  the 
whole  earth.     (Ps.  xlviii  :2.) 

Then  Hiram  the  King  of  Tyre  is  mentioned.  He  sent 
messengers  to  David,  as  well  as  cedar  trees ;  carpenters  and 
masons,  and  they  built  David  a  house.  It  must  be  under- 
stood that  we  have  in  this  and  the  events  which  follow  not 
a  strict  chronology.  The  children  mentioned  were  born  at 
a  later  period.  All  is  put  in  here  to  show  how  David  grew 
great  and  that  the  Lord  was  with  him.  Hiram,  the  Gentile 
King,  and  the  messengers  he  sent,  are  typical  of  that  day, 
when  our  Lord  reigns  in  Zion  and  "the  Kings  af  Tarshish 
and  of  the  isles  shall  bring  presents" — when  all  nations 
shall  serve  Him.     (Ps.  lxxii:10-ll.) 

The  Hebrew  names  of  the  eleven  sons  of  David  are  of  deep 
significance.    It  seems  the  story  of  the  redemption  which  is 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  201 

in  Him,  whom  David  foreshadows,  is  made  known  in  these 
names.  Shammuah  (heard)  ;  Shobab  (returning)  ;  Nathan 
(he  has  given)  ;  Solomon  (peace)  ;  Ibhar  (the  Lord 
chooses)  ;  Elishua  (my  God  is  salvation)  ;  Nepheg  (bud- 
ding) ;  Japhia  (glorious) ;  Elishama  (God  heareth)  ;  Eliada 
(whom  God  knoweth)  ;  Eliphalet  (my  God  is  escape) .  This 
is  a  most  blessed  revelation  contained  in  those  names;  and 
some  Christians  can  say  there  is  no  meaning  in  names! 
Read  them  in  their  meaning  and  ponder  over  each  as  telling 
forth  the  very  Gospel  story  from  start  to  finish. 

Twice  David  enquired  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  Philis- 
tines. Once  he  is  told  to  go  up  and  the  Lord  gave  him  the 
victory  and  he  burned  the  images  of  the  Philistines.  It  is 
another  picture  of  how  the  coming  King  will  make  an  end  of 
idolatry.  Again  he  asked  the  Lord  and  was  told  not  to  go 
up.  Then  the  Lord  smote  the  Philistines  Himself.  In  all 
David  was  obedient. 

3.    The  Ark  Brought  to  Zion. 

CHAPTER  VI 

1.  The  Ark  fetched  by  David.     1-5. 

2.  Uzzah;  his  error  and  death.     6-9. 

3.  The  Ark  in  the  house  of  Obed-edom.     10-11. 

4.  The  Ark  brought  into  David'a  City.     12-19. 

5.  Michal's  mockery  of  David.     20-23. 

It  is  of  importance  to  read  1  Chronicles  xiii  for  a  better 
understanding  of  how  the  ark  was  bi-ought  from  Kirjath- 
jearim  to  David's  city.  The  book  of  Chronicles  contains 
these  larger  records  because  in  that  book  these  events  are 
described  in  their  theocratic  character,  while  in  Samuel 
the  outward  aspect  of  David 's  kingdom  is  followed.  David 
issued  the  call  that  the  people  with  the  priests  and  the 
Levites  should  gather  to  bring  again  the  ark  of  God.  (1 
Chro.  xiii:2-3.)  However  we  do  not  read  anything  more 
about  the  Levites,  who  alone  were  commissioned  to  carry  the 
ark.  It  is  evident  that  David  neglected  to  follow  the  divine 
instructions  given  in  the  law  concerning  the  handling  of  the 


202  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

ark.  (See  Numbers  iv.)  This  neglect  may  be  traced  to  the 
fact  that  David  did  not  inquire  of  the  Lord.  The  way 
they  transported  the  ark  was  the  way  of  the  Philistines. 
(1  Sam.  vi:7.)  When  Uzzah  put  forth  his  hand  to  steady 
the  ark,  he  was  smitten  for  his  error  and  died.  God  had 
spoken  to  His  people  and  taught  them  the  lesson  that  the 
ways  of  the  Philistines  and  disobedience  to  His  Word  in 
holy  things  demands  His  judgment.  How  many  in  the 
past  and  more  so  to-day  act  like  Uzzah  when  in  service  for 
God  they  employ  the  methods  of  the  world  and  disregard 
entirely  His  Word.  Godly  fear  and  faithful  submission  to 
the  Word  of  God  are  essentials  in  true  service  for  God. 
Service  without  these  is  often  a  snare  and  results  in  dis- 
honour. 

Then  the  progress  of  the  ark  was  arrested,  because  David 
filled  with  fear  would  not  remove  it  to  his  city.  The  ark 
found  a  resting  place  for  three  months  in  the  house  of  Obed- 
edom  ("servant  of  Edom")  ;  he  was  a  Levite  and  there- 
fore authorized  to  care  for  the  ark.  (1  Chron.  xxvi:l-5.) 
Blessing  rested  upon  his  house.  The  judgment  of  Uzzah 
and  the  blessing  of  Obed-edom  had  a  great  effect  upon 
David.  ''So  David  went  and  brought  up  the  ark  of  God 
from  the  house  of  Obed-edom  into  the  city  of  David  with 
gladness."  This  is  all  we  find  in  our  chapter.  But  how 
did  he  bring  the  ark  up  ?  1  Chronicles  xv  gives  the  answer. 
' '  Then  David  said,  none  ought  to  carry  the  ark  of  God  but 
the  Levites ;  for  them  hath  the  Lord  chosen  to  carry  the  ark 
of  God,  and  to  minister  unto  Him  for  ever."  The  sons  of 
Kohath,  Merari,  Gershom,  etc.,  are  given  there.  All  is  now 
done  in  accordance  with  the  Word  of  God  and  blessing  fol- 
lows. And  David  filled  with  divine  joy  danoed,  girded 
with  a  linen  ephod,  before  the  Lord.  After  the  ark  had 
been  set  in  its  proper  place  in  the  tabernacle  which  David 
had  pitched  and  the  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings  had 
been  brought,  he  blessed  the  people  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  In  his  dancing  the  King  had  taken  a  place  amidst 
the  people.  And  Michal,  who  is  called  here  not  the  wife 
of  the  King,  but  "the  daughter  of  Saul,"  despised  David. 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  203 

She  looked  upon  David's  holy  joy  as  an  indecent  humilia- 
tion, while  the  King  declared  he  would  even  be  more  vile 
than  thus  and  base  in  his  own  sight.  "What  a  contrast  with 
the  pride  of  Saul  which  is  now  manifested  in  his  daughter 
Miehal.  And  what  happened  when  the  ark  had  been  put 
into  the  tabernacle?  1  Chronicles  xvi:4-36  tells  us  how 
David  appointed  Levites  to  minister  and  then  he  delivered 
into  the  hands  of  Asaph  and  his  brethren  a  great  Psalm 
of  Praise.  And  that  sublime  utterance  looks  forward  to  a 
far  more  glorious  day,  when  the  Lord  dwells  in  Zion  in  the 
midst  of  an  obedient  people.  Then  the  heavens  will  be 
glad  and  the  earth  rejoice  and  among  all  the  nations  it 
will  be  said  "Jehovah  reigneth";  and  even  nature  will 
sing  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.     (1  Ch.  xvi:31-36.) 

4.    The  Lord's  Promise  to  David  and  the  Covenant. 

CHAPTER  VII 

1.  David's  Desire.     1-3. 

2.  Nathan  receives  the  Message  for  David.     4-17. 

3.  David  in  the  Presence  of  Jehovah.     18-29. 

We  reach  now  a  climax.  The  Lord  speaks  and  reveals 
His  great  purposes  He  had  in  His  eternal  councils  for 
David,  the  King  after  His  own  heart.  We  behold  the  King 
in  peace  sitting  in  his  own  house ;  he  had  rest  from  all  his 
enemies.  In  pious  meditation  the  heart  of  the  King  had 
but  one  great  thought,  one  great  ambition.  The  Prophet 
Nathan  is  in  his  presence  and  to  him  he  speaks.  ' '  See  now, 
I  dwell  in  an  house  of  cedar,  but  the  ark  of  God  dwelleth 
within  curtains. ' '  And  Nathan  told  him  to  do  all  that  was 
in  his  heart.  But  he  had  spoken  without  divine  authority. 
God  knew  all  David  planned  and  what  was  in  his  heart. 
While  His  prophet  encouraged  David  to  carry  out  his 
wishes,  God  meant  otherwise. 

That  night  Nathan  received  an  important  message.  The 
Lord  told  Nathan  that  David  thought  of  building  Him  a 
house,  but  that  the  Lord  would  build  David  a  house.  Then 
He  promises  him  a  son.     "He  shall  build  an  house  for  my 


204  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

name,  and  I  will  establish  the  throne  of  his  kingdom  for 
ever."  Solomon  is  first  in  view,  but  he  is  only  a  type  of 
Him,  who  said  while  on  earth  "a  greater  than  Solomon 
is  here. ' '  In  Christ  alone  this  great  covenant-promise  is  to 
be  fulfilled.  Chastening  for  his  offspring  is  announced,  but 
a  disannullment  of  the  covenant  is  impossible,  for  God's 
gifts  and  calling  are  without  repentance.  "But  my  mercy 
shall  not  depart  away  from  him,  as  I  took  it  from  Saul, 
whom  I  put  away  before  thee.  And  thine  house  and  thy 
kingdom  shall  be  established  forever  before  thee,  thy  throne 
shall  be  established  forever."  More  than  that,  this  great 
covenant  was  confirmed  by  the  oath  of  Jehovah.  "Once  I 
have  sworn  by  my  holiness  that  I  will  not  lie  unto  David. 
His  seed  shall  endure  forever,  and  his  throne  as  the  sun 
before  me. "  (Ps.  Ixxxix  :35-36.)  And  when  He  was  about 
to  come,  the  Son  of  David  according  to  the  flesh,  but  also 
David's  Lord,  He  who  spoke  these  words  to  Nathan,  it  was 
divinely  announced  ' '  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the 
throne  of  His  father  David.  And  He  shall  reign  forever 
and  of  His  Kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  (Luke  1:32- 
33.)  That  throne  and  that  kingdom  He  has  not  yet  re- 
ceived. He  fills  the  Father's  throne  in  the  highest  heaven, 
but  all  heaven  and  earth  waits  for  the  appointed  time 
when  He  will  come  again  to  claim  His  crown-rights  and 
receive  the  world-wide  kingdom,  which  David  in  inspired 
songs  of  praise  so  often  beheld.  (Ps.  Ixxii.)  "And  this 
prophecy  refers  neither  only  to  Solomon  nor  only  to  Christ ; 
nor  has  it  a  twofold  application,  but  it  is  a  covenant- 
promise  which,  extending  along  the  whole  line,  culminates 
in  the  Son  of  David,  and  in  all  its  fulness  applies  only  to 
Him.  These  three  things  did  God  join  in  it,  of  which  one 
necessarily  implies  the  other,  alike  in  the  promise  and  in 
the  fulfilment:  a  unique  relationship,  a  unique  kingdom, 
and  a  unique  fellowship  and  service  resulting  from  both. 
The  unique  relationship  was  that  of  Father  and  Son,  which 
in  all  its  fulness  only  came  true  in  Christ  (Heb.  i:5).  The 
unique  kingdom  was  that  of  the  Christ,  which  would  have 
no  end    (Luke  i:32,  33;  John  iii:35).    And  the  unique 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  205 

sequence  of  it  was  that  brought  about  through  the  temple 
of  His  body  (John  ii;19),  which  will  appear  in  its  full 
proportions  when  the  New  Jerusalem  comes  down  out  of 
heaven  (Rev.  xxi:l-3). 

' '  Such  was  the  glorious  hope  opening  up  wider  and  wider, 
till  at  its  termination  David  could  see  'afar  off'  the  dawn 
of  the  bright  morning  of  eternal  glory ;  such  was  the  destiny 
and  the  mission  which,  in  His  infinite  goodness,  God  as- 
signed to  His  chosen  servant.  Much  there  was  still  in  him 
that  was  weak,  faltering,  and  even  sinful;  nor  was  he, 
whose  was  the  inheritance  of  such  promises,  even  to  build 
an  earthly  temple.  Many  were  his  failings  and  sins,  and 
those  of  his  successors ;  and  heavy  rods  and  sore  stripes  were 
to  fall  upon  them.  But  that  promise  never  failed."* 
And  to  this  we  add,  nor  will  the  promise  ever  fail  in  the 
future.  Even  now  all  is  preparing  for  Him  who  alone 
is  the  Hope  of  the  world.  *'Thy  Kingdom  come"  is  still 
the  prayer,  nor  will  it  ever  come  till  the  King's  corona- 
tion day  arrives.  And  Nathan  delivered  faithfully  the 
great  covenant  message.  David's  response  is  beautiful, 
yea  it  measures  up  to  the  fullness  of  Grace  the  gracious 
Lord  had  bestowed  upon  him.  He  does  not  seek  the  fel- 
lowship of  Nathan  to  talk  over  this  unspeakably  wonder- 
ful promise.  He  sat  before  the  Lord.  All  the  thoughts  in 
him,  planning  to  work  and  to  build  the  Lord  a  house,  were 
forever  hushed.  He  is  in  His  presence  as  a  worshipper, 
pouring  out  his  grateful  heart.  Jehovah's  Grace  has 
touched  the  innermost  cords  of  his  soul;  they  give  forth 
their  sweet  vibrations,  which  ascend  in  a  holy  melody  to 
the  courts  above.  He  is  humbled,  bowed  in  the  dust. 
Who  am  I  Lord  God  ?  and  what  is  my  house  that  thou  hast 
brought  me  hitherto? — He  believes  all  he  has  heard;  he 
trusts  in  every  word.  His  prayer  is  ''do  as  thou  hast 
said."  What  an  hour  it  was  when  the  King  with  the 
message  of  Grace  and  Mercy  was  in  the  presence  of  the 
Lord!    May  we  who  are  the  recipients  of  even  greater 

*  Edersheim  in  Bible  History 


206  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

grace  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  respond  to  that  grace  as 
David  did. 


5.     The  Extension  of  His  King'dom. 

CHAPTER  VIII 

1.  The  Philistines  and  Moab  smitten.     1-2. 

2.  Hadadezer  overthrown.     3-8. 

3.  Further  conquests  and  triumphs.     9-14. 

4.  David's  reign  and  his  associates.     15-18. 

Great  conquests  and  victories  follow.  David  arose  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  to  go  forth  to  conquer.  With 
such  a  message  he  had  heard,  assuring  him  of  the  Lord's 
presence  and  power,  of  the  success  of  his  kingdom,  he  began 
to  extend  his  kingdom  over  the  different  nations  which  siir- 
rounded  the  land.  The  Lord  was  with  him  and  preserved 
him  whithersoever  he  went.  The  history  of  these  wars  for 
the  enlargement  of  the  Kingdom  of  David  we  shall  have 
occasion  to  follow  a  little  closer  in  our  annotations  of  the 
first  book  of  Chronicles,  The  extension  of  the  Kingdom  of 
our  Lord  when  He  comes  and  begins  His  Kingly  work 
among  the  nations,  to  rule  them  with  a  rod  of  iron,  is  fore- 
shadowed in  these  events. 

When  we  read  in  verse  15  of  David's  reign  executing 
judgment  and  justice  we  have  another  faint  picture  of 
the  rule  of  the  coming  King.  The  leading  officers  of  the 
Kingdom  are  mentioned.  Joab  was  the  general  over  his 
army;  Jehosaphat  the  recorder.  Zadok  and  Ahimelech 
were  the  priests;  Seraiah  the  scribe.  Benaiah  had  charge 
of  the  Cherethit€S  and  Pelethites;  these  two  names  mean 
"executioners  and  runners,"  while  David's  sons  were  also 
ruling  with  him.  Order  prevailed  in  all  things.  When 
that  true  Kingdom  will  be  established  on  earth  there  will 
also  be  those  who  rule  under  the  King,  who  have  charge 
over  five  or  ten  cities,  (Luke  xix:17-18.)  David's  sons 
who  ruled  with  him  may  represent  typically  believers  who 
are  sons  of  God  in  Christ  and  f ellowheirs  with  Him. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  207 


6.    David  and  Mephibosheth. 

CHAPTER  IX 

1.  Mephibosheth  brought  to  David.     1-6. 

2.  Grace  and  Mercy  shown  to  him.     7-13. 

The  story  of  Mephibosheth  is  the  first  thing  mentioned 
after  the  government  of  David  had  been  fully  established. 
Typically  it  reveals  the  Gospel  in  a  beautiful  way,  and  dis- 
pensationally  the  kindness  of  God  which  will  be  manifesteli 
in  the  coming  kingdom.  Mephibosheth  is  a  type  of  the 
sinner  and  the  condition  in  which  he  is  in.  He  was  help- 
less, being  lame  of  both  feet.  How  he  became  lame  is 
found  in  chapter  iv  :4.  He  fell  and  became  lame,  a  helpless 
cripple.  It  reminds  us  of  the  fall  of  man  and  the  helpless 
condition  into  which  sin  has  put  man.  Therefore  he  could 
not  come  to  David.  He  had  to  be  carried  into  the  King's 
presence.  The  sinner  cannot  come  of  himself  to  the 
Saviour;  He  has  to  seek  him  out.  And  David  wanted  to. 
show  him  "the  kindness  of  God"  for  Jonathan's  sake. 
Thus  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward 
man  hath  appeared.  (Titus  iii:4.)  God  for  Christ's  sake 
shows  His  great  kindness  to  sinful  man.  Mephibosheth 
means  "shame  out  of  the  mouth";  when  he  hears  from 
David's  lips  what  kindness  was  prepared  for  him  he  con- 
fessed with  his  mouth  his  own  shame  and  nothingness. 
"What  is  thy  servant  that  thou  shouldst  look  upon  such 
a  dead  dog  as  I  am?"  And  what  words  of  Grace  came 
from  David's  lips!  Surely  the  kindness  of  God  is  here 
fully  made  known.  He  is  lifted  from  his  low  place  of 
shame  to  take  a  place  at  the  King's  table  "as  one  of  the 
King's  sons."  It  is  the  kindness  of  God  as  made  known 
in  the  Gospel  of  His  Son  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  takes 
us  out  of  our  shame  and  makes  us  one  of  His  sons.  "So 
Mephibosheth  dwelt  in  Jerusalem ;  for  he  did  eat  continually 
at  the  King's  table;  and  was  lame  on  both  feet."  When 
the  Kingdom  has  come  the  King  will  show  such  grace  and 


208  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

kindness  to  the  poor  and  needy.     (Isaiah  xi:l-5;  Ps.  Ixxii; 

1-4.) 


7.    The  War  with  Ammon  and  the  Syrians. 

CHAPTER  X 

1.  David  and  Hanun.     1-5. 

2.  Ammon  and  the  Syrians  smitten.     6-10. 

The  chapter  with  the  war  against  Ammon  and  the  Syrians 
is  the  prelude  to  the  great  sin  of  David.  While  Joab  is 
carrying  on  the  siege  of  Rabbah,  the  last  city  of  the  Am- 
monites, David,  no  doubt  flushed  with  the  great  victory 
and  prosperity,  remained  in  his  house  and  committed  his 
awful  sin.  The  war  with  Ammon  originated  through  the 
insults  which  Hanun  the  King  of  Ammon  had  heaped  upon 
David 's  ambassadors,  David  wanted  to  show  kindness  also 
to  Hanun  as  his  father  Nahash  had  shown  kindness  to 
David.  We  have  no  record  of  this  kindness.  In  this  en- 
deavour David  did  certainly  not  follow  the  right  course,  for 
Ammon  was  an  enemy,  and  while  Nahash  showed  some 
kindness  to  David  during  his  exile,  he  also  had  reproached 
Israel  and  was  ready  to  thrust  out  the  right  eyes  of  the 
men  of  Jabesh-gilead.  (1  Sam.  xi:l-3.)  Hanun 's  deed  in 
treating  David's  peaceful  messengers  in  so  shameful  a 
way  showed  that  he  was  a  wicked  man  like  his  father  and 
not  worthy  of  David's  kindness.  Had  he  inquired  of  the 
Lord  the  messengers  would  have  been  spared  these  indigni- 
ties. Ammon  then  formed  an  alliance  with  the  Syrians, 
but  Joab  smote  them.  The  greatest  victory  is  recorded  in 
verses  15-19.  The  King  appeared  himself  to  lead  his  hosts 
against  the  mighty  foe  and  their  overthrow  followed.  It 
foreshadows  the  day  of  final  victory  over  the  rebellious 
nations,  led  by  the  beast  (Rev.  xix:19-20)  when  the  true 
King  comes  to  fight  against  those  nations. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  209 


III.     David's  Sin,  Chastisement  and  Restoration 

Chapter  xi-xx 
1.     David's  Great  Sin. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1.  David's  great  Sin.     1-5. 

2.  David  Sends  for  Uriah.     6-13. 

3.  The  murder  of  Uriah.     14-25. 

4.  David   makes   Bath-sheba   his   wife.     26-27. 

We  see  the  King  once  more  in  his  house.  He  sent  Joab, 
his  servants  and  all  Israel  to  battle  again  against  Ammon. 
Was  it  not  his  business  as  King  to  go  forth  with  Israel  as 
he  had  done  before?  Instead  he  remains  in  ease  and  com- 
fort at  home.  Evidently  he  rested  all  day  on  his  couch, 
during  the  heat  of  the  day,  and  when  the  cool  evening  came 
he  walked  upon  the  roof  of  his  house.  He  had  been  in  self- 
indulgence  and  was  self-satisfied  with  his  great  achieve- 
ments. The  spirit  which  characterized  later  Nebuchad- 
nezzar when  he  walked  in  his  palace  (Dan.  iv:20)  puffed 
up  with  pride,  which  preceded  his  great  humiliation,  was 
'no  doubt  David's  spirit  also.  Had  he  remained  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  humble  and  depending  on  Him,  as 
we  saw  him  after  the  Lord  had  spoken  through  Nathan 
(vii:18)  this  awful  sin  would  not  have  happened.  How 
often  it  has  been  repeated  in  the  experiences  of  God's  peo- 
ple! Nor  did  this  great  sin  like  a  mighty  giant  ensnare 
him  suddenly.  The  way  for  it  had  been  prepared.  He 
had  given  way  to  the  flesh  before  in  taking  wives  and 
concubines.  We  read  nothing  of  self-restraint  or  self-judg- 
ment in  his  life  up  to  his  fall.  And  had  he  not  disobeyed 
the  law  in  multiplying  wives  unto  himself?     It  is  written: 


210  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

' '  Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself,  that  his  heart 
tvirn  not  away."  (Deut.  xvii:17.)  Had  he  really  walked 
constantly  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  he  would  have  heeded 
the  warning  of  His  law.  What  warning  there  is  for  all  be- 
lievers !  The  flesh  is  the  same  to-day  as  it  ever  was ;  it  does 
not  change.  We  are  told  "to  make  no  provision  for  the 
flesh."  (Rom.  xiii:14.)  Paraphrased  this  means,  do  not 
nourish  the  flesh  by  the  indulgence  of  it ;  flee  fleshly,  youth- 
ful lusts.  And  now  the  culmination  is  reached.  "I  made 
a  covenant  with  mine  eyes;  How  then  should  I  look  upon 
a  maid;"  thus  spake  Job.  (Job  xxxi:l.)  David  knew  no 
such  covenant.  He  looks  where  he  should  not  have  looked 
and  sin  soon  follows.  It  is  a  solemn  illustration  of  James 
i:14-15.  "But  every  man  is  tempted,  when  he  is  drawn 
away  of  his  own  lust  and  enticed.  Then  when  lust  hath 
conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin,  and  sin  when  it  is  finished, 
bringeth  forth  death. ' '  The  King  of  all  Israel  had  become 
another  Achan.  "I  saw — I  coveted — I  took."  (Josh,  vii: 
21.)*  And  sin  follows  sin.  The  offspring  of  sin  is  sin. 
What  cunningness  and  deception  followed.  But  honest 
Uriah  frustrates  his  wicked  plan.  Did  not  David's  eon- 
science  smart  under  it?  No  doubt  it  was  deadened.  Then 
he  becomes  actually  the  murderer  of  Uriah  the  Hittite. 
When  the  news  of  the  death  of  Uriah  is  announced  to 
David,  hypocrisy  is  crowned  in  the  words  of  the  King,  "Let 
not  this  thing  displease  thee,  for  the  sword  devoureth  one 
as  another."  And  here  we  read  still  the  dreadful  record, 
the  sin  of  David  and  how  God  dealt  with  it. 

"David,  too,  has  faced  that  ever  since,  and  faces  it  still: 
he  will  face  it  ever.  It  is  put  away,  that  sin,  yet  it  re- 
mains, and  will  remain,  type  of  all  sins  of  His  people,  and 
of  God 's  dealing  with  them :  out  of  the  holy  light  of  eternity 

*  It  need  scarcely  be  pointed  out,  how  this  truthful  account  of  the 
sins  of  Biblical  heroes  evinces  the  authenticity  and  credibility  of  the 
Scriptural  narratives.  Far  different  are  the  legendary  accounts 
which  seek  to  palliate  the  sins  of  Biblical  personages,  or  even  to 
deny  their  guilt.  Tims  the  Talmud  denies  the  adultery  of  David  on 
the  ground  that  every  warrior  had,  before  going  to  the  field,  to  give 
his  mfe  a  divorce,  so  that  Bathsheba  was  free.  We  should,  however, 
add,  that  this  view  was  controverted. — Edersheina. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  211 

they  will  never  pass, — out  of  our  memories  never!  Here 
is  man,  here  is  his  condemnation, — redeemed,  saved,  justi- 
fied man!  Thyself,  reader;  myself.  Cease  ye  from  man 
forever ! — from  ourselves,  sinner  or  saint !  Turn  we  to 
God  forever,  and  let  us  ascribe  greatness  and  salvation  to 
Him  alone. 

' '  This  is  what  an  unexercised  conscience  can  bring  a  David 
to.  This  is  what  lack  of  self-judgment,  with  temptatioii 
and  opportunity,  may  make  a  saint!  Shall  we  not  cry 
afresh,  with  David  himself,  *  Search  me,  0  God,  and  Imow 
my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts ;  and  see  if  there 
be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  ever- 
lasting'?"* 

And  seven  days  later  the  equally  guilty  woman  becomes 
David's  wife.  And  she  became  the  mother  of  Solomon. 
We  find  her  mentioned  in  the  Genealogy  of  Matthew  I. 
Surely  Grace  and  Mercy  covered  their  sin.  Yet  what  a 
trail  of  sorrow,  miseiy  and  unrest  follows !  We  shall 
find  in  chapters  which  follow  the  awful  results.  Incest, 
fratricide,  rebellion,  civil  war  and  the  King  a  fugitive! 
What  a  man  soweth  that  he  will  also  reap. 

2.    The  Message  of  God  and  David's  Confession.    The 
Beginning  of  the  Chastisement. 

CHAPTER  XII 

1.  The  Lord's  Message  through  Nathan.     1-4. 

2.  David's  Anger.     5-6. 

3.  Thou  art  the  man!      7-9. 

4.  The  Ohastiseraent.     10-12. 

5.  David's  Confession.     13. 

6.  The  death  of  the  child  announced.     14. 

7.  The  death  of  the  child  and  David's  grief.     15-2S. 

8.  Solomon  born.     24-25. 

9.  Rabbah  taken.     26-31. 

The  Lord  was  displeased  with  what  David  had  done. 
Nathan  comes  with  his  message  in  the  form  of  a  parable. 
His  outburst  of  anger  and  condemnation  of  the  injustice 

*  Numerical  Bible. 


212  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

done  to  the  poor  man  shows  that  he  did  not  think  of  his  own 
ease.  Yet  sorrow  and  unrest  were  his  portion;  he  tried  to 
cover  up  his  sin  and  as  a  result  w-as  in  the  deepest  agony. 
Psahns  like  the  sixth,  the  thirty-eighth,  the  thirty-second 
and  others  tell  us  of  the  deep  soul  exercise  through  which 
he  passed.  Then  Nathan  pointed  at  him  with  his  soul 
piercing,  "Thou  art  the  man!"  First  the  Prophet  tells 
him  all  the  Lord  had  done  for  him;  he  reminds  him  of  all 
God's  kindness.  What  had  David  done?  He  had  des- 
pised the  Lord 's  commandment ;  had  killed  Uriah  the  Hittite 
with  the  sword  and  taken  his  wife.  Then  the  chastisement 
is  announced.  Hje  had  slain  Uriah  with  the  sword  of  the 
children  of  Ammon — the  sword  should  now  never  depart 
from  his  house.  He  had  taken  Uriah 's  wife — others  should 
take  his  wives.  He  had  done  it  secretly — ^but,  said  Jehovah, 
I  will  do  this  thing  before  all  Israel,  and  before  the  sun. 
We  shall  find  the  sentence  executed  in  chapter  xiii:28-39; 
xvi:21-22;  xviii:14. 

Then  the  King's  heart  broke.  "I  have  sinned  against 
the  Lord."  It  was  at  that  time  that,  his  soul  filled  with 
deepest  sorrow,  and  yet  illumined  with  the  light  from  abbve, 
he  uttered  that  wonderful  penitential  Psalm,  the  fifty-first. 
"Against  Thee,  Thee  only,  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this 
evil  in  Thy  sight,  that  Thou  mightest  be  justified  when  Thou 
speakest,  and  be  clear  when  Thou  judgest."  All  the  inward 
corruption  now  is  revealed  to  him,  as  many  a  saint  after 
him  has  found  out  by  bitter  experience  that  in  our  flesh 
there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  "Behold  I  was  shapen  in 
iniquity  and  in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  (Ps. 
li:6.)  And  when  he  prayed  "ta<ke  not  Thy  Holy  Spirit 
from  me" — he  must  have  had  a  vision  of  Saul,  the  mad 
King,  when  the  Spirit  had  left  him  and  an  evil  one  pos- 
sessed his  heart.  But  David  knew  God  and  God  knew 
David.  He  is  in  the  light  and  uncovers  all  in  His  presence. 
Then  David  announced  the  divine  mercy,  "the  Lord  hath 
also  taken  away  thy  sin."  And  Nathan  added  "because 
by  this  deed  thou  hast  given  great  occasion  to  the  enemies 
of  tke  Lord  to  blaspheioe,  the  child  also  that  is  born  unto 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  213 

thee  shall  surely  die."  That  was  the  bitterness  of  it.  Up 
to  the  present  time  infidels  and  rejectors  of  the  Word  of 
God  point  to  David's  sin  and  blaspheme,  though  the  very 
things  they  sneer  at  are  the  things  which  they  practice. 
The  child  died  and  David's  grief  Avas  great.  All  his  fast- 
ing and  night  long  prayer  did  not  change  the  divine  sen- 
tence. But  he  also  knew  the  comfort  of  hope  and  expresses 
it  beautifully.  "I  shall  go  to  him,  but  he  shall  not  return 
unto  me." 

And  has  it  no  meaning  that  Solomon's  birth  is  recorded 
immediately  after  these  sad  and  solemn  incidents?  Solo- 
mon means  "Peaceful."  Peace  had  come  to  his  heart; 
the  divine  favour  was  restored  unto  him,  yet  the  chastise- 
ment grievous  and  sore  would  follow  him  in  the  future. 
And  then  the  Lord  named  also  Solomon.  He  called  him 
"Jedediah."  This  means  "Beloved  of  Jehovah."  He  is 
the  blessed  type  of  God's  own  Son.  For  us  He  is  "Peace" 
— He  who  hath  made  peace  and  our  sin  is  covered  by  His 
precious  blood.  To  God  He  is  "the  Beloved."  The  record 
of  the  fall  of  Rabbah  closes  this  chapter.  What  is  recorded 
in  verse  31  was  cruel  and  barbarous.*  Ammon  did  horrible 
things  to  the  women  of  Israel.  (See  Amos  i  :13.)  A  fearful 
retribution  came  upon  them.  How  often  it  has  been  re- 
peated in  history,  even  down  to  the  20th  century  with  all 
its  boasted  civilization,  now  collapsed  in  the  greatest  and 
most  awful  war  the  world  has  ever  witnessed.  And  thus 
it  will  continue  to  the  end,  till  the  true  King  comes. 

3.    Further  Chastisement.    Amnon,  Tamar  aad  AbsaloBi. 

CHAFTEB.  XIM 

1.  Ammon's  wicked  deeire.     1-5. 

2.  The  Incest.     6-14. 

3.  His  hatred.     15-18. 

4.  Amnon  murdered.     19-36. 

5.  Absalom's  flight.     37-39. 

"Behold  1  will  raise  up  evil  against  thee  out  of  thine 


*  However,  there  is  a  doubt  about  the  translation.  It  has  been 
rendered  in  the  following  way:  "And  he  set  them  to  saws  and  iron 
picks  wad  iron  axes  amd  made  them  Mka-  at  the  brick  kiln." 


214  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

own  house."  This  was  Jehovah's  sentence  and  it  is  now 
carried  out.  The  evil  which  he  had  nourished  in  his  heart, 
the  passion  which  he  had  fed  now  breaks  out  in  his  own 
family.  His  oldest  sons  and  Tamar,  a  daughter  of  David, 
half  sister  to  Amnon,  are  the  chief  actors  in  the  first 
tragedy.  Amnon  means  ' '  faithful. ' '  Thus  he  should  have 
been,  but  he  is  the  very  opposite.  Brought  up  in  the  midst 
of  scenes  of  license,  as  it  must  have  been  in  David 's  harem, 
the  lust  of  the  flesh  gets  the  upper  hand  and  the  awful 
deed,  a  positive  transgression  of  the  law  (Lev.  xx:17)  is 
committed.  The  deed  had  been  precipitated  by  a  satanic 
adviser,  Jonadab,  a  subtle  man,  and  when  it  was  done 
violent  hate  gave  way  to  the  violent  passion  of  Amnon.  Un- 
happy Tamar,  outraged,  insulted  and  hated,  appears  with 
her  virgin-princess  gown  torn,  ashes  on  her  head,  her  hand 
on  top  of  her  head  (the  oriental  way  of  expressing  a  heavy 
burden)  and  crying,  and  her  brother  Absalom  discovers  the 
reason  of  her  sorrow.  He  then  hated  his  brother  Amnon. 
David  heard  of  it  also  and  was  very  wroth,  but  he  made 
no  attempt  to  deal  with  his  son.  We  do  not  read  a  word 
that  he  even  rebuked  him.  ' '  The  gloss  of  the  Septuagint  is 
likely  to  be  correct,  that  David  left  unpunished  the  incest 
of  Amnon  with  Tamar,  although  committed  under  pecu- 
liarly aggravating  circumstances,  on  account  of  his  par- 
tiality to  him  as  being  his  first  born  son.  This  indulgence 
on  the  part  of  his  father  may  also  account  for  the  daring 
recklessness  which  marked  Anmon's  crime.  But  a  doting 
father,  smitten  "iwith  moral  weakness,  might  find  in  the 
remembrance  of  his  own  past  sin  an  excuse  for  delay,  if 
not  a  barrier  to  action;  for  it  is  difficult  to  wield  a  heavy 
sword  with  a  maimed  arm. ' '  * 

After  two  years  the  reckoning  day  comes.  Absalom 
("the  father  of  peace")  becomes  the  murderer  of  his 
brother.  It  was  an  awful  deed.  In  the  midst  of  merry- 
making, Amnon  filled  with  wine,  with  no  chance  to  repent, 
is  cruelly  slain.  The  sword  is  unsheathed  and  fell  upon 
David's  house.     The  harvest  is  on.     "What  a  man  sowetli 


History  of  Judab  a'»d  larod. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  216 

that  he  wiU  reap — murder  for  murder.  It  wai  an  awful 
blow  to  David,  for  Amnon,  his  beloved  first-born,  the  son 
Ahinoam,  was  dead.  Exaggerated  tidings  reach  the  court 
of  David.  "Absalom  hath  slain  all  the  King's  sons  and 
there  is  not  one  of  them  left."  And  wicked  Jonadab,  the 
instigator  of  Amnon 's  crime,  appears  again  and  acts  as 
comforter  of  the  King.  Jonadab  is  one  of  the  most  abomin- 
able characters  in  Bible  history.  We  do  not  read  of  him 
again.  Absalom  the  fratricide  fled  to  Talmai,  his  maternal 
grandfather.  He  remained  there  three  years ;  so  this  chap- 
ter covers  a  period  of  five  years.  Alas !  who  was  responsible 
for  it  all?  The  scenes  of  lust  and  murder,  outrage  and 
bloodshed,  revolt  and  rebellion,  sorrow  upon  sorrow,  grief 
upon  grief,  start  with  David 's  great  sin.  Pardoned  he  was, 
restored  in  every  sense  of  the  word,  yet  God  maintains  His 
holiness  and  chastised  His  servant. 


4.    David  and  Absalom. 

CHAPTER  XIV 

1.  Joab's  scheme.     1-3. 

2.  The  woman  of  Tekoah  before  the  King.     4-20. 

3.  Joab  brings  Absalom  to  Jerusalem.     21-24. 

4.  Absalom's  beauty.     25-27. 

5.  Absalom  sees  his  father.     28-33. 

In  all  these  records  of  those  sad  events  we  hear  not  a 
word  that  David  inquired  of  the  Lord.  Joab  now  appears 
upon  the  scene  again  and  that  for  evil,  though  he  did  not 
mean  to  do  evil  to  the  King.  He  concocts  a  scheme  by 
which  Absalom  is  to  be  brought  back  into  the  favor  of  the 
King,  This  he  must  have  tried  many  times  before,  for 
verses  19  and  22  indicate  this.  It  seems  almost  as  if  Joab 
imitated  Nathan,  when  he  came  with  his  message  to  David. 
But  God  had  not  sent  him  and  David's  conscience  was  not 
touched.  The  wisdom  he  used  was  not  the  wisdom  from 
above,  but  the  wisdom  of  a  cunning  man.  The  whole  story 
was  deception  and  "the  wise  woman"  of  Tekoah  lent  her- 


216  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

Belf  as  a  willing  instrument.  And  David  finds  out  that  it  is 
all  a  plot  and,  blinded  by  a  mere  love  for  Absalom,  without 
thinking  of  the  claims  of  God  in  this  case,  he  becomes  a 
willing  victim  to  the  scheme  of  Joab.  And  so  Absalom  was 
brought  back.  The  King  commands,  "Let  him  turn  to  his 
own  house,  and  let  him  not  see  my  face."  It  was  an  evil 
hour  when  it  happened.  Absalom's  rebellion  and  the 
King's  exile  were  the  fruit  of  the  unscrupulous  plot  of 
Joab. 

Absalom's  physical  beauty  was  great  with  magnificent 
hair.*  He  was  thus  fitted  to  do  the  work  of  winning  the 
people  to  himself  and  became  the  leader  of  a  rebellion. 
The  deed  he  had  done  in  avenging  the  crime  against  his 
sister  was  most  likely  looked  upon  by  the  mass  of  the  people 
as  a  noble  and  heroic  deed.  That  behind  the  beautiful  ex- 
terior there  was  a  proud,  violent  and  evil  spirit  may  be  seen 
In  his  deed,  when  after  Joab's  refusal  to  come  to  him,  he 
set  the  barley  field  of  Joab  on  fire.  Then  a  reconciliation 
between  David  and  Absalom  followed:  ''Once  more  we 
notice  here  the  consequences  of  David's  fatal  weakness,  as 
manifested  in  his  irresolution  and  half -measures.  Morally 
paralysed,  so  to  speak,  in  consequence  of  his  own  guilt, 
his  position  sensibly  and  increasingly  weakened  in  popular 
estimation,  that  series  of  disasters,  which  had  formed  the 
burden  of  God's  predicted  judgments,  now  followed  in  the 
natural  sequence  of  events.  If  ever  before  his  return  from 
Geshur  Absalom  had  been  a  kind  of  popular  hero,  his 
presence  in  Jerusalem  for  two  years  in  semi-banishment 
must  have  increased   the   general   sympathy." 


*  The  statement  that  his  hair  weighed  200  shekels  is  undoubtedly 
the  error  of  a  scribe  who  copied  the  manuscript.  The  Hebrew  letters 
which  stand  for  20  and  for  200  are  similar.  It  should  no  doubt  be 
20  shekels. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  217 


6.    Absalom's  Conspiracy  and  David's  Flight. 

CHAPTER  XV 

1.  Absalom  steals  the  hearts  of  the  meu  of  Israel.     1-6. 

2.  His  Conspiracy.     7-12. 

3.  The  Flight  of  the  King.     13-37. 

The  beautiful  prince  gradually  prepared  for  the  great 
conspiracy  of  which  we  read  now  and  which  made  of  his  own 
father,  the  Lord's  anointed,  an  exile.  Chariots  and  horses 
with  fifty  men  to  run  before  him  won  no  doubt  the  admira- 
tion of  the  people.  His  evident  interest  in  their  welfare, 
kissing  those  who  sought  his  presence  and  advice,  endeared 
him  still  more  to  the  men  of  Israel.  To  this  must  be  added 
his  open  words,  which  must  have  quickly  circulated  among 
the  people,  *'0h,  that  I  were  made  judge  in  the  land,  that 
every  man  which  hath  any  suit  or  cause  might  come  unto 
me,  and  I  would  do  him  justice." 

This  continued  for  about  four  years.*  During  this  time 
he  stole  the  hearts  of  the  men  of  Israel.  All  is  now  ripe 
for  the  great  rebellion.  He  lies  to  his  father  about  an 
alleged  vow  he  had  made  at  Geshur.  The  unsuspecting 
King  said,  "Go  in  peace."  So  he  arose  and  went  to 
Hebron.  The  signal  is  given  at  which  all  the  tribes  of 
Israel  were  to  saj^,  ' '  Absalom  reigneth  in  Hebron. ' '  Then 
he  sent  for  David's  counsellor  Ahitophel.  He  was  away 
from  Jerusalem  at  Giloh,  a  short  distance  from  Hebron, 
which  would  seem  that  he  also  was  in  league  with  Absalom. 
Ahitophel  ("the  brother  of  folly")  was  the  grandfather 
of  Bath-sheba.  As  his  name  so  was  his  deed  in  joining  the 
revolution,  through  which  he  may  have  thought  of  avenging 
the  shame  which  had  been  put  upon  his  family  by  David's 
sin. 

When  David  hears  the  news  he  said  to  his  servants  who 

*  "Forty"  is  incorrect.  Ancient  versions  have  "four  years"  which 
we  take  is  the  correct  number.  Others  have  suggested  that  the  40 
years  should  be  reckoned  from  David's  anointing.  (1  Sam.  xvi:13. ) 
This,  however,  is  unlikely. 


218  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

were  with  him  in  Jerusalem,  "Arise  and  let  us  flee."  F»ar 
now  takes  hold  on  him.  He  feared  for  himself  and  for 
his  city.  Yet  he  passed  through  the  deepest  soul-exercise 
and  clung  to  the  Lord  in  all  the  chastisement  which  fol- 
lowed, stroke  after  stroke,  upon  him.  The  third  Psalm  gives 
the  culmination  of  this.  It  bears  the  inscription,  * '  A  Psalm 
of  David  when  he  fled  from  Absalom  his  son."  In  spite 
of  his  fears  he  trusted  the  Lord.  "But  Thou,  oh  Lord,  art 
a  shield  for  me ;  my  glory  and  the  lifter  up  of  mine  head. ' ' 
(Ps.  iii:3.)  It  is  claimed  that  Psalm  xli  also  refers  to  this 
period  of  his  life.  If  that  is  correct  then  David  was  sick 
at  the  time  of  Absalom's  rebellion.  Yerse  9  in  that  Psalm 
would  have  a  meaning  in  connection  with  Ahitophel,  the 
traitor.  John  xiii  :18  makes  it  clear  that  Judas  Iscariot  is 
predicted ;  but  Ahitophel  is  a  type  of  Judas,  like  him  he  was 
a  suicide.  Another  Psalm  which  was  probably  ^vritten 
during  the  rebellion  of  Absalom  and  which  speaks  of  Ahito- 
phel's  treachery  is  Psalm  Iv.  The  King  and  his  household 
left  the  city  and  all  the  people  after  him.  All  the  Chere- 
thites  and  Pelethites  ("executioners  and  runners")  and 
six  hundred  which  came  after  him  from  Gath  accompanied 
the  King.  And  not  all  was  bitterness.  Ittai  ("with  Jeho- 
vah") the  Gittite,  and  his  devotion  to  the  King,  must  have 
greatly  comforted  David 's  heart.  He  was  a  stranger  and  an 
exile,  who  had  come  but  yesterday  to  David.  He  told  him 
to  return  to  abide  with  the  King  (that  is  Absalom).  Beau- 
tiful is  his  answer,  which  strongly  reminds  us  of  the  blessed 
words  of  Ruth,  the  Moabitess.  (Ruth  i:16.)  What  noble 
purpose  he  expresses !  He  wants  to  be  with  the  King  in  life 
or  in  death.  Grace  has  linked  us  even  closer  with  our  Lord. 
Ittai  in  his  devotion  and  attachment  to  the  King  is  a 
blessed  type  of  those  who  are  true  to  the  Lord  in  the  days 
of  His  rejection. 

And  there  was  much  weeping  as  David  passed  over 
Kidron.  Our  Lord  passed  over  that  brook  also  to  enter  the 
garden  (John  xviii:l)  where  He  offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications  with  strong  crying  and  tears.  The  ark  had 
been  carried  along,  but  now  the  King  directed  Zadok  to 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  219 

carry  it  back  to  the  city.  ' '  If  I  shall  find  favour  in  the  eyes 
of  the  Lord,  He  will  bring  me  again,  and  show  me  both 
it  and  his  habitation. ' '  Beautiful  it  is  to  see  that  in  all  his 
great  soitow,  conscious  that  it  was  the  hand  of  the  Lord 
which  chastised  him,  in  all  his  affliction  he  does  not  forget 
the  Lord.  He  trusts  in  His  mercy.  Deep  submission 
breathe  in  these  words. 

What  a  sight  the  weeping  King,  barefooted,  his  head 
covered,  ascending  Olivet!  A  type  of  Him  who  also  as- 
cended Olivet  and  wept.  (Luke  xix:41.)  Then  Hushai 
("hasty")  met  David.  Alas!  for  the  evidence  of  unbelief 
in  the  King,  in  planning  to  have  Hushai  return  to  the  city 
and  feign  friendship  for  Absalom  so  as  to  defeat  the  counsel 
of  Ahitophel. 

6.    The  Sorrows  and  Testing-s  of  the  King. 

CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  Lying  Ziba.     1-4. 

2.  Shimei  curses  and  stones  David.     .5-14. 

3.  Absalom  enters  Jerusalem.     1,5-19. 

4.  Ahitophers  wicked  counsel.     20-23. 

Ziba  in  great  craftiness  meets  the  exiled  King  with  pro- 
visions and  acts  as  the  false  accuser  of  Mephibosheth.  And 
David  hastily  puts  all  that  belongs  to  Mephibosheth  into  his 
hands.  Strange  that  David  could  believe  in  the  falsehood 
of  Ziba.  How  could  one  who  was  a  helpless  cripple  aspire 
to  possess  a  kingdom?  Mephibosheth  had  been  deceived 
(xix  :25)  by  Ziba  and  David  readily  believed  the  lying  story. 

Shimei  ("my  fame")  appeared,  cursing  David,  stoning 
him  and  his  servants.  His  accusation  that  he  was  respon- 
sible for  "all  the  blood  of  the  house  of  Saul"  was  un- 
founded and  unjust.  He  was  not  responsible  for  the  death 
of  Saul  and  Jonathan,  and  equally  guiltless  of  the  death  of 
Abner  and  Ishbosheth.  And  yet  David  saw  something  else 
in  the  curses  of  Shimei  and  in  calling  him  a  bloody  man. 
The  blood  of  Uriah  which  he  had  shed  must  have  suddenly 


220  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

come  to  his  mind.  And  when  Abishai  offers  to  kill  Shimei, 
David  rebuked  him.  (See  Luke  ix:52-56.)  ''Let  him 
curse,  because  the  Lord  hath  said  to  him,  Curse  David" — 
' '  Let  him  alone,  and  let  him  curse ;  for  the  Lord  hath  bid- 
den him."  He  realizes  Shimei  is  but  an  instrument  in  the 
Lord's  hands ;  He  had  permitted  it  and  David  acknowledges 
thus  that  he  had  deserved  the  curses.  ' '  It  may  be  that  the 
Lord  will  look  on  mine  affliction,  and  that  the  Lord  will 
requite  me  good  for  his  cursing  this  day."  His  eyes  now 
look  to  the  Lord  whose  chastening  hand  rested  so  heavily 
upon  him. 

Absalom  is  now  in  Jerusalem  and  Hushai  succeeds  in  his 
commission  given  to  him  by  David.  He  deceives  Absalom. 
Whom  did  Hushai  mean,  when  he  said,  "Whom  the  Lord 
and  this  people,  and  all  the  men  of  Israel  choose,  his  will 
I  be,  and  with  him  will  I  be "  ?  They  can  only  be  applied 
to  David ;  most  likely  in  his  heart  he  meant  David.  But  it 
was  flattery  which  wicked  Absalom  gladly  accepted.  Absa- 
lom followed  tjie  vile  counsel  of  Ahitophel  and  committed 
the  unnatural  crime  to  show  to  all  Israel  that  the  breach 
between  him  and  his  father  David  was  beyond  remedy. 
God's  predicted  judgment  upon  David  had  come  literally 
true.  (See  chapter  xii:ll-12.)  The  world  will  yet  find 
out  that  God's  judgments,  though  long  delayed,  will  find 
ultimately  their  literal  fulfilment. 


7.    Absalom,  Ahitophel  and  HushaL 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1.  The  counsel  of  Ahitophel  and  Hushai.     1-14. 

2.  The  counsel  made  known  to  David.     15-22 

3.  Ahitophel  commits  suicide.     23. 

4.  Absalom  pitched  in  Gilead.     24-26. 

5.  The  kindness  of  Shobi,  Machir  and  Barzillai.     27-29. 

Ahitophel 's  counsel  was  aimed  at  the  person  of  David 
only.  He  wanted  to  have  him  killed  and  thus  by  the  death 
of  the  one  man  bring  all  Israel  back.    But  Ahitophel  had 


TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  221 

not  reckoned  with  David's  Lord,  who  loved  him  and  in  all 

the  chastisement  through  which  he  had  to  pass,  was  still 
his  Lord  and  his  Keeper.  It  was  not  Hushai  who  defeated 
the  counsel  of  Ahitophel,  but  the  Lord.  "For  the  Lord 
had  appointed  to  defeat  the  good  counsel  of  Ahitophel,  to 
the  intent  that  the  Lord  might  bring  evil  upon  Absalom." 
Hushai  was  evidently  not  present  when  Ahitophel  spoke. 
"When  he  came  to  Absalom  and  asked  his  opinion  he  gave  a 
different  advice  which  Absalom  and  all  the  men  of  Israel 
adopted.  The  Lord  gave  the  counsel  through  Hushai  and 
then  made  Absalom  and  his  men  to  follow  the  advice  of 
Hushai.  Hushai  then  communicated  with  Zadok  and 
Abiathar  as  David  had  advised  him.  We  do  not  follow 
the  interesting  story  in  its  details.  David  heard  of  the 
counsel  and  the  uncertainty  of  Absalom's  movement  and 
passed  over  Jordan  into  safety.  Thus  through  Hushai 's 
conspiracy,  acting  as  a  spy  for  David,  the  King  had  been 
saved.  But  would  he  have  been  lost  if  Hushai  had  not  been 
acting  the  spy?  The  Lord  would  not  have  forsaken  the 
King  and  though  He  used  Hushai 's  counsel  yet  David  was 
the  loser  after  all.  He  lost  the  opportunity  of  seeing  the 
Lord's  power  and  intervention  in  his  behalf.  And  how 
much  we  also  lose  by  want  of  faith  in  Him,  with  whom 
nothing  is  too  hard. 

Ahitophel  seeing  his  counsel  defeated  and  unable  to  slay 
the  King  set  his  house  in  order  and  committed  suicide. 
As  stated  before  he  is  a  type  of  Judas  Iscariot,  the  betrayer 
of  our  Lord,  as  Ahitophel  was  the  betrayer  of  David.  Like 
Ahitophel  Judas  hanged  himself.     (Matth.  xxvii:5.) 

8.    The  Civil  War  and  Absalom's  Death. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

1.  The  battle  in  the  forest  of  Ephraim.     1-8. 

2.  The  Death  of  Absalom.     9-18. 

3.  The  Tidings  of  hia  death  and  David's  grief.     19-33. 

And  now  everything  is  ready  for  the  battle  and  the  vic- 
tory.    The  army  of  David  consisted  of  three  divisions,  Joab, 


222  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

Abishai  and  the  faithful  Ittai  had  the  command.  David 
was  ready  to  go  forth  with  his  warriors,  but  the  people  re- 
fused to  let  him  go.  What  a  testimony  they  gave  concern- 
ing him !  ' '  Thou  art  worthy  ten  thousand  of  us. ' '  But  of 
Him,  who  according  to  the  flesh  is  the  Son  of  David,  we 
say,  "He  alone  is  worthy."  The  King  then  stood  by  the 
gate  of  Mahanaim  to  see  the  departure  of  his  troops.  As 
his  generals  Joab,  Abishai  and  Ittai  left  him  he  gave  them 
the  message,  "Deal  gently  with  the  young  man,  even  with 
Absalom."  The  battle  took  place  in  a  wild  jungle  forest, 
most  likely  with  many  steep  rocks  and  gulches.  Absalom 
lost  20,000  men  "and  the  forest  (on  account  of  rocks  and 
gulches)  devoured  more  people  that  day  than  the  sword 
devoured. ' ' 

Absalom  fled,  but  his  flight  was  arrested  when  his  head 
caught  in  the  boughs  of  an  oak,  as  Josephus  states,  en- 
tangled by  his  hair.  "And  he  was  taken  up  between  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  and  the  mule  that  was  under  him 
went  away."  The  first  one  who  saw  him  would  not  smite 
him,  not  for  a  thousand  shekels  of  silver,  for  he  had  heard 
the  King's  request.  Then  Joab,  unscrupulous  Joab,  whose 
scheme  had  brought  Absalom  back  into  the  presence  of  the 
King,  took  three  darts  (literally  "staves")  and  thrust  them 
through  the  heart  of  Absalom  while  he  was  yet  alive.  Most 
likely  the  unfortunate  rebel  son  was  unconscious  through 
the  impact  with  the  tree.  The  armour  bearers  made  a  com- 
plete end  of  him.  Joab 's  deed  was  unjustifiable  in  view  of 
the  King's  command  to  deal  gently  with  Absalom.  Absa- 
lom's body  was  cast  into  a  pit  and  covered  with  a  very 
great  heap  of  stones,  a  criminal's  monument.  He  had 
looked  for  a  more  honorable  death,  for  he  had  reared  a 
pillar  in  his  lifetime,  wliich  he  called  after  his  own  name, 
"for  he  said,  I  have  no  son  to  keep  my  name  in  remem- 
brance." Those  who  claim  that  the  Books  of  Samuel  are 
a  patchwork  of  a  number  of  writers  who  made  use  of  dif- 
ferent sources,  refer  us  to  chapter  xiv  :27  and  point  out  the 
discrepancy.   But  why  should  there  be  ?    Absalom  may  have 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  223 

put  up  this  monument  before  he  had  any  sons,  or  he  may- 
have  lost  his  two  sons. 

And  then  comes  the  record  of  how  the  tidings  were  car- 
ried to  David.  The  watchman  announces  that  he  recog- 
nizeth  in  the  swift  runner  Ahimaaz  the  son  of  Zadok.  ' '  And 
the  King  said,  He  is  a  good  man,  and  eometh  with  good  tid- 
ings. ' '  All  is  well — is  his  message,  while  the  anxious  father- 
heart  but  paying  little  attention  to  the  victory  won,  in- 
quired for  the  young  man  Absalom.  Cushi  the  second  run- 
ner makes  his  appearance  and  he  carries  the  tidings  of 
Absalom's  death,  which  he  transmits  to  David  in  a  tender 
and  cautious  manner.  And  then  that  grief !  How  pa- 
thetic !     The  weeping  King,  crying  out  over  and  over  again : 

0  my  son  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  Absalom !     Would  God 

1  had  died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son ! 

' '  The  conduct  of  David  in  reference  to  his  profligate  son, 
is  certainly  extraordinary,  but  is  not  occasioned  by  weak- 
ness of  character,  which  would  be  inconsistent  with  the 
judicial  severity  with  which  he  banished  him  from  his  pres- 
ence during  five  years.  The  shameful  and  sinful  conduct 
of  Absalom  may  be  viewed  in  two  aspects:  it  exhibits,  on 
the  one  hand,  the  operation  of  the  curse  which  David's  sin 
brought  upon  his  house  (2  Sam.  xii:10),  and  the  influence 
of  the  iniquity  of  the  fathers,  which  is  visited  upon  the 
children  (Exod.  xx:5)  ;  it  exhibits,  on  the  other  hand,  Absa- 
lom's own  degeneracy  and  profligacy,  which  fit  him  to  be 
the  bearer  of  the  family-curse.  It  was  not  in  the  latter, 
but  in  the  former  aspect,  that  David  regarded  the  conduct 
of  Absalom,  for  his  own  guilt  is  so  grievous  in  his  eyes,  that, 
in  comparison  with  it,  he  deems  Absalom's  wickedness  to 
be  inconsiderable.  Hence  arises  the  deep  and  boundless 
compassion  with  which  he  surveys  his  reprobate  son. — 
David's  treatment  of  Shimei  may  be  regarded  in  the  same 
light ;  his  consciousness  of  his  own  great  guilt  causes  him  to 
overlook  the  guilt  of  that  criminal. ' '  * 


•Kurtz-Sacred  History. 


224  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 


9.    The  Return  of  the  King. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

1.  The    continued    grief    of    the    King.     1-8. 

2.  The   Return   of   the   King.     9-16. 

3.  Mercy    shown    to    Shimei.     17-23. 

4.  Mephibosheth's  joy.     24-30. 

5.  Barzillai  and  Chimham.     31-40. 

6.  Strife  between  Judah  and  Israel.     41-43. 

What  grief  must  have  been  David's  that  "the  victory 
of  that  day  was  turned  into  mourning ' '  ?  And  the  people 
went  about  on  tip-toe,  like  people  ashamed  after  defeat. 
A  great  stillness  pervaded  everj'thing,  only  broken  by  the 
loud  and  wailing  voice  of  David :  0,  my  son  Absalom,  O, 
Absalom  my  son,  my  son!  All  mourned  with  him.  "But 
what  a  man  must  this  David  have  been  to  endear  himself 
to  his  men,  that  his  personal  grief  became  so  completely 
theirs?" 

Then  Joab  acted.  He  speaks  as  a  wise  statesman.  It 
was  a  bold  rebuke,  but  well  deserved,  for  David 's  continued 
mourning  was  more  than  weakness;  it  was  selfishness.  That 
he  greatly  resented  the  words  of  condemnation  of  Joab  may 
be  learned  from  the  fact  that  immediately  after  he  appointed 
Amasa  as  commander  in  chief  of  his  army  instead  of 
Joab.  The  word  was  also  spoken  to  bring  the  King  back 
to  Jerusalem  from  his  exile  and  he  returned. 

Once  more  Shimei  appears  upon  the  scene;  he  brings 
with  him  a  thousand  men  of  Benjamin  and  Ziba  also. 
Shimei  fell  down  before  the  King  and  implored  his  for- 
giveness. Though  Abishai  suggested  his  death,  the  mercy 
Shimei  craved  was  readily  granted  and  the  King  sware 
unto  him.  But  the  mercy  shown  was  at  the  expense  of 
righteousness.  The  ultimate  fate  of  Shimei  we  shall  find 
recorded  in  1  Kings  ii. 

Mephibosheth  appears  next  with  undressed  feet,  un- 
trimmed  hair  and  unwashed  clothes;  he  had  been  thus 


THE  B00K8  OF  SAMUEL  225 

since  the  flight  of  the  King.  Ziba  's  deception  practised  on 
the  King  is  now  discovered.  But  David's  conduct  towards 
lame  Mephibosheth  cannot  be  justified.  The  impatience 
David  showed  when  Mephibosheth  speaks  is  proof  that  lie 
felt  guilty  at  the  rash  word  he  spoke  to  Ziba.  Then  he 
tells  Mephibosheth  that  he  and  Ziba  should  divide  the  land. 
This  was  injustice.  The  deception  of  Ziba  had  deserved 
punishment.  Beautiful  is  Mephibosheth 's  answer.  It 
shows  a  love  and  devotion  which  is  almost  unsurpassed  in 
the  Bible.  "Yea,  let  him  take  all,  forasmuch  as  my  lord 
the  King  is  come  again  in  peace  to  his  own  house."  It  was 
a  sweet  echo  of  Jonathan 's  love  for  David.  It  hardly  needs 
to  be  pointed  out  that  in  all  this  David  still  acts  as  a  natural 
man  and  not  as  guided  by  Jehovah  and  His  Spirit.  His 
object  was  to  make  himself  still  more  attractive  with  the 
people  and  conciliate  the  different  factions.  If  he  had 
acted  in  faith,  remembering  that  the  Lord  had  called  him 
into  the  Kingdom  and  that  He  was  able  to  keep  him,  he 
would  not  have  tried  to  gain  his  end  by  such  means.  The 
bright  picture  in  this  chapter  is  aged  and  unselfish  Barzillai. 
And  the  strife  between  Judah  and  Israel  on  account  of  the 
King  is  the  first  indication  of  the  great  division  and  the 
internal  strifes,  which  many  years  later  broke  out  among 
the  people.    Thus  failure  is  seen  on  all  sides. 


10.    The  Revolt  of  Sheba. 

CHAPTER  XX 

1.  Sheba's  Revolt.     1-2. 

2.  The  ten  Concubines  shut  up.     3. 

3.  Amasa's  failure.     4-6. 

5.  Joab  and  the  death  of  Amasa.     7-13. 

6.  Joab,  the  wise  woman  and  the  death  of  Sheba.     14-22. 
6.     David's  officials.     23-26. 

The  final  revolt  in  David 's  reign  was  headed  by  a  wicked 
man,  whose  name  was  Sheba.  Israel  sided  with  him,  prob- 
ably as  the  result  of  the  dissension  recorded  at  the  close  of 


226  THE  BOOKS  OF  8AMUEL 

the  previous  chapter.  Judah  remained  loyal  to  David. 
The  act  of  David  in  shutting  up  unto  the  day  of  their  death 
the  ten  concubines  to  live  in  widowhood  was  necessitated  on 
account  of  what  had  taken  place.  (Chap,  xvi  :21.)  Amasa 
being  now  the  leader  of  the  hosts  of  David  (chapter  xix  :13) 
is  called  to  subdue  the  revolt;  but  he  proves  a  failure  and 
could  not  mobilize  the  army.  Abishai  is  commissioned  then 
and  with  him  is  also  Joab.  All  the  mighty  men,  including 
the  executioners  and  runners  (Cherethites  and  Pelethites) 
pursued  after  Sheba.  Then  Amasa  appeared  on  the  scene. 
Joab  was  girded  around  his  loins  with  a  sword  which  was  in 
the  scabbard  and  the  sword  fell  out.  Joab  picked  up  the 
sword  but  Amasa  did  not  see  the  sword  in  his  hand.  Then 
Joab  took  Amasa  by  the  beard  with  his  right  hand,  while 
he  held  the  sword  in  his  left.  Then  he  smote  Amasa  de- 
liberately so  that  he  died.  He  might  have  lied  himself  out 
of  the  accusation  that  he  murdered  Amasa  by  saying  he  fell 
into  the  sword  and  that  it  was  an  accident.  But  1  Kings 
ii:32  gives  the  reckoning  with  unscrupulous  Joab  for  the 
innocent  blood  he  had  shed.  Jealousy  had  led  Joab  to 
murder  Amasa.  And  Sheba  was  killed  in  Abel,  the  city 
in  which  he  sought  shelter.  On  the  advice  of  the  woman 
mentioned  in  the  story,  he  was  beheaded.     The  revolt  ended. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  38? 


IV.     The  Appendix  to  the  History  of  David 

Chapter  xxi-xxiv 
1.    The  Famines  and  the  Wars  with  the  Philistines. 

CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  The  Famine  and  the  Gibeonites.     1-14. 

2.  The  Wars  with  the  Philistines.     15-22. 

The  fourth  section  of  the  second  Book  of  Samuel  is  an 
appendix  to  the  history  of  David.  When  the  great  famine 
happened  in  the  days  of  David  we  do  not  know.  After  the 
famine  had  returned  year  after  year,  for  three  years, 
David  inquired  of  the  Lord.  Why  did  he  not  inquire  in 
the  first  year?  It  is  an  evidence  of  the  low  spiritual  state 
which  prevailed  at  that  time.  The  answer  which  David 
received  revealed  the  cause  of  the  judgment  which  rested 
upon  the  land.  It  was  Saul  and  the  blood-guilt  in  having 
slain  the  Gibeonites.  The  story  of  the  Gibeonites  is  re- 
corded in  Joshua  ix.  They  got  in  among  Israel  through 
deception  and  Joshua  had  made  peace  and  a  league  with 
them.  Though  they  belonged  to  the  nations  doomed  to 
death  they  were  permitted  to  live  and  became  the  hewers 
of  wood  and  the  drawers  of  water.  (Josh.  ix:26-27.) 
Jehovah's  name  and  an  oath  assured  them  of  their  safety. 
Saul  had  violated  tliis  covenant  and  slain  some  of  them. 
This  wrong  is  now  to  be  righted.  David  did  not  inquire 
again  of  the  Lord  what  he  should  do  but  consulted  the 
Gibeonites  instead.  And  the  Gibeonites  demand  not  silver 
nor  gold  of  Saul  and  of  his  house,  ' '  neither  for  us  shalt  thou 
kill  any  man  in  Israel. ' '  After  that  they  asked  that  seven 
men  of  his  sons  be  delivered  unto  them  and  they  would 


228  TEE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

hang  them  up  unto  the  Lord  in  Gibeah.  And  again  in 
haste  the  King  promised  to  do  so.  Their  demand,  though 
piously  worded,  was  not  according  to  the  Law  of  God. 
Children  were  not  to  be  put  to  death  for  the  sins  of  their 
fathers.  (Deut.  xxiv:16.)  Saul  was  the  guilty  one  and 
he  had  died.  How  atonement  for  the  broken  covenant  and 
the  blood  guilt  was  to  be  made  remained  for  the  Lord  to 
say.  David,  not  asking  direction  from  Him,  but  turning  to 
the  Gibeonites,  had  failed  again.  And  the  Gibeonites  in 
their  awful  demand  shared  the  bloodthirsty  cruel  character 
of  the  Canaanites.  David  carried  out  the  awful  request. 
He  spared  Mephibosheth,  Two  sons  of  Kizpah,  a  concu- 
bine of  Saul,  and  five  sons  of  Merab,*  Saul's  eldest  daugh- 
ter, are  the  victims.  They  were  hanged  by  the  Gibeonites 
and  then  left  hanging.  Sad  it  is  to  think  that  the  horrible 
deed  might  have  been  averted  if  but  David  had  again 
turned  to  the  Lord  and  inquired  of  Him.  And  another 
law  is  broken,  when  these  bodies  were  kept  hanging  for 
months.  "And  if  a  man  have  committed  a  sin  worthy  of 
death,  and  he  be  put  to  death,  and  thou  hang  him  on  a 
tree.  His  body  shall  not  remain  all  night  upon  the  tree, 
but  thou  shalt  in  any  wise  bury  him  that  day."-  Surely 
the  Lord  could  not  sanction  the  deed  so  opposite  to  His  own 
law.  One  of  the  most  terrible  scenes  recorded  in  the  Bible 
follows.  Rizpah,  the  concubine  of  Saul,  watched  by  her 
dead  from  April  till  fall,  when  it  began  to  rain  again. 
Six  months  she  abode  there,  the  only  resting  place  the 
coarse  sackcloth,  above  her  the  putrifying  corpses  of  the 
seven  men,  including  her  two  sons.  While  the  hot  oriental 
summer  lasted  she  kept  her  awful  watch  and  chased  away 
by  day  the  screeching  birds  of  prey,  while  her  nights  were 
disturbed  by  the  hungry  howls  of  wolves  and  jackals. 
Could  there  be  a  more  pathetic  picture!  And  she  gained 
something  by  it.  When  David  hears  of  it  he  is  stirred  to 
action.  The  bones  of  Saul  and  Jonathan  and  the  seven 
men  who  had  been  hanged  were  buried.     And  after  that 


*  Michal  in  the  Authorized  Version  is  incorrect. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  229 

God  was  entreated  for  the  land.     It  seems  then  that  David 
turned  to  God  and  He  was  favorable  to  the  land. 

In  the  record  of  the  battles  with  the  Philistines  four 
giants  are  mentioned.  They  represent  the  power  of  dark 
uess,  which  the  people  of  God  must  overcome.* 


2.    David's  Song  of  Deliverance. 

CHAPTER  XXII 

1.  The  Praise  of  Jehovah.     1-4. 

2.  The  Sorrows  of  the  Past.     5-7. 

3.  God's  Presence  and  Intervention.     8-20. 

4.  Reward  and  Approval.     21-28. 

5.  Tlie  Judgment  of  the  Enemies.     29-43. 

6.  The  exaltation  above  the  adversaries.     44-49. 

7.  The  Praise  of  Jehovah.     50-51. 

It  would  take  many  pages  to  give  an  exposition  of  this 
great  song  which  in  the  Book  of  Psalms,  with  a  few  changes, 
is  known  as  Psalm  xviii.  He  uttered  these  words  through 
the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  ' '  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by 
me  and  His  word  was  in  my  tongue."  (Chapter  xxiii:2.) 
It  is  therefore  a  great  prophetic  utterance.  The  song  takes 
us  beyond  David  and  his  experience.  His  sufferings  and 
deliverances  are  indicated,  but  they  are  but  prophetic  of 
Him,  whose  sufferings  and  whose  victory  are  foreshadowed 
in  David's  life  and  experience.  The  great  deliverance 
psalm  includes  therefore  prophetically  the  story  of  David 's 
greater  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  In  verses  5-7  we 
have  David's  suffering  when  an  exile,  persecuted  by  Saul; 
prophetically  the  suffering  of  Christ,  who  was  compassed 
by  the  waves  of  death  and  who  was  plunged  beneath  these 
dark  waves  and  saved  out  of  death.  Verses  8-20  describe 
the  intervention.  Nothing  in  the  life  of  David  could  be 
made  to  fit  this;  but  being  a  prophetic  utterance  there 
is  no  difficulty  to  trace  here  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  who 


*  For  a  full  typical  application  we  refer  the  reader  to  the  Numer- 
ical Bible. 


230  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

wafi  brought  forth  into  a  large  place  (verse  20).  *'H©  dt- 
livered  me,  for  He  delighted  in  Me ' '  can  only  be  truthfully 
applied  to  Christ.  And  all  looks  forward  to  a  still  greater 
intervention  and  manifestation  of  God.  Verses  21-28 
equally  can  only  be  true  of  our  Lord.  "For  I  have  kept 
the  ways  of  the  Lord,  and  have  not  wickedly  departed  from 
my  God."  It  is  impossible  to  say  that  David  spoke  of  him- 
self. The  history  we  have  traced  gives  a  far  different  story. 
But  every  word  is  true  if  we  think  of  David's  Son,  our 
Lord.  And  the  judgment  and  exaltation  described  in  the 
closing  stanzas  of  this  song  will  be  realized  in  Him  into 
whose  hands  the  Father  has  committed  all  judgment.  He 
wiU  be  "the  head  of  the  nations"  and  a  people  will  serve 
Him.  (Verse  44-45.)  That  David  had  before  his  heart 
the  great  covenant-promise  (chapter  vii)  and  that  his  vision 
was  enlarged  so  that  he  beheld  "His  Anointed"  and  His 
coming  manifestation  and  kingdom  becomes  sufficiently  clear 
in  the  last  two  verses  of  the  song. 


3.     The  Last  Words  of  David  and  the  Record  of  the 
Mighty  Men. 

CHAPTER   XXIII 

1.  His  last  Words.     1-7. 

2.  The  names  and  records  of  David's  mighty  men.     8-39. 

In  his  last  words  an  even  greater  and  clearer  vision  is 
given  to  King  David.  "If  Psalm  xviii  was  a  grand  Hal- 
lelujah, with  which  David  quitted  the  scene  of  life,  these 
'his  last  words'  are  the  Divine  attestation  of  all  that  he  had 
sung  and  prophesied  in  the  Psalms  concerning  the  spiritual 
import  of  the  kingdom  which  he  was  to  found  in  accordance 
with  the  divine  message  that  Nathan  had  been  commissioned 
to  bring  to  him.  Hence  these  'last  words'  must  be  re- 
garded as  an  inspired  prophetic  utterance  by  David,  before 
his  death,  about  the  King  and  Kingdom  of  God  in  their  full 
and  real  meaning. ' '  *     And  this  King  is  Christ  and  the 


*  History  of  Judah  and  Israel. 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  231 

Kingdom  that  which  will  be  set  up  with  the  second  coming 
of  Christ.  As  the  translation  in  the  authorized  version  is 
weak  we  give  here  a  corrected  translation : 

"David  the  son  of  Jesse  saith, 

And  the  man  who  was  raised  on  high  saith. 

The  anointed  of  the  God  of  Jacob, 

And  the  sweet  Psalmist  in  Israel: 

The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  spake  by  me. 

And.  His  word  was  on  my  tongue. 

The  God  of  Israel  said, 

The  Rock  of  Israel  spake  to  me: 

A  righteous  ruler  over  men. 

A  Ruler  in  the  fear  of  God, 

Like  the  light  of  the  morning  when  the  sun  riseth, 

A  morning  without  clouds; 

When  the  tender  grass  cometh  forth  out  of  the  earth, 

Through  the  clear   shining  after  the  rain. 

But  my  house  is  not  so  with  God. 

Yet  He  has  made  me  an  everlasting  covenant 

Ordered  in  all  and  sure; 

For  this  is  all  my  salvation — all  my  delight. 

Although  He  maketh  it  not  to  grow. 

But  the  wicked  shall  be  all  of  them  as  thorns  thrust  away. 

For  they  cannot  be  taken  with  the  hand; 

And  the  man  that  toucheth  them. 

Must  have  iron  and  the  staff  of  a  spear 

And  they  shall  be  utterly  burned  with  fire  in  their  dwelling. 

Little  comment  is  needed;  just  a  little  help  to  open  up 
the  words  of  the  dying  King.  The  righteous  ruler  over 
men,  a  ruler  in  the  fear  of  God  is  our  Lord.  Thus  He 
will  yet  rule  over  the  earth  in  righteousness.  And  when 
He  comes  to  rule,  there  cometh  the  morning  without  clouds 
when  the  earth  will  be  refreshed,  through  the  clear  shining, 
the  brightness  of  His  glory,  after  the  rain ;  after  judgment 
is  passed.  Then  David  confesseth  that  his  house  it  not  so 
with  God.  His  hope,  his  salvation,  all  his  delight  is  in  the 
covenant  made  with  him ;  it  centers  in  the  fulfilment  of  the 
Davidic  covenant.  And  the  wicked  will  suffer  the  fire  of 
His  wrath. 

In  blessed  keeping  with  this  last  great  prophetic  utteraoice 


232  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

of  the  King  are  the  records  and  the  names  of  the  mighty 
men  of  David.  They  were  the  men  who  loved  David,  stood 
by  him,  showed  their  loyalty  and  devotion  to  the  King. 
And  others  are  given,  of  whom  we  read  no  definite  deeds. 
The  last  name  is  Uriah  the  Hittite.  The  spiritual  mean- 
ing is  not  hard  to  find.  Before  the  judgment  seat  of 
Christ  all  will  be  made  manifest.  When  He  comes  to  be  the 
righteous  Ruler,  to  usher  in  the  morning  without  clouds, 
those  will  be  remembered  who  were  loyal  and  devoted  to 
Him  in  His  rejection.  No  name  and  no  deed,  even  the 
smallest,  will  then  be  forgotten.  What  an  incentive  this 
should  be,  especially  in  the  solemn  days  in  which  we  live, 
when  we  see  the  day  approaching,  to  serve  Him  and  be  as 
devoted  to  our  absent,  but  coming  Lord,  as  David's  mighty 
men  were  to  Him.  In  our  annotation  on  1  Chronicles  where 
we  find  these  records  also  we  hope  to  point  out  some  of 
the  details  of  the  deeds  of  David's  mighty  men.  (1  Chron- 
icles xi.) 

4.    David's  Failure;  the  Altar  on  tke  Threshing  Floor  of 

Araunah. 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

1.  The  numbering  of  the  People.     1-9. 

2.  The  Sin  acknowledged  and  Gad's  message.     10-14. 

3.  The  Peatilence.     15-17. 

4.  The  Altar  on  the  threshing-floor  of  Araimah.     18-25. 

The  final  chapter  of  the  books  of  Samuel  is  of  much  in- 
terest and  importance.  "And  again  the  anger  of  the  Lord 
was  kindled  against  Israel,  and  He  moved  David  against 
them  to  say.  Go,  number  Israel  and  Judah."  In  1 
Chronicles  xxi:l  we  read  "And  Satan  stood  up  against 
Israel,  and  provoked  David  to  number  Israel."  This  has 
often  been  pointed  out  as  a  discrepancy  and  contradiction. 
Criticism  has  explained  it  in  the  following  way :  "Of  sur- 
passing interest  for  the  study  of  the  progressiveness  of 
revelation  in  the  Old  Testament  period  is  the  form  which 
the  chronicler  has  given  to  this  verse^     To  his  more  devel- 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL  233 

oped  religious  sense  the  idea  was  abhorrent  that  God  could 
be  subject  to  moods,  and  incite  men  to  a  course  of  action 
for  which  He  afterwards  calls  them  to  account.  Accord- 
ingly he  writes:  And  Satan  stood  up  against  Israel 
and  moved  David  to  number  Israel."  There  is  no  contra- 
diction here  nor  do  the  two  accounts  need  an  explanation 
as  the  above.  Israel  had  committed  some  sin  which  brought 
upon  them  the  displeasure  of  Jehovah.  Satan  the  accuser 
was  then  permitted  to  influence  David.  The  statement,  *  *  He 
(God)  moved  David,"  also  means  in  Hebrew,  "He  suffered 
him  to  be  moved."  He  permitted  Satan  to  do  His  work. 
In  1  Tim.  iii:6  we  read  that  pride  is  the  condemnation  (or 
as  it  is  literally  "the  crime")  of  the  devil.  And  Satan  the 
accuser  moves  David  with  national  pride  to  number  the 
people.  It  is  significant  that  preceding  this  record  are  the 
names  and  achievements  of  the  mighty  men  of  David.  No 
doubt  his  heart  swelled  with,  much  elation  over  his  victories 
and  great  achievements.  While  David 's  eyes  were  blinded 
by  Satan^  Joab  saw  the  danger.  In  1  Chron.  xiii:3  we 
read  that  he  said  to  David :  ' '  The  Lord  make  his  people  an 
hundred  times  so  many  more  as  they  be ;  but,  my  Lord  the 
King,  are  they  not  all  my  Lord's  servants?  Why  doth 
my  Lord  require  this  thing?  Why  will  he  be  a  cause  of 
guilt  to  Israel?"  The  King's  word  prevailed  and  reluc- 
tantly Joab  and  the  captains  went  forth  to  carry  out  the 
King's  command.  It  was  altogether  a  military  census. 
But  the  census  was  not  completed.  ( 1  Chronicles  xxvii  :24. ) 
David's  heart  then  smote  him  and  we  see  him  coming 
to  the  Lord  and  confessing  his  sin.  ' '  I  have  sinned  greatly 
in  that  I  have  done;  and  now  I  beseech  thee.  Lord,  taJ^e 
away  the  iniquity  of  thy  servant;  for  I  have  done  very 
foolishly."  It  was  a  true  confession  he  made  that  night. 
Then  the  Lord  sent  the  answer  through  the  prophet  Gad. 
The  Lord  leaves  the  choice  to  David.  Either  three  years 
of  famine,*  three  months  of  flight  or  three  days  of  pesti- 
lence.    And  here  the  man  of  faith  asserts  himself.    "Let 


•  This   is   according   to   I    Chron  xxi :  12 ;    2   Sam.   xxiv :  13   seven 
years,  which  must  be  the  error  of  game  copyist. 


234  THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL 

us  now  fall  into  the  hand  of  the  Lord ;  for  His  mercies  are 
great,  and  let  me  not  fall  into  the  hand  of  man. ' '  And  the 
Lord  did  not  disappoint  his  servant's  faith  in  His  mercy. 
When  the  angel  stretched  out  his  hand  upon  Jerusalem  to 
destroy  it  the  Lord  said,  It  is  enough ;  stay  now  thine  hand. 
And  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  the  same  who  appeared  to  the 
patriarchs,  to  Moses,  Joshua  and  others,  was  by  the  thresh- 
ing floor  of  Araunah  the  Jebusite.  Once  more  David 's  voice 
is  heard  in  confession.  "I  have  sinned,  and  I  have  done 
vdckedly ;  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done  ?  Let  Thy 
hand,  I  pray  thee,  be  against  me,  and  against  my  father's 
house. ' '  He  was  willing  to  be  the  one  sufferer  for  his  peo- 
ple; in  this  he  is  a  type  again  of  our  Lord,  the  sin- 
bearer.  He  is  commanded  to  rear  an  altar  upon  the  thresh- 
ing-floor of  Araunah.  ''It  was  a  fitting  spot  for  mercy 
upon  Israel,  this  place  where  of  old  faithful  Abraham  had 
been  ready  to  offer  his  only  son  unto  God;  fitting  also  as 
still  outside  the  city ;  but  chiefly  in  order  that  the  pardon- 
ing and  sparing  mercy  now  shown,  might  indicate  the  site 
where,  on  the  great  altar  of  burnt-offering,  abundant  mercy 
in  pardon  and  acceptance  would  in  the  future  be  dispensed 
to  Israel."  *  It  was  the  place  upon  which  the  temple  was 
built.  (1  Chron.  xxi:28-xxii:l.)  And  Araunah  the  Jebu- 
site offered  willing  the  threshing  floor  and  the  sacrificial  ani- 
mals. But  David  would  not  consent.  ' '  Neither  will  I  offer 
burnt  offerings  unto  the  Lord  my  God  of  that  which  doth 
cost  me  nothing. ' '  For  fifty  shekels  of  silver  he  bought  the 
oxen  and  the  threshing  floor.  Then  the  burnt  offerings  and 
peace  offerings  ascended  unto  Jehovah  as  a  sweet  savour. 
And  Jehovali  answered  by  fire.  (1  Chron.  xxi:26.)  And 
David  before  that  altar,  who  buj^  and  offers,  thus  meeting 
the  claim  of  God,  is  a  type  of  our  Lord  who  bought  us 
with  the  great  price  and  offered  Himself.  And  even  so  as 
this  book  closes  with  the  Lord  being  merciful  to  His  land 
and  people,  the  plague  stayed,  so  will  Israel  in  the  future 
receive  and  enjoy  His  mercy.  It  will  be  the  result  of  the 
one  sacrifice. 


*  Ederriheim, 


FIRST  KINGS 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction 237 

Chronological  Table 239 

Division  of  the  First  Book  of  Kings 243 

Analysis  and  Annotations 245 


The  Book  of  Kings 


Introduction 

In  the  introduction  to  the  books  of  Samuel  we  stated  that  the 
first  and  second  books  of  Kings  are  called  in  the  Greek  version  of 
the  Old  Testament  the  third  and  fourth  books  of  Kingdoms  and  in 
the  Latin  version  the  third  and  fourth  books  of  Kings.  The  two 
books,  which  were  originally  undivided  and  formed  one  book,  con- 
tain the  history  of  Israel  under  the  government  of  Kings.  The  same 
period  of  history  is  also  covered  in  the  two  books  of  Chronicles. 
However  there  is  a  great  diflference  between  the  books  of  Kings  and 
the  books  of  Chronicles.  The  books  of  Kings  were  written  before 
the  captivity;  the  books  of  Chronicles  after  that  event.  (1  Chron. 
vi:15.)  The  books  of  Kings  trace  the  history  of  the  Kings  from  the 
prophetic  vievppoint;  the  books  of  Chronicles  from  the  priestly. 
Kings  gives  the  history  from  a  human  point  of  view,  Chronicles  from 
the  divine  standpoint.  After  Solomon's  wonderful  reign  and  the 
division  of  the  Kingdom  the  history  of  the  Kings  of  Israel  is  mostly 
given  while  much  less  is  said  of  the  Kings  of  Judah.  The  books  of 
Chronicles  are  characterized  by  an  almost  entire  absence  of  the  his- 
tory of  the  Kings  of  Israel;  they  are  mentioned  only  in  case  of 
absolute  necessity.  After  the  genealogical  tracings  the  history  of 
the  Kingdom  of  David  is  followed  in  detail  down  to  the  Babylonian 
captivity.  The  blessing  and  grace  of  God  as  manifested  towards 
the  house  of  David  is  beautifully  given  in  Chronicles.  The  story 
centers  aroimd  the  Temple.  In  the  introduction  to  Chronicles  and 
more  so  in  the  annotations  we  shall  point  out  more  fully  these  in- 
teresting and  striking  differences,  the  blessed  marks  of  inspiration. 

THE  AUTHORSHIP  OF  KINGS 

Much  has  been  written  on  the  possible  instrument  who  was  used  in 
putting  these  records  together  as  we  have  them  now.  Critics  have 
much  to  say  on  the  different  compilers,  redactors,  editors,  etc.,  who 
all  had  a  hand  in  putting  these  histories  together.  They  speak  of 
proximate  sources  and  primary  sources  and  later  additions  and  re- 
dactions. To  say  the  least  it  is  bewildering  and  unprofitable  to  fol- 
low, what  they  term,  their  scientific  method.  That  the  author  of 
these  two  books  had  certain  sources  or  documents,  besides  tradi- 

237 


238  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

tional  accounts  at  his  disposal,  cannot  be  denied.  But  we  maintain 
that  he  was  chosen  by  the  Lord  to  write  these  records  of  the  Kings 
and  was  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  he  wrote.  The  books  of  Kings 
have  the  mark  in  every  way  of  being  the  work  of  one  person  and  not 
a  number  of  persons,  followed  by  others  who  edited  their  writings. 
Unity  of  style  can  be  clearly  followed  throughout  the  books;  there  is 
a  uniform  mode  of  expression  which  would  be  quite  impossible  with 
a  number  of  authors  or  compilers.  See  and  compare  1  Kings  xxii:43 
with  2  Kings  xiv:3-4;  1  Kings  xii:31  with  2  Kings  xvii:32;  1  Kings 
xi:43  with  2  Kings  xiii:13.  Jewish  tradition  declares  that  the 
Prophet  Jeremiah  was  the  instrument  chosen  to  write  the  two  books 
of  Kings.  While  no  one  can  say  with  certainty  that  this  is  true, 
much  is  in  favor  of  this  view.  There  is  a  striking  similarity  of  style 
and  idiom  between  the  language  of  Kings  and  the  language  employed 
by  Jeremiah.  Perhaps  no  one  was  better  fitted  to  write  the  won- 
derful history  of  Solomon's  failure,  the  division  of  the  Kingdom,  the 
apostasy  of  Israel,  the  chastisements  of  the  Lord,  than  the  prophet 
of  tears,  the  man  of  God  whose  loving  messages  were  to  a  backslidden 
Israel. 

SPIRITUAL  AND  PROPHETIC  TRUTHS 

There  is  much  spiritual  and  prophetic  truth  to  be  found  in  these 
records.  Solomon's  wonderful  reign,  and  the  building  of  the  house 
of  the  Lord  contains  great  foreshadowings  of  the  coming  Kingdom 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Solomon's  reign  of  peace  marks  the  climax 
of  the  history  of  Israel.  In  him  the  promise  made  unto  David  (2 
Sam.  vii)  foimd  its  first  fulfillment.  As  head  over  the  people,  as 
king  of  righteousness  ruling  in  righteousness,  as  King  of  peace,  ex- 
ercising also  priestly  functions,  furthermore,  in  taking  Pharaoh's 
daughter  and  the  Gentiles  seeking  after  him  and  much  else  he  is  a 
type  of  the  coming  King  in  whom  the  covenant  promises  made  to 
David  will  be  fully  realized.  There  are  many  spiritual  lessons  to 
be  foimd  in  the  decline  among  Israel.  Elijah's  and  Elisha's  minis- 
tries, their  messages  and  miracles,  have  a  deeper  prophetic  and  spir- 
itual meaning.  To  write  a  large  volume  on  these  two  great  historical 
books  and  trace  in  them  God's  way  in  government  as  well  as  the 
prophetic  foreshadowings  would  be  a  far  easier  work  than  to  con- 
dense them  in  brief  annotations.  However  we  hope  and  pray  that 
even  these  few  hints  we  could  give  will  be  used  by  our  Lord  to  help 
His  people  into  a  better  knowledge  of  His  Word.  The  chronological 
table  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel,  and  of  contemporary  events, 
which  follows  this  introduction  should  be  freely  consulted  in  the 
study  of  the  text. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


239 


1 

lO 

ooinM' « 

OOSOJ 

oo-x* 

ae« 

Min 

^ 

■ie'isri          1 

t- 

mininio 

ro  WIN 

rH  rH 

moi 

o»oo 

K 

M 
Pi 

-l~XJ. 

Oi 

O  O  Od  ^ 

C>  0)  o 

o>o» 

00  00 

woo 

<c 

05<0in-w 

ooo 

05  10 

<Din 

rH-* 

u 

'HOI 

TTIf^ 

t- 

in  in  in  lO 

CO  CO  CO 

1-1  IH 

CROJ 

05  00 

""^-uu 

0> 

OiOi  dc> 

OiOiCi 

0J0> 

ooa 

00  00 

mot-u5  ■^co 

O  00  00  ^ 

CO        00  Tjl 

t-t-o 

CJin 

p3 

•J9UtM           1 

t- c- in  »n  in  in 

CO  iNcaiN 

PI        rH  rH 

Oi  Oid 

00  00 

n 

Eh 

O)  Ci  Oi  O)  Oi  o> 

QiOiGid 

Oi       Oi  Oi 

00  CO  00 

OCX 

mrHt-inao(NOO>ooiO)in 

•*      00-* 

t~[-  <D 

T-IO)-^ 

•< 

•jiav          1 

t~t-inininin'*mco<MciN 

(N        --IrH 

O  Oi  05 

0)00  00 

0 

CiO^QiOiOiOiOiCiOiOiOOi 

Oi       OiQi 

00  00  00 

00  00  00 

a 

O 
CO 

a 

t3 

55 

m 

S 

« 

•tf 

cS 

'5) 

W 

«s 

i 

cS 

o 

>• 

p.— 

cs 

© 

'd 

-d 

.5  a 

V  as 

1 

a 

eg 

m 

.2^ 

.2S 

•d 

o 

a 

.2-2 

*T3 

60    - 

*t-i  ^3 

si 

C3 

n3«iH 
cs  o 

flS 

01   C4 

cs 
M 

2 

as 
Mo 

NPP 

"35 

o 

u 
03 

O 

s 

11 

Wa2 

•laBJsi  JO  sSui^ 

^ 

"SS 

^ 

5    5 

em  JO  uoissaoay 

iH 

ooo 

5 

in     « 

am  mojj  .leai 

>:) 

r4 

M 

00 

» 

e3 

C4 

!5 

M 

oS  d) 

< 

V 

US  <u 

-,  « 

n 

0)  ;>> 

K 

>> 

Sh    ^ 

m  »  w 

t-. 

aj 

■« 

M 

eg 

3 

IV 

IN 

a 

IN 

i*>IN 

_2 

>> 

WrH 

O 
n 
o 

a" 

O 

n 

■<  to 

"o 

IN 
CO        ^ 

s  « 

aa 
2® 

o 

M 
M 
1-5 

<  < 

^Sa^ 

a 

^    a 

«g 

!z;p5 

WtsjO 

o 

< 

-^•^ 

■qBpnf  JO  s8ui2i 

^ 

CJCO 

555 

■s 

^ 

.C  J3 

am  JO  uoissaoiy 
em  moaj  aBajt 

rH 

(Ot-t- 

CO 

CO 

t^OO 
rH  r-\ 

in 

0 
60 

^1 

^H 

CJ 

"3     t, 

>^       eg 

«9 

P 

"-5 

o 

p 

t- 
r-i 

a 

5 

H 

Pi 

6 

o 

o 

O 

a- 

a" 

■< 

© 

(^  » 

oS 

o 

><*  *^s 

M 

3  0 

1-5 

n 

1-5        •< 

•smop2a!;X  omx 

em  }<^  noi^uj'edag 

tH 

ooocQeo 

•*  'T  ■* 

o 

•aw 

oo« 

•<{ 

!»  niojj  j»»i 

240 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


uaqsn 


•aojujio 


t-t-t- 
t-t-t- 


t-t-t- 


U5CO 
00  00 


>-IOO 

t-t-t- 
t-t-t- 


o>t-to 


00  00 


(NiHr-l 


ooooo 


oow 


(MlHiH 

t-t-o 


.2  ®  — 

„    a 


aqi  ^o  uorssaooy 


o/:  a     ~ 


.  J3  a 

JrO    S    O 


S  M  wis   2  !- 

^  >;:s  1.-2  i 


iSg|    ^ 


as.    ^  _  s-2 


•<H      -J3  ;3 


t-'g.g       U, 


a  2 


»  C-.i- 


a 


oa 


P-ii-i 


a^^ 

t'S 

«M"S 

^t-c 

-s--^ 

ajts 

^  a 

M^S 

>! 

a  cb"^ 

a.S 

-5  o  a" 

cSOO 

a  cs  m 

j3 

M  "^ 


•qcprif  JO  sSuiji 
eqj  JO  noissaoiV 
3qj  taoaj'  JBa^ 


W    . 

O   QQ 

»  o 


O  S> 

a^ 


;sS 


I H  £  "  i  <  S 


M      - 

■<  < 

MM 


< 

■»* 

» 

;?; 

>j 

DC 

s 

M 

K 

< 

< 

&< 

o 

;« 

§ 

< 

H? 

-< 

p 

•smopSnig  o^x 

sqj  JO  tiouBJBdeg 

« 

00 

«u> 

t» 

tH         Ifl 

eqj  tnoij  iB9^\ 

t-l  r^ 

0* 

r*l        r-l 

O 

►-3 

< 

1H 

CO 

eo 

CD 

THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


241 


■aaqsn 


•aoiaiio 


■jaojAi 


00  oi 
coca 
t-t- 


Oi«3 

CON 


COCO 

t-t- 


co<o 


'S-Jj 


ZM    2 

J,  a!  OS        « 

^    GO  '^         -JS  h-j 

J3  o  a  ^  ■■« 
bt  a)  •-3  =3  2  o 
"^  ^         •^ 


M    a 


O   Pi 


03  g- 


o    ^  9 
«o.2 


v.aj: 


1  -4-  tl«M 


.2  M  »^''  a 
ar^     5 

•3  ^  fl  ? 
S  J^  t^  vZ.  ►^ 


4;  O 

05       •< 
O  »  t> 


"laeasj  jo  a2ai;^ 
8q>  JO  uoissaab'v 


-OS 


ogo 


•Sa 
a  bo 


0^  W 


HBpnf  JO  sSnis 
aq'}  JO  uotssaoav 


«  T) 


eq^  JO  ooi)8J8d3g 
«q»  woij  i««A. 


242 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


•jeqsn 
•no^aiio 


iHrH  © 


OO 


0  05 
OO 


ODO 

OCR 

mm 


rHrt  O 


J?»      «!? 


'laBasi  JO  sSnig 
aq?  JO  uoissaDOv 
eq^  mojj  aea^ 


M  © 


..•Co 

«  S  2 

•■-•<'0 
>   O  bo 


•5  =8 


3W 


CIS  02  »-  cS 

o    s  a 

a>  L<  (Sew 


i  o^ 


TO  CI  t<  a)  <i^  ^  Qj 

Oil  ocogia^ 

a'5  n^§o  '^ 


jm     ^ 


Si 


a' 


.2:2  a  fi 

•2.5  SjW  «  is  « 

i-T        E-1        c» 


iS'S      .2.2       Wi   .  ftP-   .       m  ; 


Sh 


a. 9 


a  5 


•qBpnp  JO  83ni2 

eqi  JO  noissoDDy 

aqi  raoaj  jea^ 


•Buiop2ui3  Oittj, 

eqi  JO  noi'^vjedag 

eq^  raoij  j«9^ 


Is    "3 


-     o  &.X  fc) 


00 

WW 


a® 

a  ^ 

a.c 


<^  H; 


K  o 

H  a 


11    gw?-"" 

ESTRUCTION 

Jerusalem 
edaliah    Baby 
Governor  in  J 
2    months 
ast    Deportati 
the  Jews  to 
Ion    (Jos.    A 
97 ;       comp. 
Hi.   30?) 

1^ 
0  " 

•05 

R     0        ^ 

^K 

.-rt  ?i 

10  lO 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  243 


The  Division  of  the  First  Book  of 
Kings 

The  First  Book  of  Kings  contains  the  record  of  the  reign 
of  Solomon  and  the  glory  of  his  great  Kingdom  of  peace. 
But  that  glory  soon  passed  away  through  the  failure  of 
Solomon  and  the  great  united  Kingdom  becomes  a  divided 
Kingdom.  In  the  last  six  chapters  we  read  of  Elijah,  the 
Tishbite,  tlie  great  Prophet  of  God  and  his  activity  during 
the  reign  of  wicked  Ahab.  We  make  the  following  divi- 
sion: 

I.    DAVID 'S  LAST  DAYS  AND  THE  CROWNING  OF 
SOLOMON.     Chapter  i-ii  :11. 

1.  Adonijah's  exaltation  to  be  King.     Chapter 

i  :l-27. 

2.  The  Crowning  of  Solomon;  Adonijah's  sub- 

mission.    Chapter  i  :28-53. 

3.  David's   charge   to   Solomon;   David's   End. 

Chapter  ii  :1-11. 

IL    SOLOMON'S  GLORIOUS  REIGN.    HIS  FAILURE 
AND  END.     Chapter  ii  :12— xi. 

1.  The  righteous  judgment  of  Solomon,    Chapter 

~.ii:12-46,        r;;     ,  ..  ■  .   xJi.^.Ut^iy 

2.  Jehovah  appears  to  Solomon ;  His  Prayer  and 

the  Answer.     Chapter  iii. 

3.  Solomon's  Princes  and  Officers.    The  prosper- 

ous Kingdom  and  the  King's  great  Wisdom. 
Chapter  iv. 

4.  The  building  of  the  Temple  and  its  Dedication. 

Chapter  v-viii. 


244  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

5.  Jehovah  appears  unto  Solomon.    The  Great- 

ness of  the  King.     Chapter  ix. 

6.  Solomon  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba.    His  great 

riches  and  splendour.     Chapter  x. 

7.  Solomon's  failure.    Judgment  announced  and 

the   beginning   of   the    disruption.    Chap- 
ter xi. 

III.  THE  DIVIDED  KINGDOM.     Chapter  xii-xvi. 

1.  Rehoboam  and  the  Revolt  of  the  ten  tribes. 

Chapter  xii. 

2.  Jeroboam   and   Rehoboam   and   their   reign. 

Chapters  xiii-xiv. 

3.  Abijam  and  Asa.    Kings  of  Judah.    Chapter 

XV  :l-24. 

4.  Kings  of  Israel.     Chapter  xv  :25 — xvi. 

IV.  THE    PROPHET    ELIJAH    AND    KING    AHAB. 

Chapter  xvii-xxii. 

1.  Elijah's  Prediction.    His  Miracles.    Chapter 

xvii. 

2.  Elijah    on    Mount    Carmel.    The    answered 

Prayer.     Chapter  xviii. 

3.  Elijah  in  the  Wilderness  and  on  Mount  Horeb. 

Chapter  xix. 

4.  King  Ahab,  his  wicked  reign  and  Downfall. 

Chapter  xx-xxii. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  245 


Analysis  and  Annotations 

I.     David's  Last   Days  and   the   Crowning  of 
Solomon 


Chapter  i-ii:ll 
1.    Adonijah's  exaltation  to  be  King. 

CHAPTER  1:1-27 

1.  David's  Decrepitude.     1-4. 

2.  Adonijah's  Self -exaltation.     5-9. 

3.  The  Plot  of  Nathan   and  Bath-sheba.     10-14. 

4.  Bath-sheba  and  Nathan  before  the  King.     15-27. 

David  was  about  70  years  old  and  extremely  feeble.  The 
strenuous  life  he  had  led,  the  exposures  and  hardships  of 
his  youth,  the  cares  and  anxieties  of  his  reign,  and  the 
chastenings  through  which  he  passed  on  account  of 
his  great  sin,  and  much  else  was  responsible  for  this  enfee- 
bled condition.  It  is  but  another  illustration  of  that  rigid 
law,  What  a  man  soweth  that  shall  he  reap.  It  was  a  prema- 
ture decay  with  the  complete  loss  of  natural  heat.  While 
the  King  was  in  this  helpless  condition  Adonijah  ("My 
Lord  is  Jehovah")  exalted  himself  to  be  King  and  like  his 
unhappy  brother  Absalom  he  prepared  chariots  and  horse- 
men and.  fifty  men  to  run  before  him.  Like  Absalom  he 
also  was  of  great  physical  beauty.  There  is  a  significant 
sentence  which  reveals  the  weakness  of  David  towards  his 
favorite  children,  a  weakness  which  has  borne  its  sad  fruits 
in  many  families.  ' '  And  his  father  had  not  displeased  him 
at  any  time  in  saying,  Why  hast  thou  done  so?"  There 
had  been  no  discipline  in  David 's  family ;  he  had  spared  the 
rod.    By  right  of  primogeniture  he  thought  of  claiming  the 


246  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

throne.  However,  he  must  have  known  that  his  younger 
brother  Solomon  had  been  selected  by  David  to  fill  the 
throne  after  him.  But  Adonijah  knew  not  the  Lord  nor 
was  he  subject  to  His  will.  In  his  selfish  ambition  he  was 
upheld  by  Joab  and  Abiathar,  the  priest.  No  doubt  but 
both  of  these  men  sought  their  own  interests;  Joab  to  con- 
tinue in  his  position  he  held  with  David;  Abiathar  to  get 
supremacy  over  Zadok  his  rival  in  the  priesthood.  But 
Zadok  the  priest,  who  ministered  at  Gibeon  (1  Chron. 
xvi:39),  Benaiah,  who  had  charge  of  the  Cherethites  and 
Pelethites  *  (2  Sam.  viii:18),  Nathan,  the  faithful  prophet, 
Shimei  (not  the  one  who  cursed  David),  Rei  and  David's 
mighty  men  kept  aloof  from  the  revolt.  They  remained 
true  to  Jehovah  and  to  His  anointed.  Then  Adonijah  made 
a  sacrificial  feast  to  give  his  self  exaltation  a  religious  air. 
He  invited  all  the  King 's  sons,  his  brethren,  and  the  men  of 
Judah ;  but  Nathan,  Benaiah,  David 's  mighty  men  and  his 
brother  Solomon  were  not  called.  It  was  meant  to  be  his 
coronation.  In  this  revolt,  preceding  the  enthronement  of 
God's  King,  Solomon  the  King  of  peace,  we  have  another 
foreshadowing  of  what  will  precede  the  reign  of  the  Prince 
of  Peace,  our  Lord.  It  seemed  as  if  Adonijah  might  suc- 
ceed. But  Nathan,  the  prophet,  begins  to  act.  In  agree- 
ment with  the  mother  of  Solomon  the  plan  is  made  to  dis- 
cover what  Adonijah  had  done  to  the  aged  King.  Bath- 
sheba  goes  in  first  and  after  a  while  Nathan  appeared  to 
tell  the  King  the  same  story  he  had  heard  from  the  lips  of 
his  wife.  She  reminded  David  of  his  oath,  that  Solomon 
her  son  was  to  be  the  successor  to  the  throne,  and  after  tell- 
ing him  of  Adonijah 's  act,  she  appealed  to  him  to  proclaim 
now  who  was  to  sit  upon  the  throne.  She  speaks  to  him 
repeatedly  as  "My  lord  the  King."  And  when  Nathan 
appeared  before  David  he  also  said,  "My  lord  0  King.'' 
Some  have  gathered  from  this  that  aged  David  had  become 
filled  with  the  pride  of  life.  However,  the  honour  done  to 
him  may  have  been  true  reverence  for  the  Lord's  anointed 
King. 


Ex^ecti^knreirB  mid  naxsrs. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  247 

2.    The  Anointlngf  of  Solomon;  Adonijah's  Submission. 

CHAPTER  1:28-53 

1.  The  renewed  promise  to  Bath-sheba.     28-31. 

2.  The  anointing  of  Solomon  commanded.     32-37. 

3.  Solomon  made  King.     38-40. 

4.  The  Consternation  of  Adonijah.     41-49. 

5.  Adonijah's  fear  and  submission.     50-53. 

Bath-sheba  had  withdrawn  while  Nathan  was  before  the 
King.  She  is  called  back  and  David  once  more  assures 
her  that  Solomon  her  son  should  reign  after  him.  Then 
David  commands  that  Solomon  be  anointed  King  without 
further  delay.  His  instructions  are  at  once  carried  out. 
Zadok  the  priest,  Nathan  the  prophet  and  Benaiah.  caused 
Solomon  to  ride  upon  King  David's  mule  and  brought  him 
to  Gihon.  The  priest  anointed  him  King  and  the  people 
rejoiced  with  great  joy.  But  what  joy  will  come  to  this 
earth  when  He  who  is  greater  than  Solomon  will  be  en- 
throned and  receive  His  great  Kingdom,  which  is  only 
faintly  foreshadowed  in  Solomon's  glorious  reign!  All 
David  did  w^as  according  to  Jehovah's  will  and  pur- 
pose. Solomon  was  a  mere  youth  when  he  was  anointed. 
In  1  Chronicles  xxviii  and  xxix  where  the  most  impressive 
scene  is  fully  described  which  followed  Solomon's  anoint- 
ing, we  find  David's  own  words  concerning  him,  "Solomon 
my  son,  whom  alone  God  hath  chosen  is  yet  young  and 
tender,  and  the  work  is  great."  (1  Chr.  xxix:l.)  We 
shall  follow  the  remarkable  utterances  of  King  David  at 
that  occasion  when  we  reach  the  Chronicles.  Like  Saul  and 
David,  King  Solomon  was  likewise  anointed  a  second  time. 
"And  they  made  Solomon  the  son  of  David  King  the 
second  time,  and  anointed  him  unto  the  Lord  to  be  the 
chief  governor,  and  Zadok  to  be  priest."  (1  Chronicles 
xxix:22.)  And  while  the  people  were  rejoicing  in  Gihon 
over  God's  true  King,  Adonijah's  feast  was  about  ended. 
Abiathar's  son  Jonathan  appeared  on  the  scene.  Adoni- 
jah said,  ' '  Come  in ;  for  thou  art  a  valiant  man,  and  bring- 
est  good  tidings."     And  the  tidings  he  brought  were  good 


248  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

tidings  for  God's  people:  "Solomon  sitteth  on  the  throne 
of  the  Kingdom."  Fear  and  consternation  took  hold  on 
Adonijah  and  his  guests  and  while  the  people  gathered 
around  Solomon,  Adonijah  and  his  company  scattered. 
When  another  One,  the  greater  Son  of  David,  is  enthroned 
and  the  glad  tidings  flash  forth,  He  has  taken  His  throne, 
all  his  enemies  will  be  scattered  and  be  made  the  footstool 
of  His  feet. 

Adonijah  took  hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar.  (Exodus 
xxi:12-14.)  Solomon  promises  him  that  his  life  would  be 
spared,  "but  if  wickedness  shall  be  found  in  him,  he  shall 
die."  Mercy  sho\Mi  and  righteousness  demanded  were  tlie 
first  acts  of  King  Solomon.  In  this  he  is  a  type  of  Him 
who  will  reign  in  peace  and  execute  mercy  and  righteous- 
ness on  the  earth.  Righteousness  will  reign  in  the  millen- 
nial Kingdom  and  evil  doers  will  be  cut  off. 

3.    David's  charge  to  Solomon;  David's  end. 

CHAPTER  11:1-11 

1.  David's  charge.     1-9. 

2.  David's  end.     10-11. 

We  call  attention  again  to  1  Chronicles  xxviii  and  xxix 
where  we  find  the  record  of  the  great  assembly  of  all  the 
princes  of  Israel  and  David's  great  address  to  them.  He 
then  made  known  to  all  Israel  that  the  Lord  had  chosen 
Solomon  to  occupy  the  throne.  He  speaks  there  of  the 
covenant  promise,  that  his  son  should  build  the  house  of 
the  Lord  and  His  courts.  He  exhorted  the  people  to  keep 
the  commandments  and  then  spoke  in  tenderest  words  to 
young  Solomon.  "And  thou,  Solomon  my  son,  know  thou 
the  God  of  thy  father,  and  serve  him  with  a  perfect  heart 
and  with  a  willing  mind  .  .  .  take  heed  now ;  for  the  Lord 
hath  chosen  thee  to  build  an  house  for  the  sanctuary;  be 
strong  and  do  it."  (1  Ch.  xxviii :1-10.)  Then  he  gave  to 
his  son  Solomon  the  patterns  for  the  Temple.  These  had 
been  made  under  the  guidance  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  The 
immense  treasures  are  mentioned  which  David  had  dedi- 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  '  249 

cated  for  the  Temple  worship.  Of  all  this  we  find  nothing 
in  the  record  of  the  first  book  of  Kings.  Here  only  the 
general  history  of  God's  government  in  Israel  is  given 
from  the  prophetic  point  of  view.  What  Chronicles  rep- 
resents we  shall  state  in  our  annotations  on  those  books. 

The  charge  of  David  to  Solomon  recorded  in  the  opening 
verses  of  this  chapter  was  given  privately.  Its  main  pur- 
pose was  to  exhort  his  son  to  punish  Joab  and  Shimei  and 
to  show  kindness  unto  the  sons  of  Barzillai.  Critics  have 
attacked  David's  character  on  account  of  this  charge. 
Kenan  in  his  history  of  the  people  Israel  goes  so  far  as  to 
say  that  the  incident  is  ' '  a  revelation  of  the  black  perfidy  of 
his  hypocritical  soul."  However,  the  charge  to  Solomon 
to  execute  vengeance  upon  these  two  men  is  not  a  stain  upon 
King  David.  The  punishment  was  well  deserved.  Joab 
had  killed  Abner  and  Amasa.  Shimei  had  in  great  vileness 
cursed  God's  King.  Both  were  wicked  men.  David's  own 
guilt  had  no  doubt  compelled  him  to  neglect  the  solemn 
duty  demanded  by  justice.  He  therefore  asked  Solomon 
to  vindicate  divine  justice  and  raise  it  up  from  the  defeat 
it  had  sustained  by  punishing  Joab  and  Shimei  with  death, 
while  kindness  is  to  be  bestowed  upon  the  righteous. 
From  the  prophetic  view-point  we  get  a  glimpse  of  the 
coming  righteous  judgment  of  the  King,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  who  will  execute  the  vengeance  of  God  and  punish 
the  evil  doers,  and  reward  the  righteous  in  His  Kingdom. 
Then  David  passed  away  and  was  buried  after  his  forty- 
j^ear  reign  in  the  city  of  David.  He  died  in  good  old  age, 
full  of  days,  riches  and  honour.  (1  Chron.  xxix:28.)  His 
memory  was  always  cherished  by  the  nation.  Peter  on  the 
day  of  Pentecost  spoke  of  his  burial  place :  ' '  His  sepulchre 
is  with  us  unto  this  day."  (Acts  ii:29.)  In  the  coming 
day  of  the  glorious  manifestation  of  the  Son  of  Man,  who 
also  bears  the  title  Son  of  David,  when  He  shall  receive  the 
throne  of  His  father  David,  King  David  in  resurrection 
glor^''  will  have  a  great  share  in  that  Kingdom. 


250  TEB  BOOK  OF  KIN08 


11.     Solomon's  Glorious  Reign.    His  Failure  and 

End 

Chapter  ii:12-xi. 
1.    The  righteous  Judgment  of  Solomon. 

CHAPTER  11:12-46 

1.  Solomon  upon  the  Throne.     12. 

2.  Adonijah's  Request.     13-18. 

3.  Bath-sheba  before  Solomon.     19-21. 

4.  Solomon's  answer  and  sentence  upon  Adonijah.     22-24. 

5.  Adonijah  executed.     25. 

6.  Abiathar  thrust  out.     26-27. 

7.  Joab  and  Shimei  executed.     28-46. 

' '  Then  sat  Solomon  upon  the  throne  of  David  his  father ; 
and  his  Kingdom  was  established  greatly."  Solomon  and 
his  glorious  reign  foreshadows  the  reign  of  that  greater 
Son  of  David,  our  Lord,  in  whom  the  covenant  promise 
made  to  David  will  be  fully  accomplished.  The  section 
which  begins  with  the  statement  of  Solomon's  enthrone- 
ment is  deeply  interesting  and  full  of  the  richest  typical  and 
prophetic  meaning.  Solomon's  righteous  judgments,  his 
wisdom,  his  reign  in  peace,  but  especially  the  building  of 
the  Temple  foreshadow  Him  who  will  ere  long  receive  the 
throne  and  build  the  temple  of  the  Lord.  (Zech.  vi:13.) 
Inasmuch  as  the  critics  reject  the  literal  fulfilment  of  the 
oath  bound  Davidic  covenant  and  the  prophetic  foreshadow- 
ing of  the  recorded  events,  they  also  condemn  Solomon's 
righteous  judgment  which  occupies  the  foreground  of  his 
reign.  We  quote  from  one  of  these  critics:  *'The  reign 
of  Solomon  began  with  a  threefold  deed  of  blood.  An 
Eastern  King  surrounded  by  the  many  princes  of  a  po-. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  251 

lygamous  family,  and  liable  to  endless  jealousies  and  plots, 
is  always  in  a  condition  of  unstable  equilibrium ;  the  death 
of  a  rival  is  regarded  as  his  only  safe  imprisonment. ' '  * 
In  such  statements  God's  governmental  ways  in  righteous- 
ness and  retribution  are  entirely  ignored. 

Adonijah  the  wicked  rebel  on  probation  visits  Bath-sheba. 
He  acknowledges  freely  that  the  Lord  had  given  the  King- 
dom to  his  brother.  Then  he  desired  that  Bath-sheba  should 
ask  her  son  Solomon  to  give  Abishag  the  Shunammite  to 
him  as  wife.  (Chapter  i:3.)  Bath-sheba  was  completely 
won  by  the  pathetic  plea  of  Adonijah  and  did  not  discover 
the  wicked  plot  which  was  hidden  beneath  his  request. 
Beautiful  is  the  reverence  which  Solomon  showed  to  his 
mother.  He  arose  from  his  throne,  he  bowed  himself  unto 
her,t  and  then  he  made  her  sit  on  his  right  hand.  How  he 
honored  and  loved  her !  It  may  foreshadow  the  love  of  Him 
for  the  belieAdng-  remnant  of  Israel,  His  beloved  people, 
who  will  have  a  share  in  His  coming  Kingdom.  When 
Bath-sheba  states  Adonijah 's  request  the  keen  discernment 
and  wisdom  of  Solomon  are  at  once  apparent.  "And  why 
dost  thou  ask  Abishag  the  Shunammite  for  Adonijah? 
ask  for  him  the  Kingdom  also ;  for  he  is  mine  elder  brother ; 
even  for  him,  and  for  Abiathar  the  priest,  and  for  Joab 
the  son  of  Zeruiah."  Adonijah 's  request  was  a  scheme  to 
obtain  the  Kingdom.  Most  likely  it  was  concocted  by 
Abiathar  and  Joab.  To  marrj^  a  deceased  King's  wife 
or  concubine  was,  according  to  Oriental  customs,  para- 
mount with  claiming  the  rights  of  the  King.  (2  Sam. 
xii  :8 ;  xvi  :21-22. )  Now  Abishag  was  not  the  wife  of  David 
in  the  sense  of  the  word,  yet  she  must  have  been  considered 
as  belonging  to  the  departed  King.  Had  Solomon  granted 
the  request  he  would  have  hopelessly  degraded  himself  in 
the  eyes  of  the  people.  (2  Sam.  iii:7.)  Adonijah  aimed 
by  this  cunning  scheme  at  the  throne  of  Solomon  and  at- 
tempted to  obtain  the  Kingdom.  Then  Solomon  pronounced 
judgment,  which  Adonijah  fully  deserved.     He  was  put  to 


*  Canon  Farrar. 

t  The  Septuagint  version  reads  "he  kiaaed  her." 


252  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

death  that  day.  It  has  been  suggested  by  eertaiu  critics 
that  Solomon  had  a  more  selfish,  carnal  reason  for  putting 
his  elder  brother  to  death.  "If,  as  seems  almost  certain," 
declares  a  higher  critic,  "Abishag  is  the  fair  Shulamite  of 
the  Song  of  Songs,  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  Solomon 
himself  loved  her,  and  that  she  was  the  jewel  of  his 
seraglio."  But  there  is  absolutely  no  evidence  that 
Abishag  is  identical  with  Shulamite ;  nor  does  Jewish  tradi- 
tion sustain  such  a  theory.     It  is  a  mere  supposition. 

Abiathar  is  next  dealt  with.  His  life  is  spared  but 
Solomon  thrusts  him  out  of  the  priesthood,  thus  fulfilling 
the  word  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  house  of  Eli.  (1  Sam. 
ii:31-36.)  Zadok  becomes  exclusively  priest.  (Verse  35.) 
Joab  and  Shimei  are  both  executed.  Though  Joab  caught 
hold  of  the  horns  of  the  altar  it  did  not  save  him ;  he  paid 
now  by  a  just  retribution  for  the  wicked  deeds  he  had  done. 
Shimei  was  commanded  to  remain  in  Jerusalem;  disobedi- 
ence would  mean  certain  death.  When  he  disobeyed,  the 
sentence  of  death  was  executed  upon  him.  And  here  we 
have  another  glimpse  of  the  government  of  the  Kingdom  in 
the  coming  age.  In  the  present  age  Grace  reigns  through 
righteousness;  in  the  Kingdom  age,  when  the  Lord  rules 
over  all,  righteousness  reigns.  Disobedience  will  be  swiftly 
met  by  judgment  as  it  was  with  Shimei. 


2.    Jehovah  appears  to  Solomon;  His  Prayer  and 
the  Answer. 

CHAPTER  III 

1.  Affinity  with  Pharaoh  and  Pharaoh's  daughter.     1. 

2.  Solomon  loved  the  Lord.     2-4. 

3.  Jehovah  appears  to  Solomon;  his  prayer.     5-15. 

4.  The  wisdom  granted  and  exemplified.     16-28. 

We  shall  now  see  how  the  Lord  kept  His  promise  He 
made  unto  David  in  the  establishment  of  his  Kingdom. 
After  the  execution  of  the  demanded  judgment  Solomon 
entered  into  affinity  with  Pharaoh  King  of  Egypt  (prob- 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  253 

ably  the  last  King  of  the  21  Tanitic  dynasty)  and  married 
his  daughter.  She  was  with  him  in  David's  city  until  he 
made  an  end  of  building  his  own  house,  the  house  of  the 
Lord  and  the  wall  of  Jeinisalem  round  about.  She  was  a 
Gentile  and  Jewish  tradition  states  that  she  became  a 
Jewish  proselyte.  This  union  was  prophetic  of  the  blessing 
Gentiles  were  to  receive  in  union  with  Him  whom  Solomon 
typifies.  It  was  Grace  which  took  up  Pharaoh's  daughter 
and  made  her  share  the  riches  and  honors  of  Solomon.* 
And  Solomon  loved  the  Lord.  At  Gibeon  he  offered  a  thou- 
sand burnt-offerings.  Gibeon  was  one  of  the  high  places 
where  the  priests  performed  their  functions.  (1  Chron. 
xvi:36-40.)  The  tabernacle  and  the  brazen  altar  were 
there,  but  not  the  ark  of  the  covenant.  However,  he  also 
approached  the  ark  and  stood  before  it  to  render  thanks 
unto  Jehovah. 

A  most  blessed  incident  followed.  As  stated  before  Solo- 
mon was  a  youth  when  he  was  anointed  King.  Eusebius 
states  that  he  was  only  12  years  old;  Josephus  gives  his 
age  as  15  years.  He  was  probably  not  yet  20  years  old 
when  he  became  King.  He  felt  deeply  two  things,  his  own 
littleness  and  his  great  responsibility  in  governing  the  mul- 
titude of  people.  It  was  while  still  at  Gibeon  that  Jehovah 
appeared  unto  him  in  a  dream  and  said:  "Ask  what  I 
shall  give  you. ' '  What  Grace  this  was,  but  it  also  searched 
his  innermost  soul.  And  this  offer  was  not  made  exclu- 
sively to  Solomon.  He  who  appeared  unto  Solomon  and 
put  this  gracious  question  to  him,  when  He  was  on  earth 
clothed  in  the  garb  of  a  servant,  yet  greater  than  Solomon 
in  all  his  glory,  said:  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you." 
(Matt.  vii:7.)  And  again  He  said:  "Whatsoever  ye  shall 
ask  in  my  name,  that  will  T  do."  (John  xiv:13.)  It  is 
faith's  prerogative  to  hear  Him  speak  thus  to  our  hearts 
and  to  make  use  of  His  great  offer.     Solomon's  answer  is 


*  Another  application  may  be  made  to  the  Jewish  remnant  of  the 
end  of  tlio  age  the  same  way  as  Ruth  typified  that  remnant.  See 
Annotations  on  Ruth.  That  remnant  is  called  through  Grace;  the 
Jews  through  unbelief  are  in  the  same  place  as  the  Gentiles.  The 
Grace  which  saved  and  called  the  Gentiles  will  draw  and  call  them 
and  bring  them  into  union  with  the  King. 


254  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

beautiful.  He  acknowledged  God's  great  mercy  and  kind- 
ness. Then  he  confessed  his  own  weakness  and  helpless- 
ness. **I  am  but  a  little  child;  I  know  not  how  to  go  out 
or  come  in."  He  speaks  of  his  responsibility  and  duty 
towards  God's  people  and  then  utters  his  request:  "Give 
therefore  thy  servant  an  understanding  heart  to  judge  thy 
people,  that  I  may  discern  between  good  and  bad,  for  who 
is  able  to  judge  this  thy  so  great  a  people?"  It  pleased 
the  Lord  as  it  always  pleases  Him  when  His  people  confess 
their  littleness  and  expect  help  from  Him.  The  request  is 
granted.  ' '  So  there  was  none  like  thee  before  thee,  neither 
shall  any  arise  like  unto  thee. ' '  Wisdom  from  above  filled 
his  soul.  The  Book  of  Proverbs  bears  witness  to  this  great 
understanding  the  Lord  gave  to  him.  But  he  added  much 
more;  he  gave  him  riches  and  honour.  "Seek  ye  first  the 
Kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteousness  and  all  things  shall 
be  added  unto  you."  (Matthew  vi:33.)  And  the  same 
Lord  does  still,  to  all  who  put  their  trust  in  Him,  exceed- 
ing abundantly  above  all  they  ask  or  think.  * '  He  giveth  us 
richly  all  things  to  enjoy."  (1  Tim.  vi:17.)  Then  there 
was  a  conditional  promise.  "And  if  thou  wilt  walk  in  my 
ways,  to  keep  my  statutes,  and  my  commandments,  as  thy 
father  David  did  walk,  then  I  will  lengthen  thy  days." 
(Verse  14.)  Alas!  Solomon  did  not  fulfill  the  condition. 
He  forsook  the  Lord  and  died  when  he  was  not  quite  60 
years  of  age.  He  awoke  and  behold  it  was  a  dream.  But 
it  was  more  than  a  dream.  That  the  prayer  had  been  an- 
swered and  that  the  wisdom  of  God  was  in  him  to  do  judg- 
ment is  evidenced  in  the  incident  which  follows  and  which 
needs  no  further  comment.  In  his  wisdom  he  is  a  type  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  who  is  the  wisdom  of  God.  And  the  justice 
he  administered  in  his  Kingdom  is  typical  of  the  righteous 
judgment  of  our  Lord  when  He  rules  as  King  over  the 
earth.  "He  shall  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes, 
neither  reprove  after  the  hearing  of  his  ears,  but  with 
righteousness  shall  he  judge  the  poor."     (Is.  xi  :l-4.) 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  255 


3.    Solomon's  Princes  and  Officers.    The  Prosperous 
Kingdom  and  the  King's  great  wisdom. 

CHAPTER  IV 

1.  The  Princes.     1-6. 

2.  The   Officers.     7-19. 

3.  The  Prosperous  Kingdom.     20-28. 

4.  Solomon's  great  wisdom.     29-34. 

"So  King  Solomon  was  king  over  all  Israel."  A  list  of 
the  princes  and  tlie  twelve  officers  is  given  first.  Their 
names  fit  in  perfectly  with  the  character  of  the  Kingdom, 
foreshadowing  the  coming  and  better  Kingdom  of  our  Lord. 
We  give  the  names  of  the  princes  with  their  meaning. 
Azariah,  ''Jehovah  is  help";  Elihoreph,  "my  God  is  re- 
ward"; Ahiah,  "Brother  of  Jehovah";  Jehoshaphat,  "Je- 
hovah judges";  Benaiah,  "Built  up  by  Jehovah";  Zabud, 
"Gift  bestowed";  Ahishar,  "Brother  of  ability";  Adon- 
iram,  ' '  Lord  of  Heights. ' '  * 

Then  we  have  here  the  record  of  a  remarkable  increase  of 
Judah  and  Israel ' ' as  the  sand  which  is  by  the  sea  in  multi- 
tude."  It  reminds  us  of  the  promise  made  to  Abraham, 
' '  in  multiplying  I  will  multiply  thy  seed  as  the  stars  of  the 
heaven,  and  as  the  sand  which  is  upon  the  sea  shore." 
(Gen.  xxii:17.)  Such  an  increase  will  come  during  the 
reign  of  God's  appointed  King,  the  Prince  of  Peace.  His 
Kingdom  reached  from  the  river  (Euphrates)  to  the  border 
of  Egypt.  Even  so  had  Jehovah  spoken  to  Abraham  that 
his  seed  should  possess  the  territory  from  Egypt  unto  Eu- 
phrates. This  was  realized  in  Solomon's  Kingdom.  Now 
the  Jews  hold  not  even  the  little  land  called  Palestine. 
When  the  true  King  comes  the  promised  territory  will  be 
given  once  more  to  the  seed  of  Abraham.  It  was  a  time 
of  great  prosperity.  Another  prophetic  hint  we  find  in 
the  fact  that  the  great  multitude  were  in  peace,  ' '  eating  and 


*  We  would  suggest  that  the  reader  find  with  the  help  of  a  good 
concordance  the  meaning  of  the  names  of  the  oflScers  given  in  this 
chapter. 


256  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

drinking  and  making  merry."  Such  will  be  the  universal 
state  of  the  people  in  the  coming  Kingdom  when  "ever}^ 
man  shall  call  his  neighbor  under  the  vine  and  the  fig  tree 
(Zech  iii:10),  as  under  Solomon's  reign  Judah  and  Israel 
dwelt  safely  every  man  under  his  vine  and  fig  tree.  (Verse 
25.)  Solomon  had  also  great  stables  full  of  horses  and 
many  chariots.  He  had  4000  horses ;  the  number  40,000  in 
verse  26  is  evidently  the  error  of  a  copyist.  (See  2  Chron. 
ix:25.)  There  was  much  to  be  supplied  for  the  provision 
of  the  Court  of  the  King.  See  the  daily  need;  but  they 
lacked  nothing.  How  great  the  need  there  is  in  the  world 
during  the  absence  of  the  true  King !  But  when  He  comes 
to  reign  "He  will  satisfy  the  poor  with  bread."  (Ps. 
exxxii:15.) 

And  how  marvellously  the  Lord  answered  the  King's  peti- 
tion! The  greatness  of  Solomon's  wisdom,  the  manysided- 
ness  of  its  character,  as  well  as  the  world-wide  impression 
this  wisdom  made  is  recorded  in  verses  29-34.  "Happy  is 
the  man  who  findeth  wisdom,  and  the  man  who  causeth  un- 
derstanding to  go  forth ;  for  merchandise  Vvith  it  is  better 
than  merchandise  of  silver,  and  the  gain  from  it  than  the 
most  fine  gold."  (Prov.  iii:13-14.)  The  King  expressed 
in  these  words  his  own  experience.  His  wisdom  v/as  greater 
than  the  wisdom  of  the  wise  men  of  the  East  and  greater 
than  Egypt.*  He  spake  3000  proverbs  and  made  1005  songs. 
The  book  of  Proverbs  contains  hundreds  of  his  sajdngs. 
But  not  all  these  proverbs  were  preserved  and  only  a  few  of 
his  songs.  (Song  of  Solomon  and  a  few  Psalms.)  Creation 
itself  was  known  by  the  great  King.  (See  verse  33.)  Ac- 
cording to  an  apocryphical  book  (Wisdom  of  Solomon)  he 
had  knowledge  of  kosmogony,  astronomy,  the  alteration  of 
solstices,  the  cycles  of  years,  the  natures  of  wild  beasts,  the 
forces  of  spirits,  the  thoughts  of  men,  the  qualities  of  plants 
and  roots.  Jewish  tradition  even  declares  that  he  could 
converse  with  the  wild  beasts.  This  knowledge  of  creation 
was  not  a  perfect  knowledge.     However,  it  also  reminds  us 


*  Compare  1  Chron.  ii:6.  Ethan,  1  Chron.  vi:44;  xv:17,  19.  Ps. 
Ixxxix  (Inscription)  ;  Heman  see  1  Chron.  vi:33;  xxv:5.  Psalm 
Ixxxviii   (iDscription), 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  257 

of  the  glorious  time  when  the  secrets  of  nature,  lost  through 
the  fall  of  man,  will  be  restored  through  Him,  who  will 
deliver  groaning  creation.     (Rom.  viii:21.) 

4.    The  Building  of  the  Temple  and  its  Dedication. 

Chapter  v-viii 

CHAPTER  V 
HIRAM   KING   OF   TYRE 

1.  Hiram  sends  servants  to  Solomon.     1. 

2.  The  Message  of  Solomon.     2-6. 

3.  Hiram's  answer  and  league  with  Solomon.     7-12. 

4.  Solomon's  workmen.     13-18. 

In  connection  with  1  Kings  v-viii  the  chapters  in  2  Chron- 
icles should  be  read  which  give  a  more  extensive  account. 
(2  Chronicles  ii-v:ll.)  Solomon  now  begins  the  great 
work,  which  may  be  called  his  life  work,  the  building  of  the 
house  of  the  Lord.  Hiram  heard  of  Solomon's  enthrone- 
ment, and  sent  messengers  to  Solomon.  This  Gentile  King 
was  a  lover  of  David.  David  had  made  before  his  death 
abundant  material  for  the  building  of  the  house  and  Hiram 
had  supplied  much  of  it.  ( 1  Chron.  xxii  -A. )  Solomon  re- 
quested that  Hiram  furnish  cedar  trees  from  Lebanon  for 
the  building  of  the  house  and  Hiram  agrees  to  float  them 
down  the  coast.  According  to  the  request  of  Hiram,  Solo- 
mon supplied  Hiram's  household  with  20,000  measures  of 
wheat  and  twenty  measures  of  oil.  Hiram  also  sent  a 
master-workman  by  name  of  Huram  whose  mother  was  a 
Jewess.  (2  Chron.  ii:13-14;  1  Kings  vii:14.)  This  co- 
operation of  the  Gentiles  in  building  the  Temple  is  also 
prophetic,  for  the  riches  of  the  Gentiles  are  promised  to 
Israel.  (Is.  lx:6;  liv:3.)  Jews  and  Gentiles  will  unite  to 
manifest  His  Glory.  A  large  number  of  workmen  were 
needed.  Two  classes  were  employed.  First  there  were 
30,000  men  out  of  all  Israel  raised  by  a  levy ;  10,000  worked 
by  relays  of  10,000  a  month.  The  second  class  was  com- 
posed of  strangers    (1   Kings  v:15;   2   Chron.   ii:17-18), 


258  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

150,000  in  number;  70,000  were  burden  bearera  and  80,000 
hewers  in  stone.  Over  all  were  3300  officers  (verse  16) 
with  550  chiefs  (1  Kings  ix:23),  of  whom  250  were  native 
Israelites.  (2  Chron.  viii:10.)  The  great  stones  and  the 
costly  (splendid)  stones  and  hewed  stones  are  especially 
mentioned.  They  were  for  the  foundation  of  the  house. 
These  stones  may  illustrate  all  those  who  as  "living  stones" 
are  built  up  a  spiritual  house.  (1  Pet.  ii:5.)  Through 
Grace  all  those  are  taken  out  of  nature's  place  and  pre- 
pared to  fit  into  that  marvellous  temple  of  the  Lord  "fitly 
framed  together — an  holy  temple  in  the  Lord."  (Eph. 
ii:20.) 

THE  DESCRIPTION  OF  THE  TEMPLE 

CHAPTER  VI 

1.  The  date  of  the  Beginning  of  the  Building.     1. 

2.  The  house,  the  porches  and  side  chambers.     2-10. 

3.  The  Divine  Charge.     11-14. 

4.  The  Internal  arrangements.     15-22. 

5.  The  Cherubim.     23-30. 

6.  The  Doors.     31-35. 

7.  The  inner  Court.     The  Temple  finished.     36-38. 

Three  chapters  are  taken  up  with  the  description  of  the 
Temple,  its  contents,  Solomon's  house  of  the  forest  of 
Lebanon  and  with  the  dedication  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Erich  foreshadowings  are  here  which  we  must  pass  over  in 
greater  part.  Books  could  be  written  on  these  three  chap- 
ters. However,  we  hope  to  point  out  the  way  for  a  closer 
study  of  the  Temple.  The  building  of  the  Temple  com- 
menced in  the  month  of  Zif  ("splendour"),  the  second 
month  when  nature  bursts  forth  in  all  her  splendour. 
There  comes  a  morning  without  clouds  (2  Sam.  xxiii:4) 
with  glorious  splendour,  when  He,  for  whose  coming  all  is 
waiting,  will  build  the  Temple.  (Zech.  vi:12.)  It  took 
seven  years  to  finish  the  house.  The  Temple  was  erected 
on  Mount  Moriah.  There  was  an  immense  foundation  of 
great  hewn  and  splendid  stones,  a  platform  upon  which  the 
Temple  was  built.     This  great  foundation  remains  to  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  259 

pretent  day,  known  by  the  name  "  Haram-esh-Sheref , "  and 
upon  it  there  stands  now  the  Mosque  of  Omar.  One  stone 
alone  is  thirty-eight  feet  and  nine  inches  long.  ''This 
great  stone  is  one  of  the  most  interesting  stones  of 
the  world,  for  it  is  the  chief  comer  stone  of  the  Temple's 
massive  wall.  Among  the  ancient  Jews,  the  foundation 
comer  stone  of  their  great  Sanctuary  on  Moriah  was  re- 
garded as  the  emblem  of  moral  and  spiritual  truths.  It 
had  two  functions  to  perform;  first,  like  the  other  founda- 
tion stones,  it  was  a  support  for  the  masonry  above,  but  it 
had  also  to  face  both  ways,  and  was  thus  a  bond  of  union 
between  the  two  walls.  .  .  .  The  engineers,  in  order  to 
ascertain  the  dimensions  of  this  foundation  stone,  worked 
round  it,  and  report  that  it  is  three  feet  eight  inches  high, 
and  fourteen  feet  in  length.  At  the  angle  it  is  let  down 
into  the  rock  to  a  depth  of  fourteen  inches,  but,  as  the  rock 
rises  towards  the  north,  the  depth  at  four  feet  north  of  the 
angle  is  increased  to  thirty-two  inches,  while  the  northern 
end  seems  entirely  embedded  in  the  rock.  The  block  is  fur- 
ther described  as  squared  and  polished,  with  a  finely  dressed 
face.  .  .  .  Fixed  in  its  abiding  position  three  thousand 
years  ago,  it  still  stands  sure  and  steadfast. ' '  * 

Still  more  interesting  is  the  fact  that  the  men  who  made 
an  exploration  of  this  Temple  wall,  some  3000  years  old, 
discovered  certain  marks.  We  quote  from  the  Palestine 
Exploration  report:  "I  must  now  speak  somewhat  fully 
on  a  subject  which  has  engaged  public  attention  for  some 
time,  and  has  already  given  rise  to  many  conjectures, 
namely,  the  'writings,'  either  painted  on  or  cut  into  the 
stones,  discovered  lately  on  the  bottom  rows  of  the  wall,  at 
the  south-east  comer  of  the  Haram,  at  a  depth  of  about 
eighty  feet  there,  where  the  foundations  lie  on  the  live  rock 
itself.  I  have  examined  them  carefully  in  their  places — by 
no  means  an  easy  task.  The  ventilation  at  that  depth  is 
unfavourable  to  free  breathing;  nor  is  the  pale  glimmer  of 
the  taper,  or  the  sudden  glare  of  the  magnesium  wire,  cal- 
culated materially  to  assist  epigraphical  studies.  ...  I  have 


*  From  Report  of  "Recent  Discoveries  in  the  Temple  Hill. 


260  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

come  to  the  following  conclusions : — First :  The  signs  cut, 
or  painted,  were  on  the  stones  when  they  were  first  laid  in 
their  present  places.  Secondly:  They  do  not  represent 
any  inscription.  Thirdly:  They  are  Phoenician.  I  con- 
sider them  to  be  partly  letters,  partly  numerals,  and  partly 
special  mason's,  or  quarry,  signs.  Some  of  them  were 
recognisable  at  once  as  well-known  Phcenician  characters; 
others,  hitherto  unknown  in  Phoenician  epigraphy,  I  had 
the  rare  satisfaction  of  being  able  to  identify  on  absolutely 
undoubted  antique  Phoenician  structures  in  Syria,  such  as 
the  primitive  sub-structures  of  the  harbour  at  Sidon.  No 
less  did  I  observe  them  on  the  bevelled  stones  taken  from 
ancient  edifices  and  built  into  later  work  throughout 
Phoenicia.  For  a  striking  and  obvious  instance  of  this,  the 
stones  of  which  (old  Phoenician  stones  to  wit)  immured  in 
their  present  place  at  subsequent  periods,  teem  with  peculiar 
marks  identical  with  those  at  Jerusalem."  Thus  the  stones 
testify  to  the  fact  that  strangers,  Phoenicians  and  others 
were  employed.  This  rock  foundation,  which  has  remained 
unshaken,  is  an  illustration  of  Him,  the  rock  of  ages,  upon 
whom  everything  rests. 

The  dimensions  of  the  house  were  twice  the  size  of  those 
adopted  in  the  tabernacle ;  the  whole  length  was  60  cubits, 
the  breadth  20  cubits,  and  the  height  also  20  cubits.  The 
interior  was  lined  with  boards  of  cedar,  the  house  was  over- 
laid with  gold,  and  a  wall  surrounded  the  whole.  The 
upper  chambers  were  10  cubits  high,  on  which  account  the 
height  of  the  whole  building  is  stated  to  have  been  30  cubits. 
The  porch  before  the  entrance  of  the  Temple  was  10  cubits 
in  length  and  as  many  in  breadth,  and  here  were  placed  two 
massive  pillars  of  brass,  named  Jachin  (that  is,  he  shall 
establish,  or,  steadfastness)  and  Boaz  (that  is,  in  Him  is 
strength).  On  the  other  three  sides  a  building  was  erected 
three  stories  in  height,  which  rose  to  two-thirds  of  the 
height  of  the  house  of  the  Temple.  The  sanctuary,  40 
cubits  in  length,  contained  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  ten 
candlesticks  of  gold,  and  ten  tables  of  gold.  The  holiest  of 
all  was  a  cube  of  20  cubits ;  it  contained  two  cherabim  made 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  261 

of  the  wood  of  the  olive-tree,  overlaid  with  gold,  and  10 
cubits  in  height,  whose  expanded  wings  touched  in  the 
middle,  and,  on  the  opposite  sides,  touched  the  walls. 

In  verse  7  we  find  a  remarkable  statement:  "And  the 
house  when  it  was  building,  was  built  of  stone  made  ready 
before  it  was  brought  thither,  so  that  there  was  neither 
hammer  nor  axe  nor  any  tool  of  iron  heard  in  the  house, 
while  it  was  in  building."  Thus  orderly  and  quietly  pro- 
ceeds the  erection  of  that  spiritual  house,  the  church,  des- 
tined to  be  the  holy  Temple  in  eternity.  However,  the 
Temple  itself  does  not  exactly  prefigure  the  church.  It  is 
a  type  of  the  Father's  house  above  where  God  dwells.  The 
chambei's  or  dwellings  round  about  remind  us  of  the 
words  of  our  Lord :  "In  my  Father's  house  are  many  man- 
sions." (Literally :  abodes,  dwellings.)  It  is  a  blessed  hint 
that  God  will  have  His  people  dwelling  with  Him.  But  the 
Temple  is  also  prophetic  of  another  Temple  which  will  yet 
stand  on  the  earth  when  our  Lord  reigns.  His  Glory  will 
cover  and  fill  that  house,  which  will  be  a  house  of  prayer 
and  worship  for  all  nations. 

After  the  description  of  the  dimensions  of  the  house,  and 
after  he  had  built  it  and  built  the  chambers,  the  word  of 
the  Lord  came  to  Solomon  telling  him  that  His  dwelling 
among  the  children  of  Israel  depended  upon  Solomon's 
faithfulness.  Soon  the  failure  came  in  and  Ezekiel  saw 
later  the  departure  of  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  from  the 
Temple  and  from  Jerusalem. 

And  in  the  house  gold  was  the  prominent  feature.  The 
word  "gold"  occurs  eleven  times  in  this  chapter.  All  was 
overlaid  with  gold.  Besides  this  there  were  "glistening 
stones,  and  of  divers  colours."  (1  Chron.  xxix  :2.)  Every- 
thing was  of  pure  gold;  the  sanctuary  might  have  been 
called  the  golden  house.  The  floor  was  overlaid  with  gold, 
the  walls,  the  doors  and  ceiling  were  covered  with  pure 
gold,  and  the  walls  had  inlaid  precious  stones.  (2  Chron. 
iii:6.)  Gold  is  the  emblem  of  divine  righteousness  and 
divine  glory.  Therefore  the  whole  sanctuary  witnessed  to 
the  glory  of  righteousness  which  is  in  keeping  with  the 


262  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

prophetic  foreshadowing  of  this  house.  How  much  greater 
will  be  the  glory  and  the  manifestation  of  divine  righteous- 
ness when  the  true  King  builds  the  house  and  manifests  His 
Glory ! 

Another  interesting  feature  present  the  Cherubim. 
While  the  Cherubim  which  belonged  to  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  remained  unchanged,  for  it  was  the  same  ark 
which  was  in  the  tabernacle,  Solomon  put  on  either  side  of 
it  the  big  figure  of  a  Cherub  carved  of  olive  wood  and 
overlaid  with  gold.  Each  was  ten  cubits  high.  The  two 
with  their  wings  met  over  the  mercy  seat,  while  the  wing 
of  the  one  touched  the  wall  on  the  south  and  the  wing  of 
the  other  touched  the  wall  on  the  north.  Then  instead  of 
these  Cherubim,  like  those  on  the  ark,  looking  downwards 
towards  the  mercy  seat,  they  looked  outwards.  (2  Chron. 
iii:13.)*  And  this  is  in  harmony  with  the  reign  of 
righteousness  which  is  foreshadowed  in  Solomon  and  the 
Temple.  "At  that  time,  righteousness  reigning  and  being 
established,  these  symbols  of  God 's  power  can  look  outwards 
in  blessing,  instead  of  having  their  eyes^fixed  on  the  cov- 
enant alone.  During  the  time  there  was  nothing  but  the 
covenant,  they  gazed  upon  it ;  but  when  God  has  established 
His  Throne  in  righteousness,  He  can  turn  towards  the  world 
to  bless  it  according  to  that  righteousness. ' ' 


THE  HOUSE  OF  SOLOMON  AND  PHARApH'S  DATIGHTEE. 
THE  FURNISHINGS  OF  THE  TEMPLE 


CHAPTER  VII 

The  house  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon.     1-7. 

The  royal  Palace  and  the  House  of  Pharaohs  daughter.     8-12. 

The  Master  workman.     13-14. 

The  Great  Pillars  and  Chapiters.     15-22. 

The  Brazen  Sea.     23-26. 

The  ten  Lavers  with  their  carriages.     27-40. 

Hiram's  Work.     41-47. 

The  golden  Utensils  for  the  Interior.     48-51. 

The    description   of   the    Palace    Buildings   come   next. 


"Inwards"  really  means  "towards  the  house"  or  "outwards." 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  268 

These  bnildings  ar©  called  ''Solomon's  own  house." 
(Verse  1.)  The  buildings  consisted  of  the  following:  The 
House  of  the  Forest  of  Lebanon.  (Verses  2-5.)  The  Porch 
of  Pillars.  (Verse  6.)  The  Porch  of  Judgment,  where 
the  King  judged.  (Verse  7.)  The  House  where  the  King 
dwelt.  (Verse  8.)  The  House  where  Pharaoh's  daughter 
dwelt  "like  unto  his  House."  (Verse  8.)  The  Wall 
which  surrounded  the  great  court.  Seven  things  are  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  the  Palace  buildings.  While  the 
Temple  was  God 's  dwelling  place  the  Palace  Buildings  were 
the  dwelling  place  of  the  King  and  his  wife,  Pharaoh's 
daughter.  From  there  the  King  executed  judgment.  Here 
we  have  prefigured  the  glorious  administration  of  the  King- 
dom, when  our  Lord  judges  in  righteousness.  The  house 
of  the  forest  of  Lebanon  is  the  type  of  His  Glory  among 
the  Gentiles.  And  inasmuch  as  the  house  of  Pharaoh's 
daughter  was  closely  connected  with  Solomon 's  house  and  it 
is  written  "we  are  his  house"  (Hebrews  iii:6),  we  have 
here  foreshadowed  the  association  of  the  Church  with 
Christ  in  His  coming  reign  of  Glory.  Everything  in  the 
Temple  and  in  the  Palace  Buildings  was  glorious  and  re- 
vealed the  immense  riches'  of  the  great  King.  What  a  day  it 
will  be  when  the  riches  and  glory  of  Christ  will  be  mani- 
fested and  when  the  Saints  of  God  will  share  it  all ! 

Then  Solomon  sent  and  fetched  Hiram  out  of  Tyre.  This 
was  not  the  King,  but  a  master  workman.  His  father  was 
a  Tyrian  and  his  mother  by  birth  of  the  tribe  of  Dan  was 
a  widow  and  had  married  a  man  of  Naphtali.  This  recon- 
ciles an  alleged  discrepancy.  (See  1  Kings  vii:14  and 
2  Chron.  ii:13.)  In  Chronicles  he  is  called  Huram.*  His 
mother  belonged  to  the  same  tribe  to  which  Aholiab  the  co- 
worker of  Bezaleel  belonged,  ( See  Exodus  xxxi  :l-6.)  The 
two  pillars  of  solid  brass  Jachin  ("He  will  establish")  and 
Boaz  ("in  Him  is  Strength")  are  first  described.  They 
were  a  new  thing  for  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  outward 
support  these  pillars  afforded  speak  of  Him  who  is  the 


*  Probably  Huram-abi    (Abi — meaning  "my  father")    was  his  cor- 
rect oame. 


3«4  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

support  of  everything  and  whose  power  upholdeth  all  things. 
Read  Jeremiah's  words  concerning  these  pillars  (Jer. 
xxvii:19,  etc.)  and  the  fulfilment  (2  Kings  xxv:13-17; 
Jerem.  lii:17).  All  the  vessels  mentioned  were  made  on  a 
much  larger  scale,  and  greater  in  number,  than  those  of  the 
tabernacle.  The  great  molten  sea  supported  by  twelve  oxen 
which  looked  towards  the  North,  South,  East  and  West,  the 
river  wrought  like  a  cup,  like  lilies,  contained  two  thousand 
baths  (about  16,250  gallons  of  water).*  Here  the  priests 
and  Levites  performed  their  ablutions.  The  water  was 
drawn  from  the  big  reservoir.  There  was  a  large  supply. 
Living  waters  in  abundance  will  flow  forth  from  Jerusalem 
in  the  coming  Kingdom  ages.  The  oxen  (the  burden  bear- 
ing beast)  are  typical  of  service.  Of  all  this  we  shall  find 
more  in  Chronicles.  Then  all  the  things  which  David  had 
dedicated,  the  silver,  the  gold  and  the  vessels  were  put  by 
Solomon  among  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord. 

THE  DEDICATION  OF  THE  TEMPLE 
CHAPTER  VIII 

1.  The  great  assembly.     1-2. 

2.  The  transportation  of  the  Ark.     3-9. 

3.  The  Glory  of  the  Lord  filling  the  house.     10-11, 

4.  Solomon's  opening  words.     12-21. 

5.  Solomon's  great   Prayer.     22-53. 

6.  Solomon's  Benediction.     .54-61. 

7.  The  Sacrifices  and  the  Feast.     62-66. 

The  ark'  of  the  covenant  is  now  to  be  transported  out  of 
David's  city  to  be  put  into  the  most  holy  place,  under  the 
wings  of  the  great  cherubim.  The  ark  was  carried,  accord- 
ing to  the  instructions  in  the  law,  by  the  priests,  A  great 
sacrificial  ceremony  also  took  place;  so  manj'  sheep  and 
oxen  were  sacrificed  so  that  "they  could  not  be  numbered 
for  multitude."  The  ark  now  had  found  a  resting  place. 
(Ps.  cxxxii  :8.)     The  staves  by  which  the  ark  had  been  car- 


*8  Chr©n.  It: 5  has  SOOO  baths:  this  must  mean  th«  actual  capac- 
ity of  this  colossal  vessel,  while  the  2000  measures  in  1  Kings  givep 
Hoe  uMial  Qoctente  of  the  laver. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  265 

ried  were  now  drawn  out.  They  were  not  to  be  removed 
( Ex.  XXV  :15 )  ;  but  now  they  were  pulled  out,  but  remained 
there  as  a  memorial  of  their  journeys  and  the  Lord's  faith- 
fulness in  bringing  them  into  the  promised  rest.  But  in 
the  ark  nothing  was  found  but  the  two  tables  of  stone; 
Aaron 's  rod  and  the  pot  of  Manna  were  missing.*  The  rod 
of  Aaron  was  the  emblem  of  the  priestly  grace  which  had 
accompanied  them  on  their  journey  and  the  Manna  was 
their  food  in  the  wilderness.  Both  Aaron's  rod  and  the  pot 
of  Manna  were  provisions  for  the  wilderness;  they  would 
not  have  been  in  keeping  with  the  reign  of  glory  and  peace, 
as  well  as  the  rest  they  now  enjoyed.  Thus  when  we  are 
brought  into  glory  we  have  no  more  need  of  priestly  inter- 
cession and  help,  nor  do  we  need  the  Manna  any  longer. 
But  the  law  was  not  missing,  for  as  regards  that  earthly 
Kingdom  over  which  our  Lord  will  yet  reign,  its  foundation 
and  administration  will  be  the  law  of  righteousness. 

When  the  ark  had  been  placed  the  glory-cloud  filled  the 
house.  Jehovah  had  appeared  in  His  Glory  to  dwell  in  the 
house.  And  when  that  future  Temple  will  be  on  the  earth  as 
seen  by  Ezekiel  in  his  great  Temple-vision,  the  Glory  will 
return  and  fill  the  house,  and  more  than  that,  the  whole 
earth  will  be  filled  with  His  glory.  (Ezek.  xliii  :l-5 ;  Numb. 
xiv:21.) 

Then  Solomon  spoke.  A  great  and  marvellous  dedicatory 
and  intercessory  prayer  follows.  It  must  be  noticed  that  in 
all,  especially  in  the  bringing  of  the  sacrifices,  Solomon  as- 
sumes the  full  character  of  priest.  He  acts  as  the  King- 
Priest,  another  Melchizedek,  King  of  Salem.  And  this  he 
was,  King  of  righteousness  in  his  judgments  and  King  of 
Peace.  In  all  this  he  foreshadows  Him,  who  is  a  priest  for- 
ever after  the  order  of  Melchizedek.  ' '  He  shall  be  a  priest 
upon  His  throne"  (Zech.  vi:13)  is  the  still  unfulfilled  pre- 
diction. Now  He  is  upon  the  Father's  Throne  as  the  priest 
and  advocate  of  His  people.  When  He  comes  again  He  will 
have  His  own  Throne  and  be  also  a  priest.  We  have  there- 
fore in  Solomon's  functions  in  dedicating  the  Temple  and  in 


*  Hebrews  ix:4  hd/S  referen<3e  to  the  Ark  in  the  Taberuaole. 


266  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

the  bringing  of  the  sacrifices  a  prophetic  type  of  our  Lord 
in  His  future  royal  Priesthood.  First,  Solomon  turned  to- 
wards the  Most  Holy  filled  with  the  Glory  of  the  Lord  and 
said:  "I  have  surely  built  thee  an  house  to  dwell  in,  a 
settled  place  for  thee  to  abide  in  forever. ' '  Then  he  blessed 
the  congregation.  He  mentions  once  more  David,  his  illus- 
trious father,  and  the  covenant-promise.  ''And  the  Lord 
hath  performed  His  word  that  He  spake,  and  I  am  risen  up 
in  the  room  of  David  my  father,  and  sit  upon  the  throne  of 
Israel  as  the  Lord  promised,  and  have  built  an  house  for 
the  name  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  (Verse  20.)  And 
yet  the  covenant-promise  had  not  seen  its  accomplishment ; 
the  failure  of  Solomon  and  the  passing  of  the  Glory  wit- 
nesses to  that.  Yet  Solomon,  his  reign  of  peace  and  pros- 
perity and  especially  his  great  work  in  the  building  of  the 
Temple  foreshadows  the  great  coming  fulfillment  of  the 
Davidie  covenant  in  the  enthroned  Christ  upon  the  throne 
of  his  father  David.  A  closer  study  of  the  great  prayer  we 
must  leave  with  the  reader.  The  different  petitions  are  of 
deep  interest  and  the  Kingdom  characteristics  are  prom- 
inent. "The  prayer  sets  the  people  under  the  form  of  a 
righteous  government,  abounding  indeed  in  kindness  and 
forgiveness,  yet  one  which  will  not  hold  the  guilty  innocent ; 
and  it  presents  God  as  the  people's  resource,  when  the  con- 
sequences of  their  sin  fall  upon  them  according  to  the  prin- 
ciples laid  down  by  Moses  in  Deuteronomy  and  else- 
where."* And  in  the  prayer  mention  is  made  "that  all 
people  of  the  earth  may  know  Thy  name,  to  fear  thee,  as 
do  Thy  people  Israel;  and  that  they  may  know  that  this 
house,  which  I  have  builded,  is  called  by  thy  name." 
(Verse  43.)  This  looks  forward  to  the  ingathering  of  the 
nations  into  the  Kingdom,  when  nations  will  be  joined 
to  a  God-fearing  Israel.  (See  Zech.  ii:ll;  iii:23). 
The  feast  mentioned  which  followed  the  dedication  feast 
is  the  feast  of  Tabernacles.  And  this  is  again  highly 
typical  for  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  is  as  a  type  un- 
fulfilled.   While  it  pointed  back  to  the  time  when  they  were 


Synopsis  of  the  Bible. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  267 

in  the  wilderness,  living  in  tents  and  journeying  towards 
the  land  of  promise,  it  also  pointed  to  the  future,  when  the 
Name  of  Jehovah  was  to  be  known  among  all  the  nations  of 
the  earth,  when  the  nations  would  come  to  worship  the  Lord 
of  Hosts.  (Zech.  xiv.)  The  conjunction  of  the  dedication 
of  the  Temple  with  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  was  more  than 
significant,  it  was  prophetic.  It  is  only  when  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  occupies  the  throne  and  He  builds  the  Temple 
of  Glory,  that  the  nations  will  seek  after  Him  and  be  con- 
verted.* And  while  the  King  prayed  and  blessed  the  peo- 
ple, the  people  full  of  happiness  and  joy  blessed  the  King. 
Heaven  and  earth  rejoiced.  It  is  the  climax  of  Israel's  his- 
tory in  the  land. 

5.    Jehovah  appears  unto  Solomon.    The  Greatness 
of  the  King. 

CHAPTER  IX 

1.  The  Second  Appearance  of  the  Lord  to  Solomon.     1-9. 

2.  Transactions  with  Hiram.     10-14. 
?,.     The  Levy  of  the  King.     15-23. 

4.  Pharaoh's  daughter  occupies  the  house.     24. 

5.  The  King's  offerings.     25. 

6.  Solomon's  na^^^     26^27. 

Jehovah's  righteous  government  in  the  midst  of  His 
people  Israel  had  now  been  established.  This  government 
was  given  and  entrusted  to  Solomon  the  Son  of  David,  so 
that,  in  a  sense,  Solomon  occupied  the  throne  of  the  Lord. 
All  depended  upon  the  faithfulness  of  Solomon.  There- 
fore the  Lord  appeared  unto  him  the  second  time,  not  to 
say  once  more :  ' '  Ask  what  I  shall  give  thee, ' '  but  to  as- 
sure him  that  He  would  keep  His  promise  made  to  David 
and  if  he  would  be  faithful  his  throne  would  be  established. 
Then  He  warns  against  disobedience.  If  he  serves  other 
gods,  Israel  was  to  be  cut  off  from  the  land  and  the  house 
would  be  forsaken.  How  all  this  came  to  pass,  Solomon's 
idolatry,  disobedience,  the  subsequent  shameful  history  of 

*  See  our  Annotation*  on  Leviticus  xxiii. 


268  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Israel's  apostasy,  we  shall  soon  have  to  follow.  Then  God 
used  Nebuchadnezzar  to  carry  out  the  judgment  upon  Jeru- 
salem and  the  Temple.  Another  Son  of  David  will  receive 
some  day  the  throne  and  the  government  will  rest  in 
His  hands.  In  Him  all  will  be  accomplished  which  the 
Prophets  have  spoken  and  w'hich  was  foreshadowed  in  Solo- 
mon. 

The  transaction  with  Hiram  is  interesting.  Besides  fur- 
nishing Solomon  with  timber  he  also  gave  him  gold; 
this  amounted  to  120  talents  of  gold  (3|  million  dollars). 
Solomon  gave  to  Hiram  twenty  cities  in  Galilee.  When  he 
came  to  look  at  them,  he  was  displeased  with  them  and 
called  them  Cabul,  w^hich  probably  means  "as  nothing." 
These  cities  may  have  been  given  to  King  Hiram  for  the 
gold  Solomon  had  received  from  him.  The  cities  were  later 
restored  to  Solomon  by  Hiram,  most  likely  after  Solomon 
had  paid  back  the  gold  Hiram  had  furnished. 

The  activity  of  the  great  King  in  building  fortresses  and 
cities  is  described  in  this  chapter.  Hazor  became  under  him 
a  stronghold  in  defence  of  S^^ria.  The  plain  of  Jezreel  had 
for  a  protection  Megiddo.  Gezer  and  Baalath  were  other 
strongholds.  Tadraor  is  Palmyra,  called  so  by  the  Greeks 
and  Romans,  while  it  is  called  still  to-day  Tadmor.  In  this 
chapter  (verse  18)  the  name  is  given  in  Hebrew  as 
' '  Tamar  " ;  in  2  Chron.  viii  :4  it  is  Tadmor. ' '  Tamar  means 
"palm  tree,"  the  same  as  Palmyra.  Chronicles  uses  Tad- 
mor because  it  was  known  by  that  name  after  the  exile. 

And  Solomon  had  a  fleet  of  ships,  manned  mostly  by  the 
experienced  shipmen  of  King  Hiram.  Another  fleet  is  men- 
tioned in  x:22,  a  navy  of  Tharshish,  which,  with  Hiram's 
navy,  sailed  every  three  years  to  fetch  gold,  silver,  ivory 
and  apes  and  peacocks.  Ophir  has  been  variously  located. 
Peru,  the  Molucca  Islands,  Armenia,  Arabia  and  parts  of 
Africa  have  been  suggested.  All  these  statements  show  the 
great  prosperity  of  the  Kingdom. 


TME  BOOK  OF  KINQS  2«© 

6.    Solomon  and  the  Queen  of  Sheba.    His  great 
Riches  and  Splendour. 

CHAPTER  X 

1.  The  Visit  of  the  Queen.     1-13. 

2.  Solomon's  enormous  wealth.     14—15. 

3.  The  Targets  and  Shields.     16-17. 

4.  The  Ivory  Throne.     18-20. 

5.  The  abundance  of  gold  and  the  depreciation  of  silver.     21-22. 

6.  The  greatest  living  Monarch.     23-26. 

7.  His  chariots  and  horsemen.     27-29. 

The  visit  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  who  had  heard  of  Solo- 
mon's wisdom,  is  the  next  recorded  event  of  much  interest 
and  significance.  It  illustrates  what  was  previously  stated 
in  chapter  iv  :34.  Sheba  was  known  to  such  ancient  writers 
as  Strabo  and  Pliny.  It  was  the  center  of  a  vast  commer- 
cial empire  in  the  southwestern  part  of  the  Arabian  penin- 
sula. The  ruins  which  are  still  to  be  seen  testify  of  a  great 
civilization.  (See  Isaiah  lx:6;  Psalm  lxxii:15;  Jerem. 
vi:20;  Ezek.  xxvii:22;  xxxviii:13).  She  heard  and 
came;  she  communed  with  Solomon  and  brought  pres- 
ents; she  was  filled  with  wonder  at  all  she  heard  and  saw 
and  declared:  "Behold  the  half  was  not  told  me."  Then 
she  uttered  her  praise:  "Happy  are  thy  men,  happy  are 
these  thy  servants,  which  stand  continually  before  thee,  and 
that  hear  thy  wisdom.  Blessed  be  the  Lord  thy  God,  who 
delighteth  in  thee,  to  set  thee  on  the  throne  of  Israel,  be- 
cause the  Lord  loved  Israel  forever,  therefore  made  He  thee 
King,  to  do  judgment  and  justice."  Then  she  gave  gold, 
spices  and  precious  stones  of  an  enormous  value.  In  all  this 
glory  which  came  to  Solomon  we  have  a  prophetic  type  of 
the  glory  which  will  come  to  Him,  who  is  greater  than 
Solomon.  When  He  occupies  the  throne,  the  Gentiles  will 
seek  Him  and  praise  the  King  as  the  Queen  of  Sheba  praised 
Solomon.  "The  Kings  of  Tarshish  and  of  the  isles  shall 
bring  presents;  the  Kings  of  Sheba  and  Seba  shall  offer 
gifts.  Yea,  all  the  Kings  shall  fall  down  before  Him;  all 
nations  shall  serve  Him.  .  .  .  And  He  shall  live,  and  ta 


270  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Him  shall  be  given  of  the  gold  of  Sheba ;  prayer  also  shall  be 
made  for  Him  continually,  and  daily  shall  He  be  praised." 
(Ps.  Ixxii  :10-15. )  This  great  Kingdom  Psalm  will  be  ful- 
filled when  our  Lord  comes  again.  ' '  The  abundance  of  the 
sea  shall  be  converted  unto  thee,  the  forces  of  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  unto  thee.  The  multitude  of  camels  shall  cover 
thee,  the  dromedaries  of  Midian  and  Ephah ;  all  they  from 
Sheba  shall  come,  they  shall  bring  gold  and  incense;  and 
they  shall  shew  forth  the  praises  of  th.e  Lord. "  (Is.  Ix  :5-6.) 
All  these  and  many  other  prophecies  will  be  fulfilled  in  the 
future  Kingdom  of  our  Lord.  The  visit  of  the  Queen  of 
Sheba  foreshadows:  all  this.  See  also  the  warning  of  our 
Lord  in  Matth.  xii:42. 

And  what  riches  and  glory  the  King  possessed !  Every- 
thing was  of  gold.  His  throne  was  of  solid  ivory  overlaid 
with  gold.  Twelve  wonderful  lions  stood  on  the  one  side 
and  on  the  other.  All  the  drinking  vessels  were  of  gold. 
Silver  depreciated  in  his  days;  it  was  worth,  next  to  noth- 
ing. "The  King  made  silver  to  be  in  Jerusalem  as  stones, 
and  cedars  made  he  to  be  as  sycomore  trees."  (Verse  27.) 
Compare  this  with  what  will  take  place  in  the  coming 
Kingdom  of  our  Lord.  "Instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come 
up  the  fir  tree,  and  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the 
myrtle  tree."  (Is.  lv:13.)  "For  brass  I  will  bring  gold, 
and  for  iron  I  will  bring  silver,  and  for  wood  brass,  and 
for  stones  iron."     (Is.  lx:17.) 

7.    Solomon's  Failure.    Judgment  announced  and 
the  beginning  of  disruption. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1.  Solomon's  Polygamy  and  Departure  from  God.     1-18. 

2.  Hadad  the  Edomite.     14-22. 

3.  Rezon  the  second  adversary.     23—25. 

4.  Jeroboam.     26-40. 

5.  Solomon's  Reign  and  Death.     41-43. 

"But — ."  An  ominous  word  with  which  this  chapter 
begins.    It  introduces  us  to  the  sad  picture  of  Solomon's 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  271 

great  apostasy.  ' '  H©  shall  not  multiply  horses  to  himself, 
nor  cause  the  people  to  return  to  Egypt,  to  the  end  that  he 
should  multiply  horses,  for  as  much  as  the  Lord  hath  said 
unto  you,  ye  shall  henceforth  return  no  more  that  way. 
Neither  shall  he  multiply  wives  to  himself,  that  his  heart 
turn  not  away,  neither  shall  he  greatly  multiply  to  himself 
silver  and  gold."  (Deut.  xvii:16-17.)  The  Lord  antici- 
pated a  royal  form  of  government  for  Israel  and  gave  these 
instructions  concerning  the  King.  The  first  failure  is  seen 
in  the  previous  chapter.  He  multiplied  horses  and  brought 
them  out  of  Egypt.  Egypt  is  the  type  of  the  world.  God 
had  answered  his  prayer  and  then  added  riches  and  every- 
thing else.  But  his  heart  was  captivated  by  riches  and 
luxuries.  No  doubt  he  loved  these  things  and  multiplied 
silver  and  gold.  The  Devil's  crime,  pride,  was  found  in 
him.  His  heart  was  lifted  up.  (Deut.  xvii:20.)  But 
worse  than  all  he  multiplied  wives.  The  sad  record 
is  found  in  the  opening  verses  of  this  chapter.  Then  his 
heart  was  turned  away  by  his  wives  and  concubines  after 
other  gods.  David,  though  his  trouble  also  originated  in 
polygamy,  had  always,  in  all  his  sin  and  failure,  clung  to 
Jehovah.  In  this  sense  David's  heart  was  perfect  with  the 
Lord  his  God.  He  did  not  turn  away  from  the  Lord,  nor 
did  David  go  after  strange  gods.  Solomon's  guilt  was 
great.  The  Lord  had  appeared  twice  to  him ;  He  never  ap- 
peared to  David.  And  with  all  the  Lord  had  done  for 
Solomon,  the  evidences  of  His  grace  towards  him,  the  house 
he  could  build,  the  superior  wisdom  he  had,  the  great  King 
departed  from  the  Lord.  Such  is  the  heart  of  man,  des- 
perately wicked.  It  becomes  now  evident  that  the  oath- 
bound  covenant  concerning  a  Man  to  sit  upon  the  Throne  of 
David  with  a  glorious  Kingdom  established,  must  be  ful- 
filled in  another  son  of  David.  Solomon  fails.  The  King- 
dom is  rent  from  him.  The  glory  departs.  Never  again 
were  the  scenes  of  glory  repeated  in  the  Kingdom  of  Israel. 
But  when  David's  Lord  and  David's  Son  appears,  the  King 
of  Righteousness,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  the  Kingdom  and  the 
Glory  will  be  restored  to  Israel. 


272  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

It  has  been  stated  that  Solomon  himself  was  not  actually 
guilty  of  idolatry.  If  he  built  the  places  of  idolatrous  wor- 
ship for  his  many  wives  only,  he  was  guilty  of  the  sin  of 
idolatry.  The  abominations  were  then  introduced.  Lux- 
uries, wealth,  self-indulgence,  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  the  lust 
of  the  flesh  and  the  pride  of  life  led  into  idolatry.  It  is  the 
same  in  the  closing  days  of  the  present  age.  Ashtoreth,  a 
Phoenician  goddess  was  worshipped  with  impure  rites. 
Milcom  (Molech)  was  the  idol-god  of  the  Ammonites. 
Chemosh  was  the  sun-god  and  war-god  of  the  Moabites. 

And  the  Lord  who  had  appeared  twice  unto  Solomon, 
the  Lord  who  had  commanded  him  not  to  go  after  other 
gods,  was  now  angry  with  Solomon.  Judgment  is  an- 
nounced. Two  adversaries  were  stirred  up  at  once  against 
Solomon,  Had  ad  the  Edomite  and  Rezon  of  Syria,  who  ab- 
horred Israel. 

Jeroboam,  a  servant  of  King  Solomon  (verse  11)  lifted 
up  his  hand  against  the  King.  Ahijah  the  Prophet,  attired 
in  a  new  garment,  meets  the  future  King  of  the  ten  tribe 
division  and  tore  his  garment  into  twelve  pieces.  *'And 
he  said  to  Jeroboam,  Take  thee  ten  pieces,  for  thus  saith 
the  Lord,  the  God  of  Israel,  Behold  I  will  rend  the  Kingdom 
out  of  the  hand  of  Solomon,  and  will  give  ten  tribes  to 
thee."  But  the  message  of  the  Lord  through  Ahijah  also 
declared  His  faithfulness  to  David.  Jehovah  still  speaks 
of  "David  my  servant";  he  is  "to  have  a  light  always  be- 
fore me  in  Jerusalem,  the  city  which  I  have  chosen  Me 
to  put  My  name  there."  Tlie  house  of  David  in  the  midst 
of  all  the  evil  is  not  forgotten.  There  will  be  affliction, 
"but  not  forever."  (Verse  38.)  And  Jeroboam  also  has 
the  opportunity  of  having  a  house  "as  I  built  for  David" 
on  the  condition  of  obedience.  But  ambitious  Jeroboam 
did  not  keep  the  statutes  and  commandments  of  the  Lord. 

And  Solomon?  Not  a  word  of  repentance !  No  tears 
like  those  his  father  wept.  No  confession  as  it  came  from 
David's  lips.  Only  one  thing  is  stated.  Only  one  act  is 
mentioned  of  apostatized  Solomon.  He  sought  to  kill  Jero- 
boam. After  a  reign  of  40  years,  Solomon  passed  away  not 
quit«  iO  yaars  old. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KIN0$  273 

111.     The  Divided  Kingdom. 

Chapter  xii-xvi 
1.    Rehoboam  and  the  Revolt  of  the  Ten  Tribes. 

CHAPTER  XII 

1.  The  Revolt  of  the  Northern  Tribes.     1-20. 

2.  The  threatening  War  averted.     21-24. 

3.  Jeroboam's  wicked  schemes.     25-33. 

Rehoboam  ("Enlarger  of  the  People")  is  the  only  son 
of  Solomon  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  (1  Chron.  iii:10.) 
Eeelesiastes  ii  :18-19  and  iv  :13-16  seems  to  give  a  hint  that 
his  father  was  fearful  about  his  reign  in  his  stead.  In 
2  Chronicles  x-xiii  we  find  the  history  of  Rehoboam  more 
fully,  which  we  follow  in  the  annotations  of  that  book.  He 
was  the  son  of  the  Ammonitess  Naamah.  During  the  first 
three  years  he  was  outwardly  faithful,  but  after  that  he 
drifted  like  his  father  into  idolatry  and  its  moral  evils. 
(1  Kings  xiv:23-24;  2  Chron.  xi:13-17.)  He  forsook  the 
Law  of  the  Lord  and  the  people  followed  him.  (2  Chron. 
xii  :1. )  The  polygamous  tendency  of  his  father  and  grand- 
father were  also  indulged  by  him.  (2  Chr.  xi:21.)  Jero- 
boam who  had  fled  into  Egypt  (xi:40)  was  recalled  and  the 
history  of  the  revolt  follows.  Jeroboam  was  made  King 
over  the  ten  tribes,  while  Rehoboam  reigned  over  Judah. 
AVhat  took  place  was  from  the  Lord  'Hliat  he  might  per- 
form his  saying,  which  the  Lord  spake  by  Ahijah  the 
Shilonite  unto  Jeroboam  the  son  of  Nebat. "  (xi  :31.)  The 
disruption  of  the  Kingdom  had  taken  place.  Up  to  the^ 
deportation  of  the  ten  tribes  under  ShalrHaneser  (722  b.  c.Xzf^^ 
covers  253  years.  During  that  time  thirteen  Kings  reigned 
over  Judah  and  twenty  over  the  ten  tribes ;  there  w^ere  also 
two  periods  of  lawlessness.     The  apostasy  of  the  t«n  trib« 


274  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Kingdom  was  complete;  none  of  their  Kings  served  the 
Lord.  Under  Ahab  and  his  two  sons  Ahaziah  and  Joram 
the  Baal  worship  became  universal.  It  was  different  with 
the  Kings  of  Judah.  A  number  of  them  were  God-fearing. 
(Asa,  Jehoshaphat,  Uzziah,  Jotham,  Hezekiah  and  Josiah.) 
Others  were  wicked  blasphemers  as  we  shall  see  from  their 
history.  It  is  also  noteworthy  that  the  reign  of  the  wicked 
Kings  was  shorter  than  the  reign  of  those  who  feared  the 
Lord. 

After  the  stoning  of  Adoram,  Rehoboam  's  collector,  Reho- 
boam  fled  to  Jerusalem  and  gathered  an  army  from  Judah 
and  Benjamin  to  fight  against  Israel  to  bring  back  the 
Kingdom  to  the  son  of  Solomon.  Shemaiah  ("heard  of 
Jehovah"),  a  man  of  God,*  brought  the  message  from  the 
Lord  not  to  fight  against  Israel.  They  were  obedient  and 
the  war  was  averted.  Many  Israelites,  who  were  true  to  Je- 
hovah, as  well  as  all  the  priests  and  Levites  remained  in 
the  Kingdom  of  Judah. 

Jeroboam  made  Shechem  his  capital.  He  also  built  the 
ancient  Penuel  ( ' '  the  face  of  God, ' '  Gen.  xxxii  :30 ;  Judges 
viii:8),  but  he  did  not  meet  the  Lord  there  like  Jacob. 
Then  the  step  was  done  which  precipitated  idolatry.  To 
protect  his  Kingdom  and  keep  the  people  back  from  the  true 
worship  of  Jehovah,  he  placed,  with  the  consent  of  the 
people,  in  Dan  and  Beth-el  on  the  northern  and  southern 
boundaries  of  his  Kingdom,  two  calves  of  gold.  Thus  with 
an  unspeakable  blasphemy  he  said :  "  It  is  too  much  for  you 
to  go  up  to  Jerusalem;  behold  thy  gods,  0  Israel,  which 
brought  thee  up  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt."  The  lowest 
class  of  the  people  were  chosen  as  priests.  Then  he  also 
offered  sacrifices  unto  the  calves  that  he  had  made.  All  was 
devised  of  his  own  heart  and  God's  Word  was  completely 
set  aside.  It  corresponds  to  the  great  apostasy  of  Roman- 
ism with  its  wicked,  blasphemous  rites. 


*  As  failure  had  come  in  Prophecy  at  once  reappears.  Shemaiah 
must  have  been  a  very  courageous  man  to  stand  in  face  of  a  gath- 
ered army  of  180,000  men,  an  angry  King  and  an  angry  people  and 
declare  a  message  which  must  have  been  decidedly  unwelcome.  And 
one  cannot  but  admire  the  gracious  submission  of  King  and  people. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINQB  275 

2.    Jeroboam  and  Rehoboam  and  their  Reig^n. 
Chapter  xiii-xiv. 

CHAPTER  XIII 
THE  MAN  OF  GOB  FROM  JUDAH 

1.  The  Man  of  God  and  Jeroboam.     1-10. 

2.  The  Temptation  and  lying  message.     11-19. 

3.  Judgment  announced.     20-22. 

4.  The  fate  of  the  Man  of  Judah.     23-32. 

5.  Jeroboam's  impenitence.     33-34. 

A  dramatic  scene  opens  this  chapter.  The  idolatrous 
King  is  engaged  in  his  religious  ceremony  when  an  unnamed 
man  of  God  interrupted  him.  He  did  not  rebuke  Jeroboam, 
but  addressed  himself  to  the  altar,  uttering  a  remarkable 
prophecy:  ''Behold,  a  child  shall  be  born  unto  the  house 
of  David,  Josiah  by  name;  and  upon  thee  shall  he  oft'er 
the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  burn  incense  upon  thee, 
and  men's  bones  shall  be  burned  upon  thee."  More  than 
300  years  later,  and  nearly  a  century  after  the  ten  tribes 
had  been  carried  away  captive,  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled. 
(2  Kings  xxiii:15-18.)  The  Man  of  God  announced  the 
unborn  King  by  name  and  also  what  he  would  do,  just  as 
Isaiah  announced  the  unboim  King  Cyrus  and  his  work. 
Higher  Criticism  has  labored  in  vain  to  destroy  this  great 
evidence  of  prophecy.  Then  the  Man  of  God  added  a  sign 
which  happened  literally  in  the  presence  of  the  King.  The 
angry  King  commanded  the  seizure  of  the  prophet,  but  the 
outstretched  arm  withered.  The  withered  arm  was  restored 
in  answer  to  the  prophet's  prayer.  Jehovah  was  seeking  in 
mercy  even  Jeroboam  in  all  his  wickedness.  It  was  unsuc- 
cessful, for  it  is  written :  ' '  After  this  King  Jeroboam  re- 
turned not  from  his  evil  way."  The  Man  of  God  and 
what  happened  to  him  occupies  the  greater  part  of  the 
chapter.  The  King  invited  him  to  a  feast,  probably  an  idol 
feast,  and  wanted  to  give  him  a  reward.  He  refused  both 
because  the  Lord  had  charged  him  not  to  eat  bread  nor 
drink  water,  nor  return  the  same  way  he  came.     The  Man 


276  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

of  God  was  to  have  no  fellowship  with  the  works  of  darknaas. 
The  same  principle  is  laid  down  for  God's  people  in  the 
New  Testament.  (2  Cor.  vi:14-18;  Eph.  v:ll;  2  John 
9-11.)  Then  comes  his  great  failure,  showing  that  while  he 
was  a  messenger  of  God,  his  heart  was  not  altogether  right 
with  God.  It  was  through  the  old  prophet  that  a  lying 
spirit  induced  him  to  disobey  the  Word  of  the  Lord.  And 
when  the  old  prophet  announced  his  coming  judgment  we 
read  not  a  word  that  he  turned  to  the  Lord  with  confession 
and  prayer.  Then  the  predicted  fate  overtook  him.  It  is 
a  solemn  lesson  which  teaches  us  obedience  to  the  Word  of 
God.  ' '  It  teaches  us  that,  whenever  God  has  made  His  will 
known  to  us,  we  are  not  to  allow  any  after  thought  whatever 
to  call  it  in  question,  even  although  the  latter  may  take  the 
form  of  the  Word  of  God.  If  we  were  nearer  to  the  Lord, 
we  would  feel  that  the  only  true  and  right  position  is  to 
follow  that  which  He  told  us  at  first.  In  every  case  our 
part  is  to  obey  what  He  has  said. ' '  The  lion  who  had  killed 
the  disobedient  prophet  remained  for  a  time  with  the  body 
without  touching  it.  It  was  to  show  the  divine  character  of 
the  judgment.  If  we  look  upon  Jeroboam's  departure  from 
God  and  idolatrous  worship  as  typical  of  the  corruption  of 
Eomanism,  we  may  see  in  the  Man  of  God  from  Judah,  who 
rebuked  the  false  altar,  a  type  of  Protestantism.  Like  the 
prophet  who  delivered  the  message  faithfully  but  became 
disobedient,  Protestantism  is  disobedient  to  the  Word  of 
God  and  the  judgment  of  God  will  overtake  it  in  the  end. 


CHAPTER  XIV 
THE  PASSING  OF  JEROBOAM  AND  REHOBOAM 

1.  Sickness  and  Death  of  Jeroboam's  Son.     1-18. 

2.  Jeroboam's  reign  and  death.     19'-20. 

3.  Reboboam's  apostacy,  punishment  and  death.     21-31. 

We  come  now  to  the  passing  of  both  Kings,  Jeroboam  of 
Israel  and  Rehoboam  of  Judah.  Abijah  ("Jehovah  is  m>' 
father"),  the  son  of  wicked  Jeroboam,  was  sick.     "That 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  277 

child  was  the  one  green  spot  in  Jeroboam 's  life  and  home ; 
the  one  germ  of  hope.  And  as  his  father  loved  him  truly, 
so  all  Israel  had  set  their  hopes  on  him.  Upon  the  inner 
life  of  this  child,  its  struggles  and  its  victories,  lies  the 
veil  of  Scripture  silence;  and  best  that  it  should  be  so. 
But  now  his  pulses  were  beating  quick  and  weak,  and  that 
life  of  love  and  hope  seemed  fast  ebbing.  None  with  the 
father  in  those  hours  of  darkness,  neither  counsellor,  cour- 
tier, prophet  nor  priest,  save  the  child's  mother."  *  Then 
the  unhappy  King  remembered  Ahijah,  who  had  first  an- 
nounced his  exaltation  to  be  king.  (xi:31.)  Disguised, 
the  wife  of  Jeroboam  proceeds  to  Shiloh  not  to  ask  prayer 
for  the  sick  son  but  to  find  out  (as  if  consulting  a  fortune 
teller) what  should  become  of  the  child.  Abijah  was  blind. 
What  need  was  there  for  Jeroboam's  wife  to  feign  to  be 
another  ?  And  the  Lord  saw  her  coming  and  announced  her 
approach  to  blind  Ahijah.  She  hears  from  his  lips  not  good 
tidings,  but  a  message  of  judgment.  Judgment  upon  the 
house  of  Jeroboam  is  announced  and  when  the  feet  of  the 
mother  entered  Tirzah  once  more  the  child  would  die.  Con- 
cerning the  child  Abijah,  the  prophet,  said :  "In  him  there 
is  found  some  good  thing  toward  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  in 
the  house  of  Jeroboam. ' '  Thus  the  little  one  was  saved  and 
removed  from  the  evil  to  come  upon  the  house  of  Jeroboam. 
Then  Jeroboam  died.  In  2  Chronicles  xiii  :20  we  read  ' '  the 
Lord  struck  him  and  he  died."  Nadab  reigned  after  him 
for  only  two  years. 

Then  follows  the  passing  of  Rehoboam.f  His  reign  was 
begun  well,  but  he  also  turned  against  the  Lord,  and  Judah 
did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Idolatry  and  immorality 
flourished,  A  corrupted  worship  led  to  a  corrupted  life. 
Departure  from  God  and  His  Word  leads  always  to  moral 
decline.  Our  times  bear  witness  to  this.  Then  the  punish- 
ment came  in  the  fifth  year  of  his  reign.  Shishak,  King  of 
Egypt,  took  Jerusalem  and  carried  away  the  treasures  of 


*  Bible-History  by  Edersheim. 

t  In  2  Chronicles  we  find  the  fuller  record.  He  had  18  wivw  and 
60  concubines.  His  family  consisted  of  28  sons  and  60  daughters. 
(2  Chron.  xi.) 


278  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

the  house  of  the  Lord  and  of  the  King.  He  took  away  th« 
golden  shields  of  Solomon  so  that  Rehoboam  had  to  substi- 
tute shields  of  brass.  Shishak  was  the  founder  of  the 
xxii  Dynasty.  Jeroboam  had  been  with  him  (xi:40),  and 
it  is  not  improbable  that  at  his  instigation  Shishak  m£ide 
his  expedition  to  Jerusalem.  In  the  temple  ruins  of  Amon 
at  Kamak,  near  Thebes,  are  recorded  more  than  sixty 
Ephraimitic  cities  that  paid  tribute  to  Shishak,  also  the 
names  of  many  more  JudaBan  cities ;  there  also  is  a  picture 
of  Rehoboam.  The  detailed  description  of  Shishak  and  his 
invasion,  the  work  of  Shemaiah  the  prophet  in  averting  a 
greater  disaster,  we  find  in  2  Chronicles  xii. 


3.    Abijam  and  Asa,  Kings  of  Judah. 

CHAPTER  XV:  1-24 

1.  Abijam  of  Judah.     1-8   (2  Chronicles  xiii). 

2.  Asa  of  Judah.     9-24   (2  Chronicles  xiv-xvi). 

Abijam  is  called  in  Chronicles  Abijah ;  in  2  Chron.  xiii  :21 
he  is  called  Abijahu.  Abijam  was  undoubtedly  the  older 
form.  It  is  possible  that  on  account  of  his  great  address  of 
rebuke  to  Jeroboam  (2  Chron.  xiii:4-12)  they  may  have 
called  him  Abijah  (Jehovah  is  my  father).  He  ascended 
the  throne  in  the  eighteenth  year  of  Jeroboam's  reign  and 
was  King  for  three  years.  Here  we  find  the  statement  that 
he  walked  in  all  the  sins  of  his  father  and  that  his  heart  was 
not  perfect  with  the  Lord  as  the  heart  of  David  his  father. 
The  statement  in  chapter  xi:36  is  repeated,  for  David's 
sake  did  the  Lord  his  God  give  Mm  a  lamp  in  Jerusalem. 
It  was  a  custom  (and  is  still  so  among  the  Fellaheen  in 
Palestine)  to  keep  a  lamp  constantly  burning  in  the  tent. 
The  extinction  of  the  lamp  signified  the  removal  of  the 
family.  The  Lord  remembered  the  house  of  David  and  his 
covenant  and  on  account  of  that  covenant  the  deserved 
judgment  was  held  back.  The  war  he  fought  with  Jero- 
boam is  not  given  in  Kings  but  in  Chronicles.  We  shall 
follow  his  history  with  the  text  in  Chronicles. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  279 

Then  his  son  Asa  ("who  will  heal"),  a  mere  boy,  began 
to  reign.  During  the  first  ten  years  of  his  reign  the  land 
had  rest.  (2  Chron.  xiv  :1.)  He  is  the  first  King  of  Judah 
of  whom  it  is  said,  he  did  right  in  the  eyes  of  the  Lord,  as 
did  David  his  father.  A  great  reformation  took  place. 
The  Sodomites  with  their  abominations,  the  result  of 
idolatry,  he  ended;  the  Idols  were  removed.  His  grand- 
mother, Maachah,  was  removed  by  him  from  being  a  queen  * 
because  she  had  made  an  idol,  which  Asa  destroyed  and 
burnt.  And  in  Chronicles  we  read  more  of  his  good  work. 
He  was  faithful  to  Jehovah,  though  he  also  failed  in  the  end. 
The  war  with  Zerah  the  Ethiopian  is  recorded  in  2  Chron- 
icles xiv,  as  well  as  other  deeply  interesting  events  during 
his  reign.  "We  do  not  touch  those  at  this  time.  Our  book 
here  only  records  the  war  with  Baasha,  King  of  Israel,  and 
Asa's  strange  alliance  with  Ben-hadad,  King  of  Syria,  to 
whom  he  presented  the  silver  and  gold  which  Shishak  had 
left  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  also  the  treasures  of  the 
King's  house.  Baasha  had  fortified  Ramah,  which  meant 
the  complete  isolation  and  domination  of  Jerusalem.  Asa, 
forgetful  of  his  experience  with  Zerah  and  the  manner  of 
getting  the  victory  (see  his  beautiful  prayer,  2  Chron. 
xiv:ll),  and  that  the  Lord  who  had  smitten  Zerah  could 
also  smite  Baasha,  feared  the  rival  King  and  renewed  the 
God  dishonoring  league  with  Syria  which  his  father  Abijah 
had  made.  What  followed  after  this  league,  the  divine  ex- 
hortation and  judgment  delivered  through  Hanani  the 
prophet  and  Asa 's  end  we  shall  follow  in  Chronicles.  Asa 's 
sin  and  failure  consisted  in  not  trusting  the  Lord  wholly, 
but  using  other  means  for  deliverance.  Hanani  told  him 
"thou  hast  relied  on  the  King  of  Syria,  and  not  on  the  Lord 
thy  God." — "For  the  eyes  of  the  Lord  run  to  and  fro 
throughout  the  whole  earth,  to  show  himself  strong  in  the 
behalf  of  them  whose  heart  is  perfect  toward  him.  Herein 
thou  hast  done  foolishly;  therefore  from  henceforth  thou 
shalt  have  wars."     (2  Chr.  xvi  :7-9.)     Then  Asa  imprisoned 


*  Most  likely  on  account  of  his  youth  Maachah  was  regent  during 
Asa's  minority. 


380  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

the  faithful  messenger.  Alas !  how  often  the  failure  of  Asa 
has  been  repeated  among  God's  people!  Many  begin  well 
but  lose  the  freshness  of  their  faith.  In  our  own  days  we 
behold  on  all  sides  Asa-movements,  no  perfect  confidence  in 
the  Lord,  but  reliance  upon  all  kinds  of  world  schemes  and 
alliances  which  make  it  impossible  for  the  Lord  to  manifest 
the  fullness  of  His  power. 


4.    Kings  of  Israel. 

CHAPTER  XV:25-XVI 

1.  Nadab,  King  of  Israel.  25-32. 

2.  Baasha,  King  of  Israel.     33-xvi:7. 

3.  Elah,  King  of  Israel.  8-14. 

4.  Zimri,  King  of  Israel.  15-20. 

5.  Divisions.     21-22. 

6.  Omri,  King  of  Israel.  23-28. 

7.  Ahab.     29-34. 

Six  Kings  of  Israel  are  now  mentioned.  Asa  saw  them  all 
ascending  the  throne  of  Israel.  The  first  mentioned  is 
Nadab  the  son  of  Jeroboam  who  followed  in  his  father's 
footsteps.  His  reign  was  cut  short  by  an  uprising  of  one 
of  the  house  of  Issachar,  Baasha.  He  smote  Nadab  at  Gib- 
bethon.  (Josh,  xix  :44 ;  xxi  :23. )  Baasha  then  smote  all  the 
house  of  Jeroboam.  Thus  was  the  prediction  of  Ahijah,  the 
prophet  of  Shiloh,  fulfilled.  "Because  of  the  sins  of  Jero- 
boam which  he  sinned,  and  which  he  made  Israel  sin,  by 
his  provocation  wherewith  he  provoked  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  to  anger."  God's  predicted  judgments  never  fail  in 
the  end.  The  judgments  written  over  against  our  own  age, 
this  evil  age,  will  some  day  be  executed  by  the  Lord  as  all 
other  judgments  which  were  threatened  against  Israel. 

The  new  dynasty  headed  by  Baasha  began  in  the  third 
year  of  Asa's  reign.  Baasha  reigned  twenty-four  years. 
He  sinned  like  Jeroboam  did,  though  he  had  been  the  exe- 
cuter  of  God's  judgment  upon  the  descendants  of  the  wicked 
King.  He  had  not  heard  Jehovah's  voice  speaking  in  the 
events  of  the  past.     Then  came  the  message  of  the  Lord  to 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  281 

Baasha  through  Jehu  the  son  of  Hanani.  (2  Chronicles 
xix:2;  xx:34.)  He  reminds  him  that  the  Lord  had  raised 
him  out  of  the  dust  (his  family  was  unknown)  and  He  had 
made  him  prince  over  Israel.  He  followed  Jeroboam  and 
Jeroboam's  fate,  and  the  fate  of  his  house  would  now  also 
be  the  fat*  of  Baasha,  who  had  executed  the  divine  sentence. 
"I  will  make  thy  house  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam,  the 
son  of  Nebat. ' '     Such  is  divine  justice. 

Elah  his  son  followed.     His  rule  lasted  not  quite  two 
years.     He  was  in  Tirzah.     While  the  army  was  away  fight- 
ing the  Philistines,  Elah  in  the  house  of  his  steward  Arza 
("earthliness")  became  drunk  and  was  killed  by  his  cap- 
tain, Zimri,  who  at  once  began  to  reign  in  his  place.     He 
only  reigned  seven  days  and  the  only  deed  mentioned,  be- 
sides his  awful  death,  is  the  slaying  of  all  the  house  of 
Baasha  "according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  which  he 
spake  against  Baasha  by  Jehu  the  prophet."     Omri  was 
made   King  by   all   Israel   and   with   him   began   another 
dynasty.     His  first  act  was  to  besiege  Tirzah  where  Zimri 
was,  who  set  the  King's  palace  on  fire  and  perished  in  the 
flames.     A  division  followed,  but  Omri  prevailed.     In  all 
these  sad  records  the  fruits  of  the  departure  from  God  and 
from  His  Word  are  seen.     They  can  easily  be  traced  in  the 
history-  of  other  nations  down  to  our  own  times,  the  days 
which    have    brought    the    most    awful    bloodshed    in    the 
world's  blood  drenched  history.     It  is  all  the  result  of  sin. 
And  Omri  was  worse  than  all  that  were  before  him,  and  his 
son  Ahab  was  the  climax  of  all  wickedness  in  the  Kingdom 
of  Israel.     There  was  no  improvement,  but  a  steady  decline 
till  God's  hand  smote  them  in  judgment.     Ahab  introduced 
Baal-worship  in  Israel.     This  was  the  result  of  his  marriage 
to  Jezebel  ("Dunghill"),  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal  ("with 
Baal"),  King  of  Zidonians.     "Ahab  did  more  to  provoke 
the  Lord  God  of  Israel  to  anger  than  all  the  Kings  of 
Israel  that  were  before  him."    The  last  verse  of  this  chap- 
ter records  a  presumptuous  action.     Hiel  ("God  liveth") 
built  Jericho.     He  found  out  that  the  word  of  God  spoken 
500  years  before  (Josh.  vi:26)  was  true. 


282  THS  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


IV.     The  Prophet  Elijah  and  King  Ahab 

Chapter  xvii-xxii 
1.    Elijah's  Prediction  and  Miracles. 

CHAPTER  XVII 

1.  Elijah's  Message  to  Ahab.     1. 

2.  At  the  Brook  Cherith.     2-7. 

3.  With  the  Widow  of  Zarephath.     8-16. 

4.  The  Widow's  Son  restored  to  Life.     17-24. 

Upon  this  scene  of  complete  departure  of  God,  when  Ahab 
and  his  heathen-wife  worshipped  Baal  and  all  the  vileness 
connected  with  that  cult  flourished  in  Israel,  there  appeared 
suddenly  one  of  the  greatest  of  God's  prophets,  Elijah 
("my  God  is  Jehovah")  the  Tishbite.  "A  grander  figure 
never  stood  out  even  against  the  Old  Testament  sky  than 
that  of  Elijah.  As  Israel's  apostasy  had  reached  its  high- 
est point  in  the  time  of  Ahab,  so  the  Old  Testament  an- 
tagonism to  it  in  the  person  and  mission  of  Elijah."* — 
"He  was  the  impersonation  of  the  Old  Testament  in  one  of 
its  aspects:  that  of  grandeur  and  judgment."  His 
miracles,  like  those  of  Moses,  have  a  judicial  character. 
Heaven  is  shut  in  answer  to  his  prayer  and  fire  falls  from 
heaven  at  his  word.  The  last  promise  in  the  Old  Testament 
is  concerning  Elijah  the  prophet  who  is  to  appear  before 
the  coming  of  the  great  and  dreadful  day  of  the  Lord,  to 
turn  the  heart  of  the  fathers  to  the  children  and  the  heart 
of  the  children  to  their  fathers.  (Mai.  iv:5-6.)  See  also 
the  Lord's  words  concerning  the  coming  of  Elijah.  (Matth. 
xvii:10-13.)  He  appeared  with  Moses  on  the  transfigura- 
tion mountain.     In  the  book  of  Revelation  two  witnesses  are 


*  Edersheim. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  283 

mentioned  who  witness  among  Israel  before  the  great  day 
of  the  Lord  comes.  Though  their  names  are  not  given,  the 
miracles  they  perform  clearly  show  that  these  witnesses 
will  be  like  Moses  and  Elijah.  "These  have  power  to  shut 
heaven,  that  it  rain  not  in  the  days  of  their  prophecy 
(Elijah),  and  have  power  over  waters  to  turn  them  to  blood 
and  to  smite  the  earth  with  all  plagues,  as  often  as  they 
will."  (Moses.)  "And  if  any  man  will  hurt  them  fire 
proceedeth  out  of  their  mouth  and  devoureth  their  ene- 
mies."  (Elijah.) — Rev.  xi:5-6.  James  speaks  of  Elijah 
also  and  tells  us  he  was  a  great  man  of  prayer. 

He  appeared  suddenly  upon  the  scene  *  and  said  to 
wicked  Ahab,  As  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  liveth,  before 
whom  I  stand,  there  shall  not  be  dew  nor  rain  these  years, 
but  according  to  my  word.  He  had,  no  doubt,  like  other 
great  servants  of  God,  his  training  in  secret. 

The  passage  in  James  gives  us  the  key:  "  Elias  was  a 
man  subject  to  like  passions  as  we  are,  and  he  prayed 
earnestly  that  it  might  not  rain. "  (James  v:17.)  It  was 
in  secret  that  he  sought  God's  presence  and  wrestled  in 
prayer  till  the  Lord  sent  him  forth  with  the  message  of 
judgment.  Prayer,  persevering  prayer,  is  the  one  great 
need  in  the  days  of  declension  and  departure  from  God, 
and  it  is  the  one  resource  of  God's  faithful  ones.  And  how 
little,  true  and  continued  waiting  upon  God  there  is  in  the 
days  of  apostasy !  When  Elijah  delivered  the  message  to 
Ahab  and  said  "according  to  ray  word"  he  did  not  speak 
presumptuously,  but  as  standing  in  the  Lord's  own  pres- 
ence as  his  mouthpiece  he  had  a  perfect  right  to  speak  thus 
with  divine  authority. 

As  soon  as  he  had  delivered  the  message  the  Lord  told  him 
to  hide  himself  by  the  brook  Cherith.  There  he  was 
miraculously  fed  by  the  ravens.  He  was  in  the  appointed 
place  and  the  Lord  took  care  of  him  in  His  own  way. 
Rationalistic  Critics  have  made  the  absurd  statement  that 
the  word  "orebim" — ravens — should  be  "arabim,"  which 


*  Of  his  birth  and  origin  we  know  almost  nothing.     His  birthplace 
may  have  been  Tishbi  of  Upper  Galilee. 


284  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

means  Arabs.*  But  the  Lord  had  commanded  the  birds, 
so  shy  in  their  nature,  to  supply  His  servant  with  the  needed 
food.  Twice  every  day  they  ministered  to  his  wants.  How 
this  shows  the  omiiipotence  of  the  Lord.  There  is  nothing 
too  hard  for  Him.  If  we  are  in  the  right'  place,  the  place 
He  assigns  to  us,  we  shall  find  that  He  still  provides  for 
those  who  trust  and  obey.  The  brook  dried  up.  Surely  his 
faith  was  being  tested.  Then  he  was  sent  to  a  destitute 
Gentile  widow,  who  faced  starvation.  And  concerning  her 
the  Lord  said :  "I  have  commanded  a  widow  woman  there 
to  sustain  thee."  The  Lord  who  commanded  the  ravens, 
commanded  the  widow.  The  Lord  delights  to  take  the  weak 
things  and  use  them  for  His  glory.  And  how  did  Elijah 
find  her  ?  Preparing  the  last  meal  for  herself  and  her  child. 
Her  faith  was  tested.  She  was  to  make  first  a  little  cake 
for  Elijah  and  bring  it  unto  him  and  afterwards  to  do  the 
same  for  herself  and  her  son.  She  obeyed  and  "the  barrel 
of  meal  wasted  not  neither  did  the  cruse  of  oil  fail,  according 
to  the  Word  of  the  Lord. ' '  Here  was  greater  faith  than  in 
Israel.  See  also  Luke  iv:25.  The  story  foreshadows  the 
bringing  in  of  the  Gentiles  to  know  the  Lord.  And  when 
the  widow's  son  fell  ill  and  died  and  was  restored  by  Elijah 
and  he  delivered  him  to  the  mother  saying:  See,  thy  son 
liveth — she  made  the  blessed  confession:  "Now  by  this  I 
know  that  thou  art  a  man  of  God  and  that  the  Word  of 
the  Lord  in  thy  mouth  is  truth. "  The  truth  of  resurrection 
both  physical  and  spiritual  is  here  foreshadowed. 


*  Thus  Canon  Farrar  in  the  Expositors  Bible:  "The  word 
(orebim)  may  equally  well  mean  people  of  the  city  Oreb,  or  of  the 
rock  Oreb;  or  merchants  as  in  Ezek.  xxvii:27;  or  Arabians. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  28i 

2,    Elijah  on  Carmel.    The  Answered  Prayer. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 

1.  The  command  to  see  Ahab.     1. 

2.  Elijah's  response.     2. 

3.  Ahab  and  Obadiah      3-H. 

4.  Elijah  and  Obadiah.     7-15. 

5.  Elijah  meets  Aliab.     16-18. 

6.  Elijah's  demand.     19-20. 

7.  The  Events  on  Carmel.     21-40. 

8.  The  Answered  Prayer.     41-46. 

The  judgment  of  God  as  announced  by  Elijah  continued 
its  allotted  time.  A  Greek  historian,  Menander  of  Ephesus, 
in  his  account  of  the  acts  of  Ethbaal  (the  father  of  Jezebel. 
Ahab's  wife) ,  says :  ' '  Under  him  there  was  a  want  of  rain 
from  a  certain  month  till  the  same  month  the  following 
year."  And  Josephus,  the  Jewish  historian  who  quotes 
this,  adds,  "by  these  v/ords  he  designed  the  want  of 
rain  that  was  in  the  days  of  Ahab."  It  was  in  the  third 
year  of  the  drought  that  Elijah  is  commanded  to  show  him- 
self to  Ahab.  Elijah  obeys.  Great  distress  and  famine 
was  everywhere.  Then  we  see  Ahab  and  Obadiah,  the  gov- 
ernor or  steward  of  his  house,  looking  for  a  little  pasture 
so  that  they  miglit  save  the  horses  and  mules  alive.  Oba- 
diah ("servant  of  Jehovah"),  holding  a  high  position  with 
Ahab,  feared  the  Lord  greatly.  He  belonged  to  the  faithful 
remnant  who  did  not  bow  the  knee  to  Baal.  ( 1  Kings  xix  :18. ) 
He  must  have  had  severe  tests  of  faith  and  much  courage.  It 
showed  faith  and  devotion  in  hiding  the  Lord's  prophets. 
Jezebel,  the  wicked  idolatrous  woman,  used  the  civil  power 
to  kill  off  the  true  prophets.  Her  aim  was  to  exterminate 
completely  the  men  of  God  who  stood  for  the  truth.  We 
find  her  mentioned  in  Revelation  ii:20.  There  she  is  used 
to  represent  Rome,  the  harlot,  and  her  spiritual  fornication 
and  idolatrj'.  Rome,  like  Jezebel,  has  persecuted  the  Lord's 
servants  and  killed  them.  (Rev.  xviii:24.)  Jezebel  had 
evidently  left  the  palace  of  Samaria  and  was  at  Jezreel,  but 
Ahab  and  Obadiah  were  still  in  Samaria  making  a  sun'ey  of 


286  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

the  land.  Then  Obadiah  met  Elijah.  The  prophet  requests 
Obadiah  to  announce  his  presence  to  Ahab.  But  Obadiah 
feared  that  such  a  message  might  cost  him  his  life.  Had  not 
the  whole  country  been  searched  for  Elijah?  And  what,  if 
the  Spirit  should  carry  Elijah  away?  Then  he  pleads  his 
kindness  to  the  hundred  prophets  whom  he  saved  when 
murderous  Jezebel  slew  the  prophets.  From  all  this  we 
learn  that  Obadiah,  pious  and  faithful,  was  full  of  fear  and 
trembling.  He  and  the  other  faithful  ones  in  Israel  during 
the  dark  days  of  Ahab  and  Jezebel  typify  that  faithful  rem- 
nant of  Israel  during  the  end  of  the  present  age,  suffering 
and  persecuted  during  the  great  tribulation.  Ahab  and 
Elijah  met,  and  the  prophet,  clothed  with  power,  rebuked 
the  apostate  King :  ' '  I  have  not  troubled  Israel ;  but  thou 
and  thy  father's  house,  in  that  ye  have  forsaken  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord,  and  thou  hast  followed  Baalim." 
What  would  have  happened  if  the  daughter  of  Ethbaal, 
demon-possessed  Jezebel,  had  been  present?  The  great 
gathering  suggested  by  Elijah  would  hardly  have  taken 
place.  But  she  was  in  Jezreel  and  was  ignorant  of  what  was 
taking  place.  Ahab  gathers  all  Israel  and  the  450  prophets 
of  Baal  upon  Mount  Carmel  as  demanded  by  Elijah.  It  is 
said  that  upon  that  mountain  there  stood  two  altars,  one 
dedicated  to  Jehovah  and  another  altar  of  Baal.  This  place 
Elijah  chose  for  the  vindication  of  Jehovah.  To  describe 
the  scene,  one  of  the  grandest  in  the  history  of  Israel,  would 
take  many  pages.  To  his  solid  statement  demanding  de- 
cision— "How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?  If  Je- 
hovah is  God,  follow  Him ;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him ' ' — 
the  people  had  no  answer.  Then  follows  his  great  declara- 
tion as  the  only  prophet  of  Jehovah,  while  450  prophets  of 
Baal  stood  over  against  him.  Then  the  sacrifices  are  sug- 
gested "and  the  God  that  answereth  by  fire,  let  him  be 
God."  And  all  the  people  answered,  it  is  well  spoken. 
Then  follows  the  wild  crying  of  the  prophets  of  Baal  from 
early  morning  till  noon;  Elijah's  sarcasm  and  the  greater 
frenzy  of  the  Baal  worshippers.  A  wild  scene  followed. 
Crying  louder  and  louder,  they  cut  themselves  with  knives 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINQS  287 

and  lancets  till  tlie  blood  flowed.  But  there  was  no  answer 
and  no  voice.  Then  Elijah  repaired  the  altar  of  Jehovah, 
that  was  broken  down.  What  a  reminder  the  tM^elve  stones 
were  with  which  he  built  the  altar !  The  sacrifice  had  been 
put  upon  the  altar  with  the  wood.  Three  times  the  altar 
had  been  drenched  with  water,  so  that  the  trench  was  filled 
with  water.  And  now  the  time  for  the  evening  sacrifice, 
that  significant  time  had  come.  A  simple  prayer  follows. 
Jehovah 's  vindication  is  demanded  and  that  he  is  Jehovah 's 
servant.  "Hear  me,  0  Lord,  hear  me,  that  this  people 
may  know  that  thou  art  the  Lord  God,  and  that  thou  hast 
turned  their  heart  back  again."  Then  Jehovah  answered 
by  fire  and  everything  was  consumed.  The  people  who  wit- 
nessed the  indescribable  scene  fell  on  their  faces  and  cried : 
''The  Lord  He  is  God— the  Lord  He  is  God."  Thus  Je- 
hovah manifested  His  power  in  the  vindication  of  His  Name 
and  in  answer  to  His  servant's  prayer ;  and  the  people  were 
brought  back  to  the  confession  of  the  Name  of  the  Lord. 
His  great  mission  to  which  the  Lord  had  called  him  had 
been  accomplished  and  the  prophets  of  Baal,  wicked  and 
guilty  as  they  were,  received  their  deserved  judgment.  And 
here  we  have  a  foreshadowing  of  events  to  come.  Apostasy 
from  the  Lord  and  from  His  Word  is  increasing.  Before 
the  age  closes  it  will  be  universal,  though  the  Lord  will  have 
a  faithful  remnant  even  in  the  dark  days  of  the  age.  His 
Name  is  dishonored  and  rejected.  But  that  blessed  Name 
will  be  vindicated  by  a  manifestation  of  His  power  in 
judgment.  ' '  For  behold,  the  Lord  will  come  with  fire,  and 
with  his  chariots  like  a  whirlwind,  to  render  His  anger  with 
fury,  and  his  rebuke  with  flames  of  fire.  For  by  fire  and 
by  his  sword  will  the  Lord  plead  with  all  flesh ;  and  the  slain 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  many."     (Is.  lxvi:15-16.) 

Higher  Criticism  has  not  left  these  records  unattacked. 
They  speak  of  "The  legendary  narratives  in  which  Elijah's 
history  is  enshrined. ' '  All  is  done  to  discredit  these  records 
and  to  make  them  appear  doubtful.  But  the  verdict  given 
by  these  men  who  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  Word  of  God, 
that  the  scene  on  Carmel  is  unhistorical,  is  a  false  verdict 


288  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

which  shows  lack  of  real  research.  Nothing  whatever  can 
be  brought  forward  to  question  the  historicity  of  this  great 
scene,  while  much  confirms  it. 

Then  follows  Elijah's  word  to  Ahab:  ''Get  thee  up,  eat 
and  drink,  for  there  is  a  sound  of  abundance  of  rain. ' '  It 
was  spoken  in  faith.  The  Lord  had  said  to  him:  "I  will 
send  rain  upon  the  earth."  (xviii :1.)  And  then  came  his 
prayer.  He  knew  the  Lord's  will  and  the  Lord's  promise, 
and  then  persevered  in  prayer,  and  when  the  answer  was 
in  sight  then  he  exercised  faith  once  more  by  sending  a 
message  to  Ahab.  Then  the  heaven  was  black  with  clouds 
and  wind  and  there  was  a  great  rain.  The  hand  of  the  Lord 
was  also  upon  Elijah  and  he  ran  before  Ahab 's  chariot  to  the 
entrance  of  Jezreel.  It  was  supernatural  power  which  sus- 
tained him.     (Is.  xl:31.) 


3.    Elijah  in  the  Wilderness  and  upon  Mount  Horeb. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

1.  Elijah's  Flight  and  Despondency.     1-8. 

2.  Upon  Mount  Horeb.     9-18. 

3.  Elisha  called.     19-21. 

Elijah  perhaps  stopped  at  the  very  door  of  the  palace 
where  wicked  Jezebel  dwelt.  He  would  remain  with  Ahab 
to  the  very  last  before  he  went  in  to  face  the  Queen. 
Should  not  Elijah  have  remained  and  gone  even  before 
Jezebel  to  hear  his  testimony?  Instead  he  becomes  terri- 
fied of  wicked  Jezebel.  Had  he  hoped  that  what  had  taken 
place  on  Carmel  would  result  in  bringing  not  alone  Ahab 
back  to  Jehovah,  but  also  influence  Jezebel?  If  such  was 
his  expectation  he  must  have  been  bitterly  disappointed. 
Jezebel  seeks  to  kill  him  and  he  flees  for  his  life.  All  what 
follows  is  the  result  of  unbelief.  This  verifies  James '  state- 
ment in  his  epistle:  "Elias  was  a  man  subject  to  like  pas- 
sions as  we  are."  Then  in  despair  and  unbelief  he  re- 
quested to  die.  He  is  altogether  occupied  with  himself  and 
did  not  look  to  God.     Instead  of  seeking  the  wilderness,  his 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  2i9 

training  school,  to  pour  out  his  heart  before  God,  to  get 
new  strength  in  communion  with  the  Lord,  "he  requested 
for  himself  that  he  might  die." 

"The  heart  of  Elijah  and  the  hand  of  God  led  the  prophet 
into  the  wilderness,  where,  overwhelmed  perhaps,  yet 
precious  in  Jehovah's  sight,  he  will  be  alone  with  God. 
Elijah's  forty  days'  journey  in  the  wilderness  has  only  a 
partial  resemblance  to  the  forty  days  which  Mioses  spent  v/itli 
God,  in  the  same  Horeb  to  which  the  prophet  was  going, 
or  to  those  which  Jesus  spent  in  the  wilderness  for  conflict 
with  the  enemy  of  God  and  man.  In  the  two  latter  cases 
nature  was  set  aside.  Neither  Moses  nor  the  Lord  ate  or 
drank.  As  for  Elijah,  the  goodness  of  God  sustains  the 
weakness  of  tried  nature,  makes  manifest  that  He  considers 
it  with  all  tenderness  and  thoughtfulness,  and  gives  the 
strength  needed  for  such  a  journey.  This  should  have 
touched  him,  and  made  him  feel  what  he  ought  to  be  in  the 
midst  of  the  people,  since  he  had  to  do  with  such  a  God. 
His  heart  was  far  from  such  a  state.  Impossible,  when  we 
think  of  ourselves,  to  be  witnesses  to  others  of  what  God  is ! 
Our  poor  hearts  are  too  far  from  such  a  position. ' '  * 

In  Mount  Horeb  the  Lord  spoke  to  him:  "What  doest 
thou  here,  Elijah?"  It  was  the  gentle  rebuke  of  a  loving 
God.  He  was  not  in  the  place  where  the  Lord  wanted  him 
as  His  servant.  It  is  a  great  contrast — Elijah  on  Mount 
Carmel  and  Elijah  on  Mount  Horeb  in  a  cave.  On  Carmel 
he  stands  the  man  of  faith,  filled  with  a  holy  zeal  for  Je- 
hovah. On  Horeb  hidden  in  the  cave  because  he  fled  from 
Jezebel.  And  how  many  children  of  God  may  learn  some- 
thing from  this  question :  * '  "What  doest  thou  here  ? ' '  They 
are  drifting  into  the  world  while  others  have  left  the  sphere 
of  service  into  which  the  Lord  called  them.  And  Elijah's 
answer  shows  his  self -occupation.  It  is  what  he  had  done ; 
what  he  was  and  the  threatening  danger  to  lose  his  life. 
But  that  danger  was  far  greater  when  they  searched  coun- 
try-wide for  him  and  when  the  Lord  preserved  his  life  by 
the  ministry  of  the  ravens  and  by  the  widow-woman. 


Synopaia  of  th«  Bibla. 


290  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

His  answer  has  in  it  the  spirit  of  bitterness  and  accusa- 
tion. Then  the  Lord  passed  by.  The  storm,  the  earth- 
quake and  the  fire  preceded  His  Coming;  these  are  always 
connected  with  Jehovah's  presence  and  manifestation. 
Then  came  ''a  still  small  voice"  Elijah  knew  so  well.  He 
wrapped  his  face  in  his  mantle  and  then  he  answered  the 
question  once  more,  but  in  an  humbled  spirit.  He  receives 
the  commission  to  anoint  Hazael,  King  of  Syria;  Jehu 
( ' '  Jehovah  is  he  " ) ,  the  son  of  Nimshi  ( ' '  Jehovah  reveals  " ) , 
he  is  to  anoint  King  of  Israel  and  Elisha  is  to  be  his  suc- 
cessor. All  three  are  called  as  instruments  of  judgment 
upon  Israel's  idolatry  and  the  house  of  Ahab.  Then  the 
Lord  announced  that  He  had  a  faithful  remnant  of  7000  in 
Israel  who  had  not  bowed  the  knee  unto  Baal.  (See  its 
prophetic  meaning  in  Romans  xi:3-6.) 


4.    King  Ahab;  his  wicked  Reign  and  End. 

Chapters  xx-xxii. 

CHAPTER  XX 

AHAB'S  WAR  WITH  THE  SYRIANS  AND  HIS  VICTORY 

1.  The  Siege  and  Eelief  of  Samaria.     1-21. 

2.  The   Victory  at   Aphek.     22-34. 

3.  A  prophet's  symbolical  action  and  his  message.     35-43. 

Two  expeditions  of  Ben-hadad  ("Son  of  the  Sun") 
against  Israel  are  recorded  in  this  chapter.  When  Ben- 
hadad  forced  the  war  and  insulted  the  King  of  Israel,  Ahab 
prepared  for  the  battle.  Then  a  prophet  came  to  Ahab, 
most  likely  one  of  those  who  had  been  hidden  by  Obadiah. 
He  brought  a  message  from  the  Lord.  "Thus  saith  Je- 
hovah, Hast  thou  seen  all  this  great  multitude?  behold  I 
will  deliver  it  into  thine  hand  this  day;  and  thou  shalt 
know  that  I  am  Jehovah."  From  this  we  may  gather  that 
a  spiritual  revival  must  have  taken  place  in  Israel  after  the 
manifestation  of  Jehovah  on  Carmel,  Jezebel,  after  her 
rage  on  account  of  Elijah's  deed,  is  not  mentioned  again 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  291 

till  after  Ahab  's  failure.  The  Lord  iu  graciousnesm  gave  to 
Ahab  another  evidence  that  He  is  the  Lord  and  can  smite 
the  enemies  of  Israel.  The  Syriansi  were  defeated.  An- 
other message  came  to  Ahab  through  the  prophet.  A  year 
later  Ben-hadad  made  another  expedition  against  Israel. 
"And  there  came  a  man  of  God,  and  spake  unto  the  King 
of  Israel,  and  said,  Thus  saith  Jehovah,  because  the  Syrians 
have  said.  The  Lord  is  the  God  of  the  hills  but  not  the  God 
of  the  valleys,  therefore  will  I  deliver  all  this  great  multi- 
tude into  their  hand,  and  ye  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord. ' ' 
A  great  victory  followed  at  Aphek.  But  Ahab  let  Ben- 
hadad,  who  had  defied  Jehovah,  live.  More  than  that  he 
treated  him  like  a  friend  and  brother,  had  him  come  into  his 
chariot  and  made  a  covenant  with  him.  In  showing  such 
clemency  to  the  enemy  of  God,  Ahab  revealed  the  state  of 
his  soul.  He  had  no  heart  for  the  Lord  and  was  bound  to 
follow  his  wicked  ways. 

Then  one  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets  (Josephus  saith  it 
was  Mieaiah ;  xxii  :8 )  was  commanded  by  the  Lord  to  ask 
another  prophet  to  smite  him.  The  prophet  refused  the 
unquestioning  obedience  demanded  from  a  prophet  and 
therefore  the  judgment  of  God  overtook  him.  The  purpose 
of  God  in  bringing  the  judgment  message  home  to  Ahab  is 
carried  out  nevertheless.  Then  Ahab  pronounced  his  own 
doom  for  showing  leniency  to  Ben-hadad. 

CHAPTER  XXI 
NABOTH'S  VINEYARD 

1.  Naboth's  Refusal.     1-4. 

2.  Jezebel's  wicked  deed.     5-16. 

3.  Elijah  pronounces  divine  judgment.     17-24. 

4.  Ahab's  wickedness   and   confession.     25-27. 

5.  The  Lord's  mercy.     28-29. 

No  comment  is  needed  on  the  story  of  Naboth's  vineyard. 
Jezebel,  the  wicked,  and  Ahab's  submission  to  her  was  his 
ruination.  On  her  Satanic  suggestion  one  of  the  most 
wicked  deeds  recorded  in  Bible  history  is  done.     Naboth  is 


292  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

murdered  to  obtain  his  vineyard.  The  measure  of  Ahab's 
apostasy  and  wickedness  is  now  filled  to  overflowing. 
For  the  wicked  King  the  tidings  of  Naboth's  death  were 
welcome  tidings.  No  inquiry  follows,  but  in  self-satisfac- 
tion he  goes  to  take  possession  of  the  beautiful  vineyard  of 
Naboth.  But  his  enjoyment,  as  it  is  always  with  the  enjoy- 
ment of  sin,  did  not  last  very  long.  No  sooner  had  the  in- 
nocent blood  been  spilt,  but  Jehovah,  who  saw  and  knew 
the  foul  deed,  sent  Elijah  with  the  final  message  of  doom 
and  judgment  for  the  gTiilty  pair.  Ahab  was  still  in  the 
vineyard.  His  eyes  still  feasted  on  the  beautiful  scene  be- 
fore him.  His  thoughts  were  occupied  with  the  pleasures  of 
sin  when  suddenly  Elijah  appeared.  "I  have  found  thee," 
were  the  prophet's  first  utterances.  "Be  sure  your  sin  will 
find  you  out. ' '  Then  follows  the  sentence  already  indicated 
in  the  words  of  the  disguised  prophet  in  the  previous  chap- 
ter. "I  will  make  thine  house  like  the  house  of  Jeroboam 
the  son  of  Nebat,  and  like  the  house  of  Baasha  the  son  of 
Abijah,  for  the  provocation  wherewith  thou  hast  provoked 
me  to  anger,  and  made  Israel  to  sin.  And  of  Jezebel  also 
spake  the  Lord,  saying,  The  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  by  the 
wall  of  Jezreel.  Him  that  dieth  of  Ahab  in  the  city  the 
dogs  shall  eat ;  and  him  that  dieth  in  the  field  shall  the  fowls 
of  the  air  eat. ' '  How  literally  this  sentence  was  carried  out 
we  shall  find  in  the  subsequent  history.  But  Ahab  having 
humbled  himself  hears  a  merciful  message  from  Elijah's 
lips.  "Because  he  humbled  himself  before  me,  I  will  not 
bring  evil  in  his  days,  but  in  his  son 's  days  will  I  bring  evil 
upon  his  house."  How  merciful  the  Lord  is  to  all  who 
humble  themselves! 


TKE  BOOK  0F  KINQM  298 

CHAPTER  XXII 
THE  DEATH  OF  AHAB 

1.  Jehoshaphat  and  Aliab.     1-12. 

2.  Tlie  Prophet  Micaiali.     13-28. 

3.  The  Battle  and  Aliab's  death.     29-40. 

4.  Jehoshaphat  of  Judah.     41-50.      (2  Chron.  xix-xx.) 

5.  Ahaziah,  King  of  Israel.     51-53. 

Three  years  passed  without  war  between  Syria  and  Israel. 
In  the  third  year  Jehoshaphat  of  Judah  came  down  to  Ahab. 
Jehoshaphat 's  son  and  heir-apparent  had  married  Athaliah 
the  daughter  of  Ahab.  An  unholy  alliance  had  therefore 
been  formed  between  the  royal  families.  Jehoshaphat,  who 
knew  better,  was  in  this  very  unfaithful,  and  though  the 
Lord  did  not  forsake  him  chastisements  came  upon  him  and 
his  house.  The  prophet  Jehu,  son  of  Hanani,  met  him  after 
he  came  back  from  the  battle  of  Ramoth-Gilead  and  said  to 
him :  '  *  Shouldst  thou  help  the  ungodly,  and  love  them  that 
hate  the  Lord  ?  Therefore  is  wrath  upon  thee  from  before 
the  Lord."  (2  Chron.  xix:2.)  Ahab,  under  the  predicted 
judgment  of  God,  asked  Jehoshaphat :  ' '  Wilt  thou  go  with 
me  to  battle  to  Ramoth-Gilead?"  And  gladly  the  good 
King  of  Judah  answers :  "I  am  as  thou  art,  my  people  as 
thy  people,  my  horses  as  thy  horses."  And  Ahab  in  all  his 
wicked  apostasy  had  prophets,  four  hundred  of  them.  Je- 
hoshaphat was,  no  doubt,  troubled  in  his  conscience,  and 
demanded  that  Ahab  inquire  of  the  Lord.  The  prophets  he 
had  used  no  longer  the  name  of  Baal,  but  the  name  of 
Jehovah.  And  they  all  prophesied  success.  Jehoshaphat, 
however,  was  suspicious  and  asked  for  a  prophet  of  the  Lord. 
From  this  we  may  gather  that  there  was  something  about 
them  by  which  the  King  of  Judah  knew  that  they  were  not 
Jehovah's  prophets.  Ahab  then  sent  for  Micaiah  the  sou 
of  Imlah.  Both  Kings  occupied  thrones  and  were  clad  in 
their  robes  in  the  entrance  of  the  gate  of  Samaria.  All  the 
false  prophets  prophesied  and  one  Zedekiah  made  horns  of 
iron  to  produce  a  vivid  impression  of  the  coming  victory. 


294  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Then  Micaiah  appeared.  The  faithful  prophet  tells  th« 
Kings  what  he  had  seen.  It  is  a  revelation  he  had.  Je- 
hovah permitted  a  lying  spirit  to  possess  Ahab's  false 
prophets  and  they  were  prophesying  lies.  And  Micaiah  pre- 
dicted the  defeat  of  Israel.  The  words  of  Micaiah  are  of 
ranch  importance.  What  happened  in  Ahab's  day,  when 
the  Lord  permitted  a  lying  spirit  to  deceive  and  lead  the 
wicked  into  ruin,  will  happen  again  at  the  close  of  this 
present  age.  God  will  send  a  strong  delusion  that  they 
should  believe  a  lie.  (2  Thess.  ii.)  Unclean  spirits  will 
then  be  on  the  earth,  even  as  they  begin  already  and  by  lying 
words,  lying  miracles  and  signs,  lead  the  Christ-rejecting 
masses  into  judgment. 

Then  the  battle.  Ahab  disguised  himself  and  Jehosha- 
phat  wore  his  robes.  It  was  more  than  cowardice  in  Ahab ; 
he  feared  the  judgment  which  was  hovering  over  him  and 
tried  to  avert  the  coming  fatal  stroke.  Jehoshaphat  was 
almost  miraculously  saved,  but  Ahab  was  miraculously 
killed.  A  soldier  drew  a  bow  at  venture.  That  arrow  was 
guided  by  a  higher  hand.  It  found  the  disguised  King  of 
Israel.  It  found  the  small  opening  in  the  King's  harness. 
A  little  while  later  the  dogs  were  licking  his  blood  as  they 
washed  his  blood  stained  chariot.  Thus  the  word  of  the 
Lord  was  fulfilled.  Jehoshaphat 's  full  record  we  shall  con- 
sider in  Chronicles  and  Azariah's  in  the  beginning  of  the 
Second  book  of  Kings. 


SECOND  KINGS 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Division  of  the  Second  Book  of  Kings 299 

Analysis  and  Annotations: 

I.     Elijah's  Final  Ministry  and  Translation  302 
II.     The  Prophet  Elisha 307 

III.  The  Reign  of  Declension  and  Apostasy.  .   326 

IV.  IhA  Reigii  of  Hezekiah,  Manasseh  and 

Amon 345 

V.     The  Reign  of  Josiah 352 

VI.     First  Apostasy  of  Judah  and  the  Cap- 
tivity    357 

Appendix 365 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  «9d 


The  Division  of  the  Second  Book  of 

Kings. 

The  Second  Book  of  Kings  is  a  continuation  of  the  his- 
tory of  the  Kingdoms  of  Israel  and  Judah  up  to  the  time 
of  the  captivities.  As  stated  in  the  introduction  to  the 
Book  of  Kings,  both  books  were  originally  undivided.  In 
the  opening  chapters  Elijah  the  Prophet  is  seen  once  more 
in  his  final  ministrations,  followed  by  his  translation.  Then 
Elisha  comes  upon  the  scene.  In  and  through  his  min- 
istry and  miracles  Jehovah  manifested  His  power  in  behalf 
of  His  people.  It  was  Jehovah's  gracious  appeal  to  Israel 
to  return  unto  Him.  The  history  of  decline  and  apostasy 
in  Israel  and  Judah  follows  after  that.  The  house  of  Israel 
was  first  carried  into  captivity  through  Assyria.  In  the 
Kingdom  of  Judah  a  revival  took  place  under  Hezekiah, 
which  was  followed  by  a  reaction  under  Manasseh  and 
Amon.  After  Josiah's  reform  and  death  Judah's  doom  was 
sealed.  The  book  ends  with  the  record  of  the  siege  of 
Jerusalem  and  the  captivity.  Hosea  and  Amos  exercised 
their  prophetic  oflSces  in  the  northern  Kingdom,  while 
Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  Joel,  Obadiah,  Micah,  Nahum,  Habakkuk 
and  Zephaniah  were  the  prophets  of  Judah.  Ezekiel  proph- 
esied among  the  captives,  while  Daniel  was  in  Babylon. 
The  division  of  this  second  part  of  the  Book  of  Kings  is 
therefore  easily  made. 


I.    ELIJAH'S  FINAL  MINISTRY  AND  TRANSLATION. 

Chapter  i-ii:ll. 

1.  Elijah  and  Ahaziah.    Chapter  i. 

2.  Elijah's  Translation.     Chapter  ii:ll. 


jJOO  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

n.    THE  PROPHET  ELISHA.     Chapter  ii:12-ix:10. 

1.  The  Beginning  of  His  Ministry.    Chapter  ii:18- 

25. 

2.  Jehoram,  Moab  and  Elisha.     Chapter  iii. 

3.  The  Miracles.     Chapter  iv. 

4.  Naaman  and  His  Healing.    Chapter  v. 

5.  Elisha  and  the  Syrians.     Chapter  vi. 

6.  Elisha's  Prediction  and  its  Fulfilment.    Chapter 

vii. 

7.  The  Famine  Predicted.    Further  Events.    Chap- 

ter viii. 

8.  The  Anointing  of  Jehu.     Chapter  ix:l-10. 

m.    THE  PERIOD  OF  DECLENSION  AND  APOSTASY. 

Chapters  ix:ll-xvii. 

1.  Jehu,    King    of    Israel.    His    deeds.    Chapter 

ix:ll-37. 

2.  Jehu's  Judgments.    The  Baal-worship  Destroyed. 

Jehu's  Death.     Chapter  x. 

3.  AthaUah;  Jehoida's  Revival.     Chapter  xi. 

4.  Jehoash.    The  Temple  Repaired.    The  Death  of 

Jehoash.     Chapter  xii. 

5.  Jehoahaz  and   Jehoash.     The  Death  of  Elisha. 

Chapter  xiii. 

6.  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah.     Chapter  xiv-xv. 

7.  King  Ahaz  and  Ass3rria.     Chapter  xvi. 

8.  Assyria  Conquers  Israel.    The  Captivity.    Chap- 

ter xvii. 

IV.     THE  REIGN   OF  HEZEKIAH,   MANASSEH  AND 
AMON.     Chapters  xviii-xxi. 

1.  Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib's  Invasion.    Chapter 

xviii. 

2.  Hezekiah  and  Isaiah.    The  Deliverance.    Chap- 

ter xix. 

3.  HezeMah's  Illness,  Recovery,  Failure  and  Death. 

Chapter  xx. 

4.  NfanflfWfJi  and  Ajnoou    Qjapter  xsi. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  301 

V.    THE  REIGN   OF  JOSIAH.     Chapters  xxii-xxiii  :30. 

1.  The  Revival.     Chapter  xxii. 

2.  The  Results  of  the  Revival.    The  Death  of  Josiah. 

Chapter  xxiii:30, 

VI.     THE  FINAL  APOSTASY  OF   JUDAH  AND  THE 
CAPTIVITY.     Chapters  xxiii:31-xxv. 

1.  Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiakim.     Chapter  xxiii:31-37. 

2.  Jehoiahm  and  Zedekiah.    The  Beginning  of  Ju- 

dah's  Captivity.     Chapter  xxiv. 

3.  The  Siege  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah's  Complete 

Overthrow.    Chapter  xxv. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 


Analysis  and  Annotations 
I.   Elijah's  Final  Ministry  and  Translation 

Chapters  i-ii:ll 
1.  Elijah  and  Ahaziah 

CHAPTER  I 

1.  Moab's  Rebellion.     1. 

2.  The  Illness  of  Ahaziah.     2. 
.S.     Elijah's  Message.     3-8. 

4.  Ahaziah's  Messengers  and  their  Fate.     9-15. 

5.  Elijah  before  the  King.     Ahaziah's  Death.     16-17. 

6.  Jehoram  becomes  King.     18. 

The  rebellion  of  Moab  is  here  briefly  mentioned.  Both 
Omri  and  Ahab  had  oppressed  Moab,  and  after  Ahab's 
death  this  rebellion  took  place.  The  complete  report  is 
found  in  the  third  chapter.  That  ancient  monument  known 
by  the  name  of  the  Moabite  stone  contains  a  most  inter- 
esting record  of  this  revolt  and  the  oppression  by  Omri 
and  his  son  Ahab.  This  record  is  as  follows:  "Omri  (was) 
King  of  Israel,  and  he  oppressed  Moab  many  days,  for 
Chemosh  (Moab's  idol-god)  was  angry  with  his  land. 
His  son  (Ahab)  followed  him,  and  he  also  said,  I  will  oppress 
Moab."*  However,  if  it  were  not  for  the  Bible  no  one 
would  know  that  the  inscription  on  the  Moabite  stone  is 
truthful.  The  Bible  proves  the  record  genuine,  and  not 
the  record  the  genuineness  of  the  Biblical  account.  The 
Bible  does  not  need  such  confirmation. 

Ahaziah,  the  wicked  son  of  a  wicked  father,  had  an  acci- 
dent and  sent  his  messenger  to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub,  the 
god  of  Ekron.     Baal-zebub  means  "Lord  of  flies."     Accord- 


*See  Appendix  on  page  365   for  a  complete  translation  of  the  record 
on  this  monument. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  303 

ing  to  rabbinical  tradition,  he  was  worshipped  in  the  form 
of  a  fly;  and  so  addicted  were  the  Jews  to  this  cult  that 
they  carried  a  small  image  in  their  pockets,  kissing  it  from 
time  to  time.  Vile  practices  were  also  connected  with  its 
worship.  What  awful  blasphemy  the  Pharisees  uttered 
when  they  accused  our  Lord  of  using  Beelzebub,  the  prince 
of  demons!* 

The  messengers  of  Ahaziah  never  reached  Ekron.  The 
Lord  had  heard  the  charge  to  the  King's  messengers  and 
He  sent  a  messenger  (angel  means  in  Hebrew  "a  messen- 
ger") to  Elijah  the  Tishbite.  The  angel  of  the  Lord  com- 
manded the  Prophet  to  meet  the  men  the  King  had  sent 
forth  to  inquire  of  Baal-zebub  and  to  announce  the  coming 
death  of  i\haziah.  The  message  is  faithfully  delivered; 
the  messengers  return  to  Ahaziah  and  he  heard  the  words 
of  Elijah  from  their  lips.  He  knew  at  once  who  the  mys- 
terious person  was  who  had  turned  back  his  messengers. 
The  King  sent  therefore  a  captain  with  his  fifty  men  to  arrest 
the  prophet.  The  captain  addressed  Elijah  as  a  "Man  of 
God"  and  commanded  him  in  the  name  of  the  King  to 
come  down  from  the  hill.  But  Elijah,  fearless  as  he  was, 
look  up  the  word  of  the  captain  and  appealed  to  his  God 
to  let  fire  come  dowii  from  heaven.  It  was  at  once  carried 
out  and  the  captain  with  his  fifty  men  were  consumed  by 
fire.  The  same  fate  overtook  the  second  expedition,  whose 
captain  urged  the  prophet's  obedience  more  than  the  first, 
for  he  said,  "Come  down  quicldy."  The  judicial  character 
of  Elijah's  ministry  is  here  once  more  in  evidence.  Critics 
have  more  than  once  condemned  his  action  and  called  him 
"arrogant  and  merciless,"  while  others  deny  the  historicity 
of  the  event  altogether.  "Terrible  as  this  answer  was,  we 
can  perceive  its  suitableness,  nay,  its  necessity,  since  it  was 
to  decide,  and  that  publicly  and  by  the  way  of  judgment 
(and  no  other  decision  would  have  been  suitable  in  a  con- 
test between  man  and  God),  whose  was  the  power  and  the 


*Matt.  xii:24.   Beelzebub  is  given  in  the  Greek  as  Beelzebul,  whicb 
means  "Lord  of  idolatrous  sacrificing." 


804  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

kingdom — and  this  at  the  great  critical  epoch  of  Israel's 
history."*  Compare  this  fire  judgment  with  Luke  ix:54- 
56.  t  TVTien  this  present  dispensation  of  Grace  is  ended, 
judgment  by  fire  will  be  meted  out  to  the  enemies  of  God 
(Rev.  xi:5).  During  the  great  tribulation  (Matt.  xxiv:22) 
the  fiery  judgments  will  be  on  the  earth  (Rev.  viii:5),  pre- 
ceding the  visible  manifestation  of  the  Lord,  who  shall  be 
revealed  from  heaven  with  his  mighty  angels  in  flaming 
fire  taking  vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  that 
obey  not  the  Gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  (2  Thess. 
i:7-8). 

A  third  company  was  sent  out  by  Ahaziah.  Mercy  was 
shown  to  this  captain  and  his  fifty  men,  for  the  captain 
feared  God  and  honored  Elijah  as  His  representative.  His 
words  breathe  humility  and  his  prayer  showed  that  he 
owned  the  power  of  God.  Such  mercy  is  also  in  store  for 
those  who  humble  themselves  when  the  coming  judgments 
are  in  the  earth.  Then  Elijah  appeared  before  Ahaziah  in 
person  and  delivered  the  God-given  message  and  the  wicked 
King  died  according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord. 


*History  of  Israel. 

fElijah  could  consistently  command  fire  to  come  down  from  heaven 
and  consume  those  who  dishonored  and  despised  in  him  the  prophet 
and  servant  of  God.  But  when  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  in  a  similar  case 
(Luke  ix:54-56)  desired  to  imitate  that  example,  the  Lord  restrained 
them,  and  said:  "Ye  know  not  what  manner  of  spirit  ye  are  of." 
Elijah  here  acted  as  the  representative  of  the  Law,  which  showed  no 
indulgence,  but  the  disciples  of  Christ  were  the  representatives  of  the 
Gospel  which  proclaims  the  remission  of  sins.  The  old  covenant 
necessarily  alarmed  and  subdued  the  enemies  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
by  minatory  language  and  punitive  measures,  while  the  new  covenant 
designed  to  disarm  and,  if  possible,  to  win  them  by  forgiving  love. — 
Kurti, 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  805 

2.    Elijah's  Translation. 

CHAPTER  n;l-ll 

1.  From  Gilgai  to  Jordan.     1-6. 

2.  The  Divided  Jordan.     7-8. 

3.  Elisha's  Request.     9-10. 

4.  Elijah  Goes  Up  to  Heaven  in  a  Whirlwind.     11. 

The  time  for  Elijah's  departure  had  now  come,  and  the 
Lord,  whom  he  had  served  so  faithfully,  "would  take  up 
Elijah  into  heaven  by  a  whirlwind."  As  Lord  He  gra- 
ciously orders  the  time  and  the  manner  of  the  departure  of 
His  servants  (John  xxi:  18-21).  His  coming  translation 
was  known  to  him,  to  Elisha  and  to  the  sons  of  the  prophets. 
The  latter  belonged  to  the  schools  of  the  prophets.* 

The  goodness  and  power  of  God  was  now  to  be  mani- 
fested in  taking  him  into  heaven  without  passing  through 
death.     The  Jewish  synagogue  and  the  church  have  always 


*"The  'schools  of  the  prophets,'  which  were  placed  under  the  direc- 
tion of  experienced  and  approved  prophets,  afiforded  to  younger  men 
an  opportunity  of  becoming  qualified  to  perform  the  duties  of  the 
prophetic  calling.  The  selection  and  the  admission  of  individuals  who 
were  suited  for  the  prophetic  office  by  their  personal  character,  and  who 
had  a  divine  call,  undoubtedly  depended  on  the  prophetic  judgment  of 
those  who  presided  over  these  institutions.  As  prophecy  was  a  gift  and 
not  an  art,  the  instructions  which  were  imparted,  probably  referred 
merely  to  the  study  of  the  law,  and  were  intended  to  awaken  and  culti- 
vate theocratical  sentiments,  as  well  as  promote  a  growth  in  spiritual 
life,  for  herein  a  suitable  preparation  for  the  prophetic  office  necessarily 
consisted.  There  are  also  indications  found  which  authorize  us  to 
conclude  that  the  revival  of  sacred  poetry,  as  an  art,  and  that  theo- 
cratic-historical composition  also,  are  to  be  ascribed  to  these  religious 
communities  as  their  source.  Such  schools  existed  in  Ramah,  Jericho, 
Beth-el,  and  Gilgai  (1  Sam.  xix:18;  2  Kings  ii:3,  5;  iv:38).  Those 
who  frequented  them,  had,  usually,  reached  the  age  of  manhood 
already,  and  in  some  cases,  were  married  men.  They  lived  together 
in  a  society  or  community,  which  often  embraced  a  large  number  of 
members,  and  were  occasionally  employed  as  prophetic  messengers 
by  their  teachers.  (2  Kings  ix:l.)  However,  the  prophets  were  not 
invariably  trained  in  these  schools;  several  are  named  who  were  taken 
at  once  from  civil  life  and  invested  with  the  prophetic  office." — Sacred 
History. 


S06  THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

believed  the  record  of  his  departure,  but  it  has  been  re- 
served to  the  destructive  criticism  to  deny  the  translation 
of  Elijah.  The  following  statements  are  taken  from  Canon 
F.  W.  Farrar's  exposition  of  the  Second  Book  of  Kings. 
"Knowing  that  he  was  on  his  way  to  death,  Elijah  felt  the 
imperious  instinct  which  leads  the  soul  to  seek  solitude  at 
the  supreme  crisis  of  life."  "His  death,  like  that  of  Moses, 
was  surrounded  by  mystery  and  miracles,  and  we  can  say 
nothing  further  about  it."  How  strange  that  a  scholar 
and  expositor  can  speak  twice  of  the  death  of  Elijah,  when 
the  record  so  clearly  establishes  the  fact  that  he  was  taken 
up  into  heaven  in  a  whirlwind  and  that  he  did  not  die  at  all ! 

He  appeared  with  Moses  when  our  Lord  was  trans- 
figured. According  to  Peter's  inspired  comment  the  trans- 
figuration scene  foresliadows  the  power  and  coming  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  (2  Peter  i:16-21).  As  He  stood  in  glori- 
ous majesty  upon  that  mountain  so  will  He  come  to  this 
earth  once  more  and  bring  His  saints  with  Him.  Moses  is 
the  representati\  e  of  those  saints,  who  died  and  are  raised 
from  the  dead;  Elijah  represents  that  company,  who  mil 
be  caught  in  clouds  to  meet  the  Lord  in  the  air,  departing 
from  the  earth  without  dying  (1  Cor.  xv:51-53;  1  Thess. 
iv:13-18). 

Elisha  clings  close  to  Elijah.  He  had  previously  cast  his 
mantle  (the  symbol  of  the  prophetic  office)  upon  Elisha, 
and  he  was  then  not  quite  ready  to  follow  him  fully.*  But 
now  we  see  Elisha  following  Elijah  from  Gilgal  to  Bethel, 
from  Bethel  to  Jericho,  and  from  Jericho  to  Jordan.  He 
proves  himself  worthy  of  the  mantle,  to  exercise  the  holy  office 
as  the  prophet  of  the  Lord.  He  covets  in  answer  to  Elijah's 
request  a  double  portion  f  of  the  spirit  which  was  upon 
Elijah  to  rest  upon  him.  Elijah's  answer  is  conditional. 
If  Elisha  saw  Elijah  taken  up  into  heaven,  it  should  be  so, 
and  if  not,  then  his  request  was  not  to  be  granted.     And 


*1  Kings  xix:19-20.     Compare  with  Luke  ix:62. 

t  According  to  the  marginal  reading  the  portion  of    the  first  born 
son,  which  was  twice  as  much  as  that  of  the  other  s®ns  (D«ut.  xxi:17). 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  307 

while  they  yet  talked  the  chariot  of  fire,  and  horses  of  fire 
appeared  and  Elijah  went  up  by  a  whirlwind  into  heaven. 
The  chariot  of  fire  with  its  horses  of  fire  were  the  symbol 
of  the  presence  of  the  Loi'd  of  Hosts  (Psalm  civ:3-4;  Isa. 
lxvi:15;  Hab.  iii:8),  but  Elijah  went  up  by  the  whirlwind. 
We  know  he  was  translated;  he  passed  on  without  dying, 
but  the  details  of  it  are  not  made  known. 

Elisha  following  Elijah,  his  request  and  the  vision  of 
glory,  are  suggestive  about  true  service  for  God.  Only 
as  we  follow  the  Lord  wholly,  as  Elisha  followed  Elijah, 
and  look  to  the  coming  glory,  are  we  fit  and  fitted  for  service. 


II.  The  Prophet  Elisha 

Chapters  ii:12-ix:10 

1.    The  Beginning  of  His  Ministry. 

CHAPTER  H:  12-25 

1.  The  Mantle  Used.     12-14. 

2.  The  Sons  of  the  Prophets.     15-18. 

3.  The  Healing  of  Jericho's  Waters.     19-22. 

4.  Judgment  Upon  the  Scoffers.     23-25. 

Both  Elijah  and  Elisha  are  types  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Their  names  indicate  this.  Elijah  means  "my  God  is 
Jehovah,"  and  Elisha,  "my  God  is  salvation."  Suffering, 
aflBiction  and  rejection  are  prominent  in  the  life  of  Elijah, 
but  it  ended  for  him  by  being  taken  into  heaven.  It  fore- 
shadows the  path  of  Him  who  was  rejected  by  His  own, 
cast  out  by  the  world  and  who  has  gone  to  heaven.  In 
Elisha  and  his  ministry,  sovereign  grace  towards  Israel  in 
apostasy  and  ripening  for  judgment,  is  the  predominant 
feature,  foreshadowing  Him  who  appeared  in  the  midst  of 
His  people,  ministering  grace  and  truth  (John  i:14,  18).* 


*Another  typical  application  is  to  look  upon  Elisha's  ministry  as 
typifying  what  will  be  bestowed  upon  Israel  and  upon  the  Gentiles 
with  the  Return  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


308  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Elisha  had  seen  Elijah's  departure  mto  heaven,  and  when 
he  saw  him  no  more  "he  took  hold  of  his  own  clothes,  and 
rent  them  in  two  pieces."  He  thus  expressed  his  grief, 
but  at  the  same  time  he  took  Elijah's  mantle  (symbolical 
of  the  prophetic  ministry,  which  had  fallen  upon  him)  and 
used  it  at  once.  He  smites  with  it  the  waters  of  Jordan 
and  the  Lord  God  of  Elijah  answers  faith  by  parting  the 
river.  It  was  the  first  miracle  of  his  administration.  "So 
shall  the  waters  of  difficulty,  hay,  the  cold  flood  of  death 
itself,  part,  if  we  smite  in  faith  vnth  the  heaven  given  gar- 
ment; so  shall  the  promise  of  God  ever  stand  sure,  and 
God  be  true  to  His  Word;  and  so  may  we  go  forward  un- 
dauntedly, though  humbly  and  prayerfully,  to  whatever 
work  He  gives  us  to  do."* 

The  sons  of  the  prophets  then  acknowledged  Elisha. 
They  are  seen  ever  after  in  close  fellowship  with  the  prophet; 
they  belonged  to  the  faithful  remnant  in  Israel.  However, 
not  having  witnessed  Elijah's  translation  they  were  unbe- 
lieving and  thought  that  the  Spirit  might  have  transported 
the  prophet  (1  Kings  xviii:12;  Ezek.  iii:14,  viii:3).  They 
were  not  obedient  to  Elisha's  command  and  urged  him  to 
send,  till  he  was  ashamed  and  yielded  to  their  request. 
After  a  three  days'  unsuccessful  search  they  returned  and 
now  they  had  to  be  ashamed,  when  their  master  told  them, 
"Did  I  not  say  unto  you.  Go  not?"  They  were  like  the 
disciples  of  our  Lord  "slow  to  believe." 

The  second  miracle  is  one  of  mercy,  followed  by  a  miracle 
of  judgment.  The  healing  of  Jericho's  waters  is  a  miracle 
of  much  significance.  Jericho  is  a  type  of  the  world  under 
the  curse  (Joshua  vi).  The  water  was  naught  and  the 
ground  barren.  A  new  cruse  with  salt  is  brought.  The 
salt  is  put  into  the  waters  and  the  prophet  said:  "Thus 
saith  the  Lord,  I  have  healed  these  waters;  there  shall  not 
be  from  thence  any  more  death  or  barren  land."  When 
He,  who  is  greater  than  Elisha,  comes  back  to  this  earth 
again,  now  under  the  curse  and  death  reigning  upon  it, 

*£der8b«iia. 


^  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  309 

th«  curse  will  be  removed;  there  will  be  healing  as  it  was 
for  Jericho.  The  other  miracles  of  grace  and  mercy  teach 
the  same  lesson. 

The  third  miracle  is  one  of  judgment.  Judgment  well 
deserved  fell  upon  those  who  despised  the  chosen  messenger 
of  God.  The  mockers  were  not  "little  children,"  but  young 
men.  They  were  of  Bethel,  and  no  doubt  associated  with 
the  wicked  worship  established  there  (1  Kings  xii:25-33). 
They  were  infidels  and  scoffers.  They  mocked  the  trans- 
lation of  Elijah  and  daunted  Elisha.  The  curse  of  the  Lord 
fell  upon  them.  Forty -two  of  their  number  were  torn  by 
she-bears.  The  punishment  has  been  declared  by  critics 
"disproportionate  to  the  offence."  It  certainly  is  not  when 
the  offence  is  considered  as  an  insult  to  the  Man  of  God, 
who  had  gone  to  heaven  and  to  the  prophet  who  had  taken 
his  place;  besides,  these  the  young  men  had  scoffed  at  the 
power  of  God.  iVnd  we  must  not  overlook  the  fact  that 
present  day  mockers  and  rejectors  of  the  ministry  of  the 
Gospel  and  Grace  of  God  will  also  receive  their  punishment 
in  due  time  (2  Peter  iii:3-7). 


2.    Jehoram,  Moab  and  Elisha. 
CHAPTER  m 

1.  Jehoram,  King  of  Israel.     1-3. 

2.  Moab's  Rebellion.     4-9. 

3.  Elisha's  Message  and  Prediction.      10-20. 

4.  The  Defeat  of  Moab.     21-27. 

In  chapter  i:17  we  read,  "And  Jehoram  reigned  in  his 
stead  (Ahaziah)  in  the  second  year  of  Jehoram,*  the  son  of 
Jehoshaphat,  King  of  Judah."  There  was,  therefore,  a 
Jehoram  King  over  Judah,  as  well  as  a  King  of  Israel  by  the 
same  name.  They  are  also  known  by  the  name  Joram. 
Joram  and  Jehoram  are  used  interchangeably.  In  2  Kings 
i:17  and  2  Chron.  xxii:6  both  Kings  are  called  Jehoram;  in 

*He  was  associated  with  his  father  in  the  government  of  'the  king- 
dom (2  Kings  viii:27;    »  Gkjoo.  xxiiS). 


310  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

2  Kings  ix:15,  17,  the  King  of  Israel  is  called  Jehoram;  in 
2  Kings  viii:21,  etc.,  the  King  of  Judah  is  called  Joram; 
comparing  2  Kings  viii:16  and  verse  29  we  find  these  two 
names  inverted.  We  mention  this  to  clear  up  a  possible 
difficulty  some  may  find  here.  Jehoram  was  another  son 
of  Ahab,  the  brother  of  Ahaziah.  A  partial  reformation 
was  attempted  by  him,  but  he  continued  in  the  sins  of 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat  (1  Kings  xii:25-33). 

The  full  record  of  Moab's  rebellion  is  now  given.  Je- 
horam formed  an  alliance  with  Jehoshaphat,  the  King  of 
Judah  and  the  King  of  Edom.  Jehoshaphat  had  been  in 
league  with  Ahab  (1  Kings  xxii)  and  now  we  see  him  in  a 
similar  alliance  with  Ahab's  second  son.  It  was  an  alliance 
displeasing  to  the  Lord  and  Jehoshaphat  was  troubled  in 
his  conscience  about  it.  The  same  question  he  had  put 
to  Ahab,  he  now  puts  to  Ahab's  son,  "Is  there  not  here  a 
prophet  of  the  Lord,  that  we  may  inquire  of  the  Lord  by 
him?"  (1  Kings  xxii:7).  Jehoshaphat  knew  the  Lord,  but 
was  in  evil  company.  When  the  three  Kings  met  in  Elisha's 
tent,  the  prophet  manifests  the  boldness  of  Elijah  in  re- 
buking the  wicked  King  of  Israel.  But  he  honors  the  King 
of  Judah.  "As  the  Lord  of  hosts  liveth,  before  whom  I 
stand,  surely,  were  it  not  that  I  regard  the  presence  of 
Jehoshaphat  the  King  of  Judah,  I  would  not  look  toward 
thee,  nor  see  thee,"  But  there  was  also  a  rebuke  for  the 
good  King  of  Judah.  The  Spirit  of  God  was  grieved  and 
Elisha  had  not  the  power  of  prophecy.  He  needed  a  min- 
strel first  to  calm  his  own  agitated  spirit  and  get  into  the 
condition  of  soul  to  utter  the  needed  message.  How  it 
should  have  humbled  the  King,  who  served  Jehovah,  that 
after  calling  for  a  prophet  of  the  Lord,  the  divine  mouth- 
piece was  unable  to  prophesy  at  once!  Unholy  alliances 
hindered  the  manifestation  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Such  is 
the  case  almost  everyu^here  in  our  days  of  departure  from 
the  truth  of  God. 

,Then  the  ditches  which  had  been  made  in  obedience  to  the 
command  given  through  Elijah  were  miraculously  filled 
with  water.     On  the  next  morning  the  Moabites  saw  the 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  311 

water  and  imagined  that  it  was  blood,  on  account  of  the 
reflection  from  the  rising  sun.  "And  they  said,  This  is  blood ; 
the  Kings  are  surely  slain,  and  they  have  smitten  one  an- 
other, now  therefore  Moab  to  the  spoil."  The  onrushing 
Moabites  were  met  by  the  Israelites  and  Elisha's  pre- 
diction was  fulfilled  in  the  defeat  of  the  Moabites  and  the 
devastation  of  their  own  land.  It  was  the  supernatural 
gift  of  water  "when  the  meal-offering  was  offered"  which 
led  to  the  defeat  of  the  enemy  and  the  victory  for  Israel. 
And  God  has  supplied  the  water  of  life  through  Him  who 
is  the  true  meal  offering. 

Kir-hareseth*  alone  was  left  intact,  all  other  cities  were 
raised,  all  wells  stopped  up  and  every  good  tree  cut  down. 
On  the  devastation  of  Moab  remarks  a  commentator,  that 
the  spirit  of  the  times  must  be  considered  and  that  the  half 
barbaric  nations  of  that  time  all  did  this.  But  could  the 
devastation  of  Moab  hundreds  of  years  before  Christ  have 
been  any  worse  than  the  devastation  of  Belgium,  Poland 
and  Galicia  in  the  twentieth  century  after  Christ? 

Then  in  despair  the  King  of  Moab  did  the  horrible  thing 
of  sacrificing  his  eldest  son,  the  one  to  reign  after  him.  He 
offered  him  upon  the  wall,  in  plain  sight  of  Israel,  as  a  burnt 
offering,  to  conciliate  his  god  Chemosh,  who  is  mentioned 
on  the  Moabite  stone  (see  Appendix). 

3.    The  Miracles. 
CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  The  Widow's  Oil  Multiplied.     1-7. 

2.  The  Shunammite  and  Her  Reward.     8-17. 

3.  The  Son  of  the  Shunammite  Raised  from  the  Dead.     18-37. 

4.  The  Deadly  Pottage  Healed.     38-41. 

5.  The  Multitude  Fed.     42-44. 

In  the  previous  chapter  Elisha  appeared  as  the  saviour 
of  Israel,  and  now  he  acts  in  behalf  of  the  widow  of  one  of 
the  sons  of  the  prophets.     His  name  is  not  given.     Elisha 

*  Kir-haresetL  is  repeatedly  mentioned  as  the  stronghold  of  Moab 
(Isaiah  xvi:7). 


312  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

had  known  him  as  one  who  feared  the  Lord.  And  now 
the  widow  deeply  in  debt,  about  to  lose  her  two  sons,  ap- 
pealed to  the  prophet.  In  answer  to  Elisha's  question 
what  she  had  in  her  house  she  told  him  that  her  whole  pos- 
session consisted  in  a  pot  of  oil.*  She  then  was  told  to  bor- 
row empty  vessels,  not  a  few.  Behind  closed  doors  she 
was  to  pour  out.  AU  the  borrowed  vessels  were  soon  filled 
and  when  the  empty  vessels  were  all  filled  and  no  other  to 
be  filled,  the  oil  stayed.  The  oil  was  to  be  sold  to  satisfy 
the  creditor  and  the  rest  to  be  used  to  sustain  the  widow 
and  her  sons.  The  Lord  is  the  father  of  the  widows  and 
heareth  their  cry;  this  is  beautifully  illustrated  in  this 
miracle.  Then  there  is  the  lesson  for  faith.  The  vessels 
had  to  be  produced  to  be  filled;  if  there  had  been  more 
vessels  the  oil  would  have  filled  them  all.  The  limitation 
was  not  in  the  supply  of  oil,  but  in  the  empty  vessels  to 
receive  the  oil.  There  is  an  abundance  of  grace  and  in 
faith  we  can  always  come  with  our  empty  vessels  to  receive 
out  of  His  fulness  grace  upon  grace. 

Then  the  great  woman  of  Shunemf  is  introduced  for  the 
first  time.  She  belonged  to  the  godly  in  Israel  and  did  not 
know  the  prophet,  but  it  did  not  take  her  long  to  discover 
that  he  was  a  holy  man  of  God.  It  is  a  blessed  picture  to 
see  this  man  of  God  walking  through  the  land,  possessing 
nothing  and  acting  in  grace  in  the  midst  of  Israel's  ruin. 
In  the  words  of  another,  "Poor  indeed,  while  making  many 
rich;  seeming  to  possess  all  things,  yet  really  having  noth- 
ing. Receiving  bounty  and  care  in  the  ordinary  need  of 
life  from  those  in  whose  behalf  he,  at  the  same  time,  is 
opening  resources  which  were  altogether  beyond  man.  And, 
besides,  he  walks  alone  in  the  world,  and  yet  all  wait  on  him. 

"All  this  gives  us  a  strong  expression  of  the  ways  of  One 
who  could  call  Himself  Master  and  Lord,  receiving  the 
homage  of  faith,  even  while  He  had  not  where  to  lay  His 
head.     In  all  this  our  prophet  is  marking  out  for  us,  as  in  a 


*In  Hebrtw :    Anointing  Oil . 
tAhiflha^  (1  Exog^  liSSi)  was  o^  Shuoem. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  SIS 

reflection,  the  path  of  the  Lord  Jesus  in  one  of  iti  most 

striking,  remarkable  characters."* 

The  pious  Shunammite  prepared  for  the  lonely  pilgrim  a 
little  chamber  with  its  simple  furnishings  in  her  own  house. 
And  the  man  of  God  appreciated  the  kindness  shown  to 
him,  and,  learning  that  she  had  no  son,  Elisha  told  her 
"about  this  sestson,  according  to  the  time  of  life,  thou  shalt 
embrace  a  son."  Like  Sarah  she  believed  and  received  her 
son.  And  when  the  child  died,  what  faith  the  Shunammite 
exhibited!  The  son  of  promise  was  dead,  yet  in  the  midst 
of  her  great  sorrow  she  could  say,  "It  is  well."  Like  Abra 
ham,  when  he  put  the  son  of  promise  upon  the  altar,  tht 
Shunammite  counted  on  resurrection  and  believed  on  Him 
who  can  raise  the  dead.  She  had  lost  her  son  for  a  while, 
but  not  her  faith. 

And  how  her  faith  clings  to  Elisha!  Not  Gehazi  with 
the  staff  can  help,  but  Elisha  is  needed.  And  her  faith  is 
rewarded.  Her  child  is  raised  from  the  dead.  The  Holy 
Spirit  mentions  her  in  the  New  Testament.  "Women  re- 
ceived their  dead  raised  to  life  again"  (Heb,  xi:35). 

"We  see  in  her  a  true  and  faithful  Israelitish  woman,  who, 
in  a  time  of  general  apostasy,  owned  Jehovah  alike  in  hei 
life  and  her  home.  Receiving  a  prophet,  because  of  Him 
who  had  sent  him,  because  he  was  a  holy  man  of  God — and 
with  humility  and  entire  self-forgetfulness — she  received  a 
prophet's  reward  in  the  gift  most  precious  to  a  Jewish  mother, 
which  she  had  not  dared  to  hope  for,  even  when  announced 
to  her.  Then,  when  severely  tried,  she  still  held  fast  to  her 
trust  in  the  promise — strong  even  when  weakest — once  more 
self-forgetful,  and  following  deepest  spiritual  impulse.  And, 
in  the  end,  her  faith  appears  victorious — crowned  by  Divine 
mercy,  and  shining  out  the  more  brightly  from  its  contrast 
to  the  felt  weakness  of  the  prophet.  As  we  think  of  this,  it 
seems  as  if  a  fuller  light  were  shed  on  the  history  of  the  trials 
of  an  Abraham,  an  Isaac,  or  a  Jacob;  on  the  inner  life  of 
those  heroes  of  faith  to  whom  the  Epistle  of  the  Hebrews 

*J.  Bellett. 


314  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

points  us  for  example  and  learning  (Heb.  xi),  and  on  such 
Scripture  sayings  as  these:  'Jehovah  killeth,  and  maketh 
alive:  He  bringeth  down  to  the  grave,  and  bringeth  up' 
(1  Sam.  ii  :6) ;  'Know  that  Jehovah  hath  set  apart  him  that 
is  godly  for  Himself:  Jehovah  will  hear  when  I  call  unto 
Him'  (Psalm  iv:3);  or  this:  'AH  the  paths  of  Jehovah  are 
mercy  and  truth  unto  such  as  keep  His  covenant  and  His 
testimonies'   (Psalm  xxv:10)."* 

And  here  we  must  also  think  of  Him,  whom  Elisha  but 
faintly  foreshadows.  He  i*aises  the  spiritually  dead  now, 
all  who  hear  His  voice,  as  He  will  raise  the  physically  dead 
in  the  future. 

In  Gilgal  the  eighth  miracle  of  Elisha  took  place.  The 
humble  pottage  which  was  being  prepared  for  the  sons  of 
the  prophets  had  been  spoiled  by  the  addition  of  a  wild 
and  poisonous  gourd.  Then  Elisha  cast  meal  into  the  pot 
and  the  pottage  became  eatible — "there  was  no  harm  in 
the  pot."  The  meal  is  typical  of  our  Lord,  who  was  cast 
into  the  scene  of  death  and  through  His  death  hath  brought 
healing. 

The  miraculous  feeding  of  the  multitude  was  Elisha's 
ninth  miracle;  prefigures  the  miracles  of  our  Lord  (Matt. 
xiv:19-21,  etc.). 


4.    Naaman  and  His  Healing. 
CHAPTER  V 

1.  Naaman,  the  Leper.     1. 

2.  The  Testimony  of  the  Maid  of  Israel.     2-4. 

3.  The  Message  to  the  King  of  Israel.     5-8. 

8.  Naaman  and  Elisha.     9-19. 

9.  Gehazi;    His  Sin  and  Punishment.     20-27. 

The  story  of  this  chapter  is  peculiarly  rich  in  its  spiritual 
and  dispensational  meaning.  Naaman,  captain  of  Ben- 
hadad,  the  King  of  Syria,  was  a  Gentile.  He  was  no  com- 
mon man.     In  all  his  greatness  and  might,  with  all  the 


♦Bible  History. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  $U 

honors  heaped  upon  him  and  wealth  at  his  command,  he 
was  an  unhappy  and  doomed  man,  for  he  was  a  leper. 
Leprosy  is  a  type  of  sin.  Here,  then,  is  a  picture  of  the 
natural  man,  enjoying  the  highest  and  the  best — but  withal 
a  leper.  And  then  the  little  captive,  taken  from  Israel's 
land,  away  from  her  home  and  her  family — what  a  contrast 
with  the  great  Naaman!  In  her  captivity  she  was  happy, 
for  she  knew  the  Lord  and  knew  that  the  prophet  in  Samaria, 
the  great  representative  of  Jehovah,  could  heal  leprosy. 
She  knew  and  she  believed.  The  grace  which  filled  the 
heart  gave  her  also  a  desire  to  see  the  mighty  Naaman 
healed;  the  same  grace  gave  her  power  to  bear  witness. 

And  how  the  Lord  used  the  simple  testimony!  The  King 
of  Syria  heard  of  it  and  addressed  a  letter  to  the  King  of 
Israel  demanding  that  he  should  recover  Naaman  from 
his  leprosy.  And  Naaman  departed  with  ten  talents  of 
silver  (about  $18,000)  and  six  thousand  pieces  of  gold 
(about  $40,000),  besides  ten  changes  of  raiment."  And 
the  King  of  Israel,  Jehoram,  no  doubt,  was  filled  with 
fear,  for  he  thought  the  King  of  Syria  was  seeking  a  pretext 
to  quarrel  with  him.  While  he  readily  acknowledged 
that  God  alone  has  the  power  to  heal,  he  did  not  look  to 
the  Lord  nor  did  he  think  of  the  mighty  prophet,  whose 
very  name  declared  that  God  is  salvation.  In  helpless  and 
hopeless  terror,  in  the  despair  of  unbelief  he  rent  his  clothes. 

It  was  then  that  the  man  of  God  spoke  reproving  the 
King,  asking  that  Naaman  come  to  him.  Then  Naaman, 
with  his  horses  and  chariot,  laden  with  the  treasures,  stood 
at  the  door  of  the  house  of  Elisha.  The  prophet  through  a 
messenger  told  the  leper,  "Go  and  wash  in  Jordan  seven 
times,  and  thy  flesh  shall  come  again  to  thee,  and  thou 
shalt  be  clean."  Well  may  we  think  here  of  our  Ix)rd  Jesus, 
who  cleansed  the  leper,  and  in  doing  so  manifested  Him- 
self as  Jehovah.     But  how  He  shines  above  all! 

"When  the  leper  comes  to  Him,  it  is  not  as  with  the  King, 
'Am  I  Gt)d,  that  I  should  heal  a  man  of  his  leprosy?'  nor 
is  it  as  with  the  prophet,  'Go  wash  in  Jordan,  and  be  clean.' 
No;  but  He  reveals  Himself  at  once  in  the  place  and  power 


316  THE  BOOK  OF  KINOS 

of  God.  'I  will  be  thou  clean.'  Elisha  was  but  a  preacher 
of  Jesus  toNaaman;  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  lepers'  cleans- 
ing, the  healing  God.  Elisha  did  not  venture  to  touch  the 
leper.  This  would  have  defiled  him.  But  our  Lord  'put 
forth  His  hand  and  touched  him';  for  He,  with  the  rights 
of  the  God  of  Israel,  was  above  the  leper,  and  could  con- 
sume and  not  contract  the  defilement."* 

And  Naaman's  wrath  and  indignation  was  stirred  by 
Elisha's  command.  The  great  and  mighty  captain  with 
his  treasures  expected  a  different  reception  from  the  prophet. 
He  expected  at  least  to  do  what  heathen  priests  with  their 
enchantments  did,  to  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  his  God 
and  strike  his  hand  over  the  place  of  leprosy.  He  rejects  the 
remedy  which  grace  had  provided  because  it  humbled  him 
into  the  dust  and  stripped  him  of  all  his  pride.  It  is  just 
this  the  sinner  needs.  Naaman  had  to  learn  that  he  was 
nothing  but  a  poor,  lost  leper.  All  his  silver  and  gold  could 
not  purchase  cleansing  for  him.  He  needed  humiliation  and 
the  obedience  of  faith.  And  so  he  learned  as  his  servants 
reasoned  with  him,  and  instead  of  returning  in  a  rage  to 
Damascus  as  the  helpless  leper,  he  obeyed  the  given  com- 
mand and  dipped  himself  seven  times  in  Jordan — "and  his 
flesh  came  again  like  unto  the  flesh  of  a  little  child,  and  he 
was  clean."  Jordan  is  the  type  of  death,  as  we  saw  in  the 
study  of  Joshua.  Our  Lord  was  baptized  by  John  in  that 
river,  for  He  had  come  to  take  the  sinners  place  in  death. 
Naaman  bathing  in  Jordan  typifies  death  and  resurrection 
in  which  there  is  cleansing  and  healing  for  the  spiritual 
leper,  but  it  is  the  death  and  resurrection  of  our  blessed 
Lord.  As  we  believe  on  Him  who  died  for  our  sins  accord- 
ing to  Scripture,  and  was  raised  for  our  justification,  we 
are  born  again  and  made  clean.  It  is  the  one  way  of  sal- 
vation, the  only  way,  revealed  in  every  portion  of  God's 
holy  Word.  "Saved  by  grace  through  faith  (in  Him  who 
died  for  our  sins),  it  is  the  gift  of  God,  not  of  works,  lest  any 
man  should  boast." 

*J.  G.  Bellett. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINOS  817 

And  the  blessed  results  of  true  salvation  are  seen  at  once 
in  Naaman  the  Syrian.  He  is  fully  restored  and  healed. 
He  stands  now  before  the  man  of  God,  no  longer  the  proud, 
self-trusting  Naaman,  but  an  humble  believer.  He  con- 
fesses the  Lord  with  his  lips.  He  offers  also  a  gift*  to  Elisha. 
He  could  not  give  anything  to  effect  his  cleansing,  but  after 
the  healing  he  offered  willingly.  But  Elisha  refused  the 
reward  offered  to  him.  He  had  freely  received  and  freely 
he  gave  (Matt.  x:8).  Then  he  requested  "two  mules'  burden 
of  earth."  This  was  to  be  used  to  build  an  altar  unto  Je- 
hovah in  Syria.  It  was  an  outward  expression  of  his  faith 
and  would  be  a  testimony  among  the  heathen  that  there 
is  but  one  Lord  to  be  worshipped.  And  there  was  the 
tender  conscience  (verse  18).  Finally  he  departed  in  peace. 
"Go  in  peace";  the  same  words  our  blessed  Lord  used  re- 
repeatedly.  And  Gehazi's  covetousness  earned  him  the 
leprosy  from  which  grace  had  delivered  the  Syrian  Gentile. 
The  story  is  full  of  solemn  lessons. 

Dispensationally  Naaman  stands  for  the  Gentiles. 
Through  Him  who  is  greater  than  Elisha  salvation  has  been 
extended  to  the  Gentiles,  while  Gehazi,  who  was  so  closely 
connected  with  Elisha,  but  who  had  hardened  his  heart,  is  a 
type  of  Israel 


5.    Elisha  and  the  S3n'ians. 
HAPTER  VI 

1.  The  Lost  Axe-head  Recovered.     1-7. 

2.  Elisha  makes  Known  Ben-hadad's  plans.     8-12. 

3.  Elisha's  Arrest  Planned.     13-17. 

4.  The  Blinded  Syrians  Led  to  Samaria.     18-23. 
6.  Samaria  Besieged.     24-30. 

6.     The  King's  Wrath  Against  Elisha.     31-33. 

It  has  been  truly  said  that  the  miracle  of  the  swimming 
axe-head  reveals  the  condescension  of  divine  power  and 
the  grace  of  benevolence.     We  see  the  great  Man  of  God 


^"A  blessing"  means  a  gift. 


818  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

in  fellowship  with  the  sons  of  the  prophets.  He  goes  with 
them  and  when  they  are  in  distress  the  power  of  God  is 
manifested  through  him.  Rationalistic  critics  have  always 
ridiculed  the  miracle  of  the  swimming  iron.  "The  story  is 
perhaps  an  imaginative  reproduction  of  some  unwonted 
incident,"  saith  Farrar,  the  higher  critic.  Then  he  adds, 
"all  the  eternal  laws  of  nature  are  here  superseded  at  a 
word,  as  though  it  were  an  every  day  matter,  without  even 
any  recorded  invocation  of  Jehovah,  to  restore  an  axe- 
head,  which  could  obviously  have  been  recovered  or  resup- 
plied  in  some  less  stupendous  way  than  by  making  iron 
swim  on  the  surface  of  a  swift-jBowing  river."*  And  Ewald, 
the  German  critic,  explains,  "he  threw  on  to  the  spot  where 
it  had  sunk  a  piece  of  wood  cut  to  fit  it,  which  caught  it 
up"  I  These  men  all  aim  at  the  denial  of  miracles  of  any 
kind.  They  delight  in  making  an  omnipotent  God,  in 
whom  they  profess  to  believe,  a  helpless  slave  to  the  laws 
of  nature,  a  God  who  has  neither  power  nor  inclination  to 
set  aside  these  laws  in  behalf  of  His  trusting  people.  We 
say  it  again,  the  rationalistic  critic  is  an  unbeliever  of  the 
worst  type. 

There  is  much  comfort  for  God's  trusting  children  in  the 
miracle  of  the  swimming  iron.  The  mighty  power  of  God 
condescends  to  help  those  who  trust  even  in  the  smallest 
things  of  life.  Our  Lord  fills  the  throne  in  Glory  and  is 
the  upholder  of  all  things,  yet  as  the  sympathizing  priest 
He  enters  into  the  lives  of  His  people.  His  power  answers 
faith,  if  we  but  learn  to  bring  our  little  troubles  to  Him  as 
the  man  came  in  distress  to  Eli.sha. 

When  war  broke  out  between  Ben-hadad  and  the  King 
of  Israel,  Elisha  made  known  the  secret  counsels  of  the 
King  of  Syria.  The  Man  of  God,  walking  in  constant  fel- 
lowship with  Jehovah,  received  this  supernatural  informa- 
tion, and  thereby  an  additional  evidence  was  given  to  apos- 
tate Israel  that  the  Lord  is  for  His  people  and  a  very  pres- 
ent help  in  time  of  trouble.     Then   one  of  Ben-hadad'i 


"Expositor's  Bible. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  319 

.servants*  suggested  that  it  was  Elisha's  work,  and  the 
King  in  his  blindness  sent  a  great  host  to  capture  Elisha. 
What  Ahaziah  attempted  with  EUjah  (chapter  i),  Ben- 
hadad  now  undertakes  with  Elisha.  But  Elisha,  who  acts 
in  grace,  does  not  call  down  fire  from  heaven  to  devour 
the  men  who  compassed  Dothan.  Elisha's  servant  (not 
Gehazi)  is  terror  stricken  when  he  beheld  the  besieging  host. 
Elisha  knows  no  fear,  for  he  knows  "they  that  are  with  us 
are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them."  He  had  seen  the 
chariots  of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof  before  (chapter 
ii:2).  He  knew  that  the  Lord's  hosts  compassed  him  about. 
He  did  not  need  to  pray  for  himself,  that  he  might  see,  for 
he  saw,  because  he  believed.  He  prayed  for  his  servant 
that  his  eyes  might  be  opened.  Then  the  servant  saw, 
"and  behold,  the  mountain  was  full  of  horses  and  chariots 
round  about  Elisha."  Angelic  ministry  and  protection  may 
be  termed  one  of  the  lost  comforts  which  God's  people  have. 
They  are  still  "ministering  spirits  to  minister  unto  the  heirs 
of  salvation." 

"I  doubt  not,  a  host  or  constellation  of  angels,  those 
heavenly  creatures,  which,  excelling  in  strength,  stand  in 
the  presence  of  God,  or  go  forth  to  minister  on  account  of 
those  who  are  heirs  of  salvation.  For  of  them  we  read  that 
*God  maketh  His  angels  spirits  (winds)  and  His  ministers 
a  flame  of  fire' ;  and  again,  'The  chariots  of  God  are  twenty 
thousand,  even  thousands  of  angels.'  At  the  divine  be- 
hest, they  get  ready  to  serve  in  whatever  the  exigency 
of  the  saint,  or  the  occasion  under  the  throne  of  God, 
may  require.  They  formed  a  travelling  chariot  to  convey 
Elijah  to  heaven,  and  to  carry  Lazarus  to  Abraham's  bosom. 
They  now  form  chariots  of  war,  when  Elisha  is  beleaguered 
by  the  hostile  bands  of  Syria.  Either  singly  or  in  company 
they  visit  the  elect  on  earth,  and  either  alone  or  in  concert 
celebrate  the  joy  of  heaven  in  the  audience  of  the  earth. 


*Certainly  not  Naaman  as  some  have  surmised.  Yet  the  knowledge 
that  Elisha  had  been  the  instrument  of  healing  the  Syrian  captain 
moved  some  unknown  servant  of  Ben-hadad  to  suggest  that  Elisha  waa 
responsible  for  the  revelation  of  the  King's  plans. 


S20  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

They  have  drawn  the  sword  to  smite  a  guilty  city,  or  with 
the  strong  hand  of  love  dragged  the  too  reluctant  one  forth 
from  the  doomed  city.  They  are  either  as  winds  or  as  jfire. 
They  are  messengers  of  mercy,  and  executors  of  judgment, 
as  *the  Lord'  who  'is  among  them'  may  command.  They 
attended  on  Mount  Sinai  when  the  law  was  published,  and 
they  hovered  over  the  fields  of  Bethlehem  when  Jesus  was 
bom.  And  here,  in  their  order  and  strength,  they  are  as 
a  wall  of  fire,  a  wall  of  salvation,  round  about  the  prophet. 

"Very  blessed  all  this  is.  And  still  more  blessed  to  know, 
that  ere  long,  the  hidden  glories,  which  are  now  only  known 
to  such  faith  as  Elisha's,  will  become  the  manifested  things; 
and  the  threatenings  of  the  enemy,  the  noise  and  the  din 
and  the  clang  of  arms,  which  are  the  present  apparent 
things,  full  of  fears  and  sorrows  for  the  heart,  shall  have 
rolled  by,  like  the  past  thunder-storm,  but  to  leave  the  sun- 
shine the  brighter."* 

Elisha  then  prayed  that  the  besieging  host  should  be 
smitten  with  blindness.  The  prayer  was  at  once  answered. 
He  led  on  the  Syrian  forces  into  Samaria.  But  was  it  not 
deception  when  the  man  of  God  said  to  the  blinded  enemies, 
"I  will  bring  you  to  the  man  whom  ye  seek,"  leading  them 
into  Samaria?  It  was  not.  Samaria  was  the  home  of  the 
prophet  and  he  was  then  on  his  way  there.  His  object  was 
to  demonstrate  to  the  Syrians,  as  well  as  to  the  King  of 
Israel,  that  Jehovah  is  the  God  and  all-sufiicient  helper  of 
His  people.  What  mercy  he  then  showed  to  his  captives. 
Jehoram  would  have  smitten  them,  but  Elisha  fed  them 
and  had  them  sent  away  in  peace.  In  this  he  is  a  type  of 
Him  who  taught,  "Ye  have  heard  tliat  it  hath  been  said. 
Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor,  and  hate  thine  enemy.  But 
I  say  unto  you.  Love  your  enemies,  bless  them  that  curse 
you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and  pray  for  them 
which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute  you"  (Matt. 
v:43-44). 

Some  time  after  Ben-hadad  besieged  Samaria  and  a  great 


*Meditatioiu  on  Elisha. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  S21 

famine  followed,  and  there  was  such  a  distress  that  women 
ate  their  own  offspring.  It  was  but  a  fulfilment  of  the 
threatened  judgments  upon  an  apostate  people  (Levit. 
xxvi:29;  Deut.  xx\iii:53).  The  same  horror  occured  dur- 
ing the  siege  of  Jerusalem  by  Nebuchadnezzar  (Lam.  iv:10) 
and  also,  according  to  Josephus,  during  the  siege  by  Titus 
70  A.D.  The  wicked  nature  of  the  King  asserted  itself  in 
blaming  Elisha  for  the  misfortune  which  had  fallen  upon 
his  kingdom.  He  seeks  to  slay  the  man  of  God.  After 
all  the  mighty  miracles  God  had  wrought  by  the  hands  of 
Elisha,  the  representative  of  Israel,  wants  to  kill  the  prophet. 
This  also  foreshadov/s  our  Lord,  when  they  sought  to  kill 
Him  after  His  gracious  ministry.  But  Elisha  knew  the 
murderous  purpose  of  the  King  ere  the  messengers  came. 
He  called  the  King  by  the  right  name  "this  son  of  a  mur- 
derer," for  such  Ahab  was.  And  when  the  King  appeared 
in  person  he  said,  "Behold  this  evil  is  of  the  Lord,  what 
should  I  wait  for  the  Lord  any  longer."  He  realizes  the 
impending  judgment  on  account  of  Israel's  sin. 

6.    Elisha's  Prediction  and  its  Fulfilment 
CHAPTER  Vn. 

1.  Elisha's  Prediction.     1. 

2.  The  Unbelieving  Lord.     2. 

3.  The  Four  Lepers  and  their  Discovery.     3-8. 

4.  The  Day  of  Good  Tidings.     9-15. 

5.  The  Prediction  Fulfilled.     16-18. 

6.  The  Death  of  the  Unbelieving  Lord.     19-20. 

When  the  worst  had  come,  Samaria  starving  to  death, 
the  King  in  despondency,  Elisha's  life  threatened,  then  the 
mercy  and  kindness  of  God  is  revealed  once  more.  The 
I)rophet  announces  the  good  news  of  salvation  and  deliver- 
ance. All  is  typical  of  the  Gospel  of  Grace.  The  unbe- 
lieving lord  who  rejected  the  good  news  and  refused  to  be- 
lieve it  represents  those  who  reject  the  Gospel.  All  in  this 
chapter  is  intensely  interesting  and  suggestive. 

The  great  victory  was  accomplished  by  the  Lord  alone. 
His  chariots  had  frightened  the  Syrian  camp  and  put  them 


822  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

to  flight.  The  bread  and  the  water,  the  silver  and  gold 
and  raiment,  all  was  His  provision  for  a  starving,  dying 
people,  and  the  four  lepers  in  despair,  facing  certain  death, 
were  the  first  to  disco^'^e^  God's  victory  for  them  and  the 
people.  Their  great  need  led  them  to  find  the  needed  sal- 
vation. Well  may  all  this  be  applied  to  our  Lord's  work 
for  us  and  to  the  provision  of  the  Gospel.  He  alone  worked 
out  the  great  salvation  and  provided  all,  that  sinners  dying 
and  lost  (represented  by  the  lepers)  may  come  to  eat  and 
drink,  without  money  and  without  price.  It  was  a  day  of 
good  tidings.  Such  is  the  still  lasting  day  of  salvation,  the 
day  of  grace.  The  lepers  who  had  their  fill  first  and  had 
tasted  God's  great  salvation,  could  not  hold  their  peace. 
Through  them  the  whole  city  hears  of  the  provision  made. 
And  the  people  went  out  to  see  how  wonderfully  the  predic- 
tion of  Elisha  had  been  accomplished.  All  enjoyed  it. 
But  the  unbelieving  lord  perished,  a  warning  that  he  that 
believeth  not  must  die  in  his  sins.  The  repetition  at  the 
close  of  this  chapter  of  the  words  of  the  unbeliever  recorded 
in  the  beginning  of  this  story,  is  of  solemn  incaning.  God 
is  true  to  His  Word,  the  Word  which  promises  life  to  all 
who  believe  and  which  threatens  eternal  punishment  to  all 
who  believe  not.  "He  that  believeth  on  the  Son  hath  ever- 
lasting life,  and  he  that  believeth  not  the  Son  shall  not  £2^ 
life,  but  the  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  him." 


7.    The  Famine  Predicted.    Further  Events 

CHAPTER  Vm. 

1.  The  Famine  Predicted.     1-2. 

2.  The  Shunammite's  Land  Restored.     3-6. 

3.  Elisha  with  Ben-hadad  and  Hazael.     7-15. 

4.  Jehoram  King  of  Judah.     (2  Chronicles  xxi:5).     16-19. 

5.  The  Revolt  of  Edom.      (2  Chronicles  xxi:8-10).     20-21. 

6.  The  Revolt  of  Libnah  (2  Chronicles  xxi:10).     22-23. 

7.  Death  of  Jehoram.      (2  Chronicles  xxi:19-20).     24. 

8.  Ahaziah  and  Jehoram.     (2  Chronicles  xxiii:6).     25-29. 

The  threatened  judgment  upon  the  house  of  Ahab  is  now 
rapidly  approaching.     Elisha,  knowing  the  secrets  of  th« 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  S23 

Lord,  preilicts  the  seven  years  famine.  "Surely  the  Lord 
God  will  do  nothing,  but  He  revealeth  His  secrets  unto  His 
servants  the  prophets"  (Amos  iii:7).  The  Shunammite, 
that  godly  woman,  is  here  introduced  once  more.  As  her 
liusband  is  not  mentioned  she  may  have  been  a  widow. 
Elisha  warns  her  of  the  coming  famine,  and  she  heeded  the 
warning  and  sojourned  for  seven  years  in  the  land  of  the 
Philistines.  After  her  return  all  was  restored  imto  her  by 
the  King.  The  introduction  here  of  Gehazi,  the  servant 
of  Elisha,  has  drawn  the  fire  of  the  critics.  "x\s  it  is  un- 
likely that  the  King  would  converse  long  ¥/ith  a  leper,  and 
as  Gehazi  is  still  called  'the  servant  of  the  man  of  God,' 
the  incident  may  here  be  narrated  out  of  order."*  But 
not  so.  It  is  fully  in  order.  Gehazi  was  known  as  the 
servant  of  Elisha  and  is  mentioned  by  his  former  position 
so  that  all  doubt  about  his  personality  might  be  removed. 
That  the  deposed  servant  was  with  the  apostate  King  is  of 
much  interest  and  has  its  lessons. 

"It  seems  to  me  that  Gehazi  stands  here  in  a  gi*ievous  posi- 
tion. Smitten  by  the  hand  of  God,  because  his  heart  clung 
to  earth,  even  in  the  presence  of  Jehovah's  mighty  and  long- 
suffering  testimony,  he  is  now  a  parasite  in  the  King's  court, 
relating  the  wonderful  things  in  which  he  no  longer  took 
part.  This  poor  world  grows  weary  enough  of  itself  to  lead 
it  to  take  some  pleasure  in  hearing  anything  spoken  of  that 
has  reality  and  power.  Provided  that  it  does  not  reach 
the  conscience,  they  wall  listen  to  it  for  their  amusement, 
taking  credit  to  themselves  perhaps  for  an  enlarged  and  a 
liberal  mind,  which  is  not  enslaved  by  that  which  can  yet 
recognize  philosophically  in  its  place.  But  that  is  a  sad 
position,  which  makes  it  evident  that  formerly  we  were 
connected  with  a  testimony,  whilst  now  we  only  relate  its 
marvels  at  court.  Nevertheless  God  makes  use  of  it;  and 
it  does  not  follow  that  there  was  no  truth  in  Gehazi.  But 
to  rise  in  the  world,  and  entertain  the  world  with  the  mighty 
works  of  God,  is  to  fall  very  deep."  f 

•Expositors  Bible. 

fSynopsis  of  the  Bible. 


824  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Elisha  after  this  went  outside  of  Israel's  land  to  Damascus. 
Guided  by  the  Lord,  whom  he  served  so  faithfully,  he  paid 
a  visit  to  the  sick  King  of  Syria.  By  referring  to  1  Kings 
xix:15  we  find  that  the  commission  to  anoint  Hazael,  King 
over  Syria,  had  been  given  to  Elijah.  There  is  no  record 
from  which  we  learn  that  Elijah  had  done  so.  And  now 
Elisha  meets  Hazael,  who  came  to  him  as  the  messenger 
of  the  sick  King  Ben-hadad,  bringing  costly  presents.  And 
the  King  asked  the  question,  "Shall  I  recover  of  this  dis- 
ease?" The  prophet's  answer  was  brief.  The  sickness 
itself  was  not  fatal,  he  would  certainly  recover  and  yet  the 
Lord  had  shown  to  him  that  the  King  should  surely  die. 
This  meant  while  the  sickness  in  itself  would  not  result  in 
Ben-hadad's  death,  he  should  nevertheless  die  by  other 
means. 

Then  Elisha's  countenance  fell  and  the  man  of  God  wept. 
Then  Elisha  told  Hazael  he  wept  on  account  of  the  horrible 
atrocities  which  he  would  commit  against  the  children  of 
Israel.  The  fulfillment  of  Elisha's  prediction  is  found  in 
chapters  x:32,  xii:17,  xiii:3.  Weeping  Elisha  foreshadows 
our  Lord  weeping  over  Jerusalem  when  He  saw  what  was 
to  come  upon  the  city  He  loved  so  well.  And  Hazael,  with 
a  mock  humility,  expressed  surprise.  But  the  prophet 
revealed  the  innermost  thoughts  of  his  'wdcked  heart  by  tell- 
ing him  he  would  be  King  over  Syria;  this  was  his  aim. 
And  so  returned  to  Ben-hadad,  bringing  a  mutilated  message 
and  murdered  the  King  immediately  after. 

The  record  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and  Israel  is  now  briefly 
given.  All  is  fast  ripening  for  the  long  threatened  judg- 
ment. After  the  death  of  Jehoshaphat,  his  son  Jehoram 
became  sole  ruler  over  Judah.  He  walked  in  the  evil  ways 
of  the  Kings  of  Israel  and  the  record  tells  the  reason,  "for 
the  daughter  of  Ahab  was  his  wife."  After  him  came  his 
son  Ahaziah.  Again  wicked  Athaliah,  his  mother,*  is  men- 
tioned.    His   connection   with   Ahab    is   made   prominent. 


*The    marginal     reading    "grand-daughter"    is     correct.      She  wa» 
Ahab's  daughter  and  Omri's  grand^daughter. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINOS  $iS 

He  did  evil  also  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  made  an  alli- 
ance with  the  son  of  Ahab,  Joram  (or  Jehoram),  who  was 
still  King  in  Israel.  Joram  was  wounded  by  the  Syrians 
and  Ahaziah,  King  of  Judah,  visited  him  in  Jezreel.  Alas! 
the  unholy  alliance  of  Jehoshaphat,  King  of  Judah,  with 
the  wicked  murderer,  Ahab,  King  of  Israel  (1  Kings  xxii) 
had  resulted  in  the  marriage  of  his  son  with  Athaliah,  the 
wicked  daughter  of  a  wicked  father.  And  Jehoram,  Jehos- 
haphat's  son,  was  dragged  down  by  her  and  she  became  the 
ruination  of  her  son  Ahaziah.    A  dreadful  harvest! 


8.    The  Anointing  of  Jehu. 

CHAPTER  IX:1-10 

1.  The  Commission.     1-3. 

2.  Jehu  Anointed.     4-10. 

The  hour  of  judgment  for  the  house  of  Ahab  has  come. 
The  instrument  for  it,  mentioned  long  ago  to  Elijah  (1  Kings 
xix:16-17),  appears  now  upon  the  scene.  The  army  of 
Joram,  King  of  Israel,  besieged  Ramoth-gilead  and  Jehu 
was  the  captain  of  the  forces.  Joram  was  recovering  from 
his  wounds  ia  Jezreel.  Then  Elisha  called  one  of  the  sons 
of  the  prophets.  Handing  him  a  box  of  oil  he  sent  him  to 
Ramoth-gilead.  He  was  to  look  out  for  Jehu,  the  son  of 
Jehoshaphat,  the  son  of  Nimshi,*  and  anoint  him  King 
over  Israel.     Then  he  was  not  to  tarry,  but  to  flee. 

The  messenger  carried  out  the  commission  and  at  the  same 
time  states  the  judgment  work  into  which  God  had  called 
him.  He  was  to  execute  judgment  on  the  house  of  Ahab, 
to  avenge  the  blood  of  the  prophets  and  the  Lord's  servants 
at  the  hand  of  Jezebel.  The  whole  house  of  Ahab  was  to 
perish  like  Jeroboam  (1  Kings  xiv:10)  and  that  of  Baasha 
(1  Kings  xvi:3).  "And  the  dogs  shall  eat  Jezebel  in  the 
portion  of  Jezreel,  and  there  shall  be  none  to  bury  her." 
More  than  fifteen  years  had  passed  since  Jehovah  througli 

Mehu  means  "Jehovah  is  He;"  .Jehoshaphat — "Jehovah  judges;" 
Nimshi — "Jehovah  reveals."     Significant  names! 


S«6  THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Elijah  had  announced  the  doom  of  the  house  of  Ahab  and 
the  doom  of  Jezebel.  And  now  the  hour  of  execution  had 
come.  God  will  judge  in  the  end,  though  He  is  never  in 
haste  to  execute  His  threatened  judgments.  The  day  is 
surely  coming  when  the  Lord  will  judge  this  world,  when 
especially  Jezebel  (Rev.  ii:20),  Babylon  the  Great,  the 
mother  of  harlots  and  abominations  of  the  earth,  drunken 
with  the  blood  of  the  saints,  the  Romish  apostate  "church," 
will  receive  her  judgment.  "And  in  her  was  found  the 
blood  of  the  prophets,  and  of  saints,  and  of  all  that  were 
slain  on  the  earth"  (Rev.  xvii:5-6,  xviii:24). 


III.  The  Period  of  Declension  and  Apostasy 

Chapters  ix:  11-17 
1.    Jehu,  Kmg  of  Israel;  His  Deeds. 

CHAPTER  IX:ll-37 

1.  Jehu  is  King.     11-13. 

2.  Jehoram,  King  of  Israel  Slain.     14-26. 

3.  Ahaziah  Slain.     (2  Chron.  xxii:9). 

4.  Jezebel  and  Her  End.     30-37. 

Jehu*  revealed  the  secret  anointing  as  King  over  Israel, 
and  under  the  blare  of  the  trumpets  the  army  hails  him  as 
King.  "Jehu  is  King!"  Oh!  for  that  day  when  our  Lord 
Jesus  will  be  hailed  as  King  to  begin  His  righteous  judgment 
over  the  earth. 

He  begins  at  once  his  awful  judgment-work.     He  is  just 


*The  Assyrian  monuments  bear  interesting  testimony  to  a  good  deal  of 
the  history  contained  in  2  Kings.  Our  space  forbids  a  fuller  mention 
of  this.  The  name  of  Jehu  has  a  place  in  the  Obelisk  of  black  marble 
which  Layard  discovered  at  Nimrood.  The  Assyrian  form  of  his  name 
is  "Yahua."  Shalmaneser  II  (860-825  B.  C.)  erected  this  Obelisk 
and  inscribed  on  it  the  annals  of  his  reign  in  190  lines  in  cuneiform 
characters.  Five  rows  of  bas-relief  illustrate  the  annals.  The  second 
row  pictures  the  bearers  of  the  tribute  of  Jehu  to  the  Assyrian  King. 
The  Obelisk  is  in  the  British  Museum. 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  327 

an  instrument  used  by  a  holy  and  righteous  God  to  execute 
His  vengeance.  Of  real  communion  with  the  Lord  he  knew 
nothing,  Nothmg  of  the  fear  of  the  Lord  or  exercise  oi 
soul  towards  Him  is  recorded,  nor  do  we  read  that  he  ever 
worshipped  or  called  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  There 
was  zeal  and  obedience  in  the  execution  of  the  judgments 
of  the  Lord. 

"But  how  awful  in  its  character!  On  what  a  fearful  jour- 
ney does  it  send  this  sword  of  the  Lord!  From  Ramoth  to 
the  vineyard  of  Naboth,  from  thence  to  the  going  up  to 
Gur,  from  tlience  to  Jezreel,  from  thence  to  the  shearing- 
house,  and  from  thence  to  Samaria,  and  all  the  road  marked 
by  blood! — blood,  too,  appointed  in  righteousness  to  be 
.shed!  For  though  the  sword  that  shed  it  cared  not  for 
righteousness,  yet  in  its  action  the  Lord  was  pleading  with 
the  flesh  of  Ahab  and  his  house — as,  by  and  by.  He  will 
have  a  greater  pleading,  even  with  all  flesh,  and  the  slain 
of  the  Lord  shall  be  many.  And  what  shall  be  the  rapidity 
and  the  stretch  of  the  divine  judgment  tlien!  What  will  be 
the  journey  of  the  sword  of  the  Lord,  or  the  'grounded  staff' 
in  that  day,  when  'as  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east 
and  shineth  even  unto  the  west,  so  shall  also  the  coming  of 
the  Son  of  Man  be!'  " 

The  record  itself  of  how  Joram  and  Ahaziah  fell  under 
the  judgment  executed  by  Jehu  needs  but  little  comment. 
Jehorara  sent  messengers  from  Jezreel,  wdiich  Jehu  detained, 
while  he  drove  on  furiously.  Then  Joram,  with  his  nephew 
Ahaziah,  King  of  Judah,  went  to  meet  Jehu.  When  they 
met  the  arrow  of  Jehu  pierced  Joram's  heart  and  his  body 
was  cast  into  the  field  of  Naboth,  the  Jezreelite,  "accord- 
ing to  the  word  of  the  Lord."  Ahaziah  fled,  but  was  smit- 
ten "at  the  going  up  of  Gur."  He  tried  to  reach  Megiddo 
and  there  he  died. 

Then  comes  Jezeljel,  the  wicked.  She  died  as  she  had 
lived,  in  wickedness  and  pride.  She  knew  she  had  to  die. 
The  evil  tidings  had  reached  Jezreel,  where  once  in  younger 
days  she  was  queen  and  mistress.  She  painted  her  face 
to  make  herself  look  beautiful.     Did  she  attempt  to  attract 


S28  TEE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Jehu?  Hardly  that,  for  she  was  an  old  woman,  ha^'^ing  a 
grandson  twenty- two  years  old  (2  Kings  viii:26).  It  was 
a  proud  defiance — she  would  meet  death  like  a  queen.  The 
miserable,  doomed  woman,  "the  dunghill,"*  of  all  vileness, 
the  instigator  of  crimes,  looked  out  of  the  window,  while 
Jehu's  chariot  came  thundering  on.  Then  she  spoke,  "Is 
it  peace — Zimri!  murderer  of  his  master.^"  It  was  a  bold 
daunt.  Zimri  had  murdered  his  master,  but  reigned  only 
seven  days  (1  Kings  xvi:9-19).  She  reminds  him  of  Zimri's 
deed  and  Zimri's  fate.  Eunuchs  threw  her  out  of  the  win- 
dow. The  blood  bespattered  the  wall  and  the  prancing 
horses.  The  chariot  of  Jehu  rushed  on  over  her  body. 
He  did  not  pay  any  attention  to  her  mangled  body.  Jehu 
entered  the  royal  palace  to  feast  and  afterwards  gave  com- 
mand to  bury  the  cursed  woman.  But  little  was  left  of 
her.  And  Jehu  said,  "This  is  the  word  of  the  I^ord,  which 
He  spake  by  His  servant  Elijah  the  Tishbite,  saying,  In  the 
portion  of  Jezreel  shall  dogs  eat  the  flesh  of  Jezebel."  God's 
judgments  are  often  slow,  but  they  are  sure. 


2.     Jehu's  Judgments.    Baal-worship  Destroyed.    His 
'Death. 

CHAPTER  X 

1.  The  Judgment  Upon  the  House  of  Ahab.     1-11. 

2.  The  Relations  of  Ahaziah  Slain.     (2  Chron.  xxii:8).     12-14. 

3.  Jehonadab  Spared.     15-17. 

4.  The  Baal  Worship  Destroyed.     18-28. 

5.  Jehu's  Record.     29-31. 

6.  Israel  Cut  Short.     32-33. 

7.  Jehu's  Death.     34-36. 

And  now  Jehu,  the  instrument,  chosen  for  judgment, 
continued  his  judgment  work  without  shov>^ing  mercy.  The 
long  threatened  national  judgment  upon  Israel  had  begun. 

The  hint  which  Jezebel  had  given  him  concerning  Zimri 
and  the  possibility  of  a  rebellion  may  have  influenced  Jehu 
to  put  away  the  descendants  of  Ahab.     There  were  seventy 


*JezebeI  means  "dunghill." 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  329 

sons,  which,  according  to  Hebrew  phraseology,  means  his 
grandsons  and  their  offspring.  He  concocts  a  clever  scheme 
by  which  the  elders  of  Samaria  and  the  guardians  of  the 
grandsons  of  Ahab  were  forced  to  kill  the  sevent3\  This 
was  done  probably  to  head  off  a  rebellion  against  him. 
Then,  according  to  the  custom  of  those  days,  the  ghastly 
evidence  of  the  deed  was  piled  in  two  heaps  at  the  entering 
in  of  the  gate.  Then  he  addressed  the  people,  showing 
that  while  he  had  slain  his  master,  they  were  also  guilty 
in  slaying  these  seventy  persons,  and  finally  he  added  the 
justification  of  the  deeds.  "Know  now  that  there  shall 
fall  unto  the  earth  nothing  of  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  which 
the  Lord  spake  concerning  the  house  of  Ahab,  for  the  Lord 
hath  done  that  which  He  spake  by  His  servant  Elijah." 
So  Jehu  slew  all  that  remained  of  the  house  of  Ahab  in 
Jezreel,  and  all  his  great  men,  and  his  kinsfolks,  and  his 
priests,  until  he  left  him  none  remaining. 

Then  forty-two  princes  and  the  sons  of  the  brethren  of 
Ahaziah  (2  Chron.  xxii:8)  were  slain.  They  were  on  the 
way  to  Jezreel,  which  showed  their  guilty  affiliation  with 
the  wickedness  of  Jezebel.  They  were  taken  alive  and  then 
were  slain  at  the  pit  of  the  shearing  house,  probably  a 
cistern  called  Beth  Eged. 

Next  he  met  Jehonadab,  the  son  of  Rechab.  The 
Rechabites  belonged  to  the  Kenites  (1  Chron.  ii  :55).  They 
are  first  mentioned  in  Gen.  xv:19.  A  part  of  this  tribe  had 
followed  Israel  (Num.  x:29-32)  and  settled  in  the  south  of 
Judah  (Judges  i:16),  where  they  became  attached  to  the 
Amalekites  (1  Sam»  xv:6).  Jethro,  Moses  father-in-law, 
was  a  Kenite  (Judges  i:16)  and  so  was  Jael,  who  slew  Sisera 
(Judges  iv:17).  See  the  record  of  Jonadab  and  his 
work  for  the  tribe  in  Jeremiah  xxxv:l-16.  Jehu  recognized 
him  as  a  friend  and  took  him  into  his  chariot.  He  may 
have  been  acquainted  with  Elijah;  and  the  great  work  he 
did,  as  made  known  by  Jeremiah,  in  separating  them  unto 
the  Lord  may  have  been  brought  about  by  the  threatened 
judgment  by  Elijah  and  its  execution  through  Jehu,  of 
which  Jonadab  knew  &nd  p^j-t  of  which  he  witnessed. 


S50  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Then  in  great  subtilty  Jehu  destroyed  the  worshippers  of 
Baal  who  appeared  at  his  summons  in  their  festive  vest- 
ments. Thus  Jehu  destroyed  Baal  out  of  Israel.  But  the 
summary  of  Jehu's  reign  gives  a  mournful  picture.  Like 
Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  Jehu  did  not  depart  from  the 
golden  calves  at  Beth-el  and  at  Dan.  Nor  did  he  take  heed 
to  walk  in  the  law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel  with  all  his 
heart.  He  is  a  sad  illustration  of  a  man  who  may  be  used 
of  God  and  yet  is  disobedient  in  his  own  life;  executing 
God's  plans,  yet  knowing  nothing  of  real  communion.  But 
the  Lord  did  not  forget  even  this  imperfect  service  (verse  30). 

3.    Athaliah  and  Jehoiada's  Revival. 
CHAPTER  XI 

1.  Athaliah's  Wicked  Reign.      1-3.     (2  Chron.  xxii:10-12). 

2.  Joash  (Jehoash)  proclaimed  King.     4-12.     (2  Chron  xxiii:l-ll). 

3.  The  Death  of  Athaliah.     13-16.      (2  Chron.  xxiii:12-15), 

4.  Jehoida's  Revival.     17-21.     (2  Chron.  xxiii:16-21). 

Athaliah,  the  wicked  daughter  of  a  wicked  pair  (Ahab 
and  Jezebel),  the  widow  of  Joram,  King  of  Judah,  Jehos- 
haphat's  son  and  the  mother  of  Ahaziah,  who  had  been 
slain  by  Jehu,  destroyed  the  seed  royal.  She  did  so  because 
she  wanted  the  authority  herself.  It  was  an  av/ful  deed, 
inspired  by  him  who  is  the  murderer  from  the  beginning. 
And  Satan  aimed  through  her  at  something  of  which  his 
instrument  was  ignorant.  It  was  one  of  the  many  attempts* 
Satan  made  to  exterminate  the  male  offspring  to  make  the 
coming  One,  the  promised  Saviour,  the  seed  of  the  woman, 
impossible.  Had  he  succeeded  through  Athaliah  in  the  de- 
struction of  the  royal  seed  of  David,  the  promise  made  to 
David  would  have  become  impossible.  Notice  the  first 
little  word  in  the  second  verse,  "But" — .  Satan's  attempt 
failed.  The  watchful  eye  of  Jehovah  and  His  power  frus- 
trated it  all.     A  wicked  woman  killed  her  own  children 


*In  the  Concordance,  which,  the  Lord  willing,  we  hope  to  publish 
in  connection  with  the  Annotated  Bible,  we  shall  give  summaries  of 
all  these  interesting  matters  as  well  as  summaries  of  doctrines,  etc., 
showing  thereby  the  marvellous  harmony  of  holy  Scriptures. 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  331 

and  a  godly  woman  was  used  to  keep  one  of  the  royal  seed 
alive.  Jehosheba  ("the  Lord's  oath"  is  the  meaning  of 
her  name),  through  whom  the  covenant-oath  was  sustained, 
was  the  wife  of  Jehoiada  (meaning  "the  Lord  knows"),  the 
high-priest  (2  Chron.  xxii:ll);  he  was  brother-in-law  to 
Ahaziah  (2  Chron.  xxii:ll)  and  Jehosheba  was  probably  a 
half  sister  of  Ahaziah.  She  took  the  young  child  from 
among  the  King's  sons  and  hid  him  first  in  the  bed-chamber 
and  then  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  till  the  seventh  year. 
Well  may  we  see  here  a  most  beautiful  type  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Like  Joash,  He  was  doomed  to  death,  yea. 
He  died.  But  He  was  raised  from  the  dead  and  is  now 
hidden  in  the  house  of  God  above,  the  heavens  having  re- 
ceived him.  Joash,  the  heir  of  the  throne  of  David,  was 
hidden  till  the  seventh  year  even  as  the  true  heir  to  the  throne 
of  David  is  now  hidden  in  the  presence  of  God  till  the  six 
years  (six  the  number  of  man's  day,  the  present  age)  are 
passed.  And  when  the  seventh  year  comes — the  begin- 
ning of  the  coming  age,  He  will  be  brought  forth  as  Joasli 
was  brought  from  his  hiding  place  and  be  crowned  king. 
A  remnant  selected  by  Jehoiada  saw  the  King  first.  It  is 
a  great  scene  this  chapter  describes.  The  company  brought 
together,  armed  with  King  David's  shields  and  spears,  the 
King's  son  brought  into  the  midst,  Jehoiada  putting  the 
crown  upon  his  head,  anointing  him  with  oil,  they  clapped 
with  their  hands  and  shouted  "God  save  the  King."  Greater 
will  be  the  scene  when  He  will  be  crowned  King  of  Kings, 
whose  right  it  is  to  reign.  Athaliah,  the  usurper,  appears 
on  the  scene,  attracted  by  the  noise.  She  is  face  to  face 
with  the  crowned  King  and  receives  now  her  well-deserved 
punishment  outside  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  A  great 
revival  followed.  A  covenant  was  made  by  Jehoiada 
between  the  Lord  and  the  King  and  the  people  "that  they 
should  be  the  Lord's  people."  Baal's  altars  and  images 
are  broken.  The  King  sits  upon  his  throne.  All  the 
people  of  the  land  rejoiced  and  there  was  peace.  All  these 
blessed  results  are  faint  foreshado wings  of  what  is  yet  to 
be  when  the  usurper  is  cast  out,  when  the  true  King  is 


«S«  THE  BOOK  OF. KINGS 

crowned.  Then  Israel  will  be  in  truth  the  lord's  people, 
idolatry  will  cease,  the  land  and  the  people  will  rejoice  and 
the  city  be  quiet. 

4.   Jehoash.   The  Temple  Repaired.  The  Death  of  Jehoash. 
CHAPTER   Xn 

1.  Jehoash's  (Joash)  Reign.      1-3.      (2  Chron.  xxiv:2). 

2.  The  Failure  of  the  Priests.     4-8.      (2  Chron.  xxiv:4-5.) 

3.  The  Temple  Repaired.     9-16.     (2  Chron.  xxiv:8-14). 

4.  Hazael  and  Jehoash.      17-18. 

5.  The  Death  of  Joash.     19-21.     (2  Chron.  xxiv:25-27). 

Great  things  had  the  Lord  done  both  in  Israel  and  in 
Judah.  As  we  have  seen  there  were  numerous  Divine  in- 
terpositions in  the  downward  course,  but  all  led  to  the  final 
judgments  upon  both.  Revivals  took  place,  but  they  were 
not  lasting  and  the  reactions  which  followed  produced  a 
greater  apostasy.  This  also  is  tlie  course  of  the  present 
age,  which  will  end  in  a  greater  departure  from  God  and 
in  a  corresponding  greater  judgment  than  Israel's.  "The 
people  had  fallen  away  from  the  Divine  purpose  of  their 
national  calling,  and  become  untrue  to  the  meaning  of  their 
national  history.  From  this  point  of  view  the  temporary 
success  of  these  reform  movements  may  be  regarded  as  a 
Divine  protest  against  the  past.  But  they  ultimately 
failed  because  all  deeper  spiritual  elements  had  passed 
away  from  rulers  and  people."  "And  still  deeper  lessons 
come  to  us.  There  is  not  a  more  common,  nor  can  there 
be  a  more  fatal  mistake  in  religion  or  in  religious  move- 
ments than  to  put  confidence  in  mere  negations,  or  to  ex- 
pect from  them  lasting  results  for  good.  A  negation  with- 
out a  corresponding  aflBrmation  is  of  no  avail  for  spiritual 
purposes.  We  must  speak  because  we  believe;  we  deny 
that  which  is  false  only  because  we  affirm  and  cherish  the 
opposite  truth.  Otherwise  we  may  resist;  and  enlist  un- 
spiritual  men,  but  we  shall  not  work  any  deliverance  in  the 
land."* 


THE  BOOK  OF   KINGS  333 

The  reign  of  Jehoash  had  begun  well.  The  record  tells 
us  that  he  did  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  as 
long  as  Jehoiada  was  priest.  But  what  happened  after  tlie 
departure  of  Jehoiada.^  The  answer  is  indicated  in  verse 
3  and  fully  given  in  2  Chron.  xxiv:17-22.  The  King,  who 
had  received  such  kindness  from  Jehoiada,  ordered  the 
stoning  of  Zechariah,  the  son  of  Jehoiada,  because  he  de- 
livered a  faithful  message  to  the  King  against  his  idolatry. 

The  leading  work  of  Jehoash's  reign  was  the  repairing  of 
the  Temple.  This  had  become  necessary  because  the  fam- 
ily of  Athaliah  had  broken  it  up  and  used  the  dedicated 
things  in  the  worship  of  Baal  (2  Chron.  xxiv:7).  The  King 
took  the  initiative,  but  the  neglect  of  the  priests  made  llie 
work  practically  impossible.  Then  the  work  was  taken  up 
in  earnest  by  Jehoiada,  and  voluntary  contributions  re- 
ceived. A  large  sum  was  collected  which  was  exclusively 
used  for  the  repairing  of  the  temple.  ^Vhen  this  was  com- 
pleted the  balance  was  used  for  the  purchase  of  the  sacred 
vessels  (see  2  Chron.  xxiv:14). 

Then  Hazael  began  his  wicked  work  and  threatened 
Jerusalem.  Joash  bought  him  off  l)y  turning  over  to  him 
all  the  hallowed  things  of  the  Temple  and  the  treasures  of 
the  palace.  Not  a  word  is  said  that  Jehoash  sought  the 
I^ord  or  prayed.  It  shows  only  too  clearly  that  Jehovali, 
the  present  help  in  time  of  trouble,  had  been  forgotten. 
The  death  of  the  King,  murdered  in  the  house  of  Millo  fol- 
lowed soon.  In  our  annotations  of  Chronicles  we  shall  hear 
more  of  his  history.     Then  Amaziah  reigned  in  his  stead. 

5.    Jehoahaz  and  Jehoash  of  Israel.    Elisha's  Death. 

CHAPTER   Xm 

1.  The  Reign  of  Jehoahaz  and  His  Death.      1-9. 

2.  Jehoash  King  of  Israel.      10— K^. 

3.  Elisha  and  Joash.      14-19. 

4.  The  Death  of  Elisha.     20-21. 

5.  Hazael  and  His  Death.     22-25. 

Jehoahaz,  the  son  of  Jehu,  reigned  after  the  death  of  his 
father  (x:35)  and  here  we  learn  that  he  also  followed  in  the 


334  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

abominable  worship  which  Jeroboam  liad  instituted  in 
Bethel  and  in  Dan.  The  Lord  delivered  therefore  Israel 
into  the  hands  of  Hazael  of  Syria  and  into  his  son's  hand. 
Jehoahaz  prayed  to  the  Lord  and  the  Lord,  so  abundant  in 
mercy,  hearkened,  for  He  saw  the  oppression  of  Israel, 
because  the  King  of  Syria  oppressed  them.  Verses  5  and 
6  form  a  parenthesis.  The  seventh  verse  tells  of  the  havoc 
which  the  King  of  Syria  had  wrought  among  Israel.  The 
prayer  of  Jehoahaz,  though  heard,  was  not  fully  answered 
at  once.  The  paranthetic  verses  (5  and  6)  must  be  looked 
upon  as  giving  a  summary  of  the  entire  history;  God  sent 
a  saviour  and  yet  they  continued  in  their  sins.  Joash,  the 
son  of  Jehoahaz,  was  the  first  one  through  whom  a  partial 
deliverance  was  wrought  (verse  25)  and  the  full  deliver- 
ance came  under  the  grandson  Jeroboam  II  (xiv:25-27). 
We  have  here  a  good  illustration  of  how  the  Lord  hears 
prayer  and  how  in  His  sovereignty  and  all-wise  purposes 
He  may  delay  the  answer  for  many  years.  It  should  be 
enough  for  God's  people  to  know  that  prayer  is  heard  and 
to  leave  the  answer  with  Him,  who  does  all  things  well. 
And  so  Jehoahaz  saw  nothing  but  oppression  (verse  22) 
though  he  had  turned  unto  the  Lord  and  had  prayed.  It 
was  a  trial  of  faith. 

After  his  death  his  son  Jehoash*  (also  called  Joash)  reigned. 
There  was  no  change  for  the  better.  Verses  10-13  are  an- 
other brief  summary  giving  briefly  the  character  of  his 
reign,  his  death  and  his  successor. 

The  deathbed  scene  of  Elisha  and  Joash's  visit  follows. 
Over  sixty  years  Elisha  had  been  the  prophet  of  God.  The 
last  we  heard  of  this  great  man  of  God  was  when  he  sent 
his  messenger  to  anoint  Jehu.  ]Many  years  f  had  passed 
and  no  ministry  of  Elisha  is  recorded.  He  was  quite  for- 
gotten and  neglected.  The  same  was  the  case  with  Daniel 
in  Babylon.  When  apostasy  advances,  the  Lord's  true 
prophets  are  not  wanted;    they  share  the  rejection  of  the 


^Distinguish  from  the  King  of  Judah  of  the  same  uame. 
i  Forty-five  years. 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  836- 

Lord  and  His  Truth.  Joash  then  visited  the  dying  prophet. 
From  this  we  may  gather  that  his  abode  was  known  and 
that  Joash  realized  that  Elisha's  death  would  be  a  great 
loss.  He  utters  the  same  words  which  Elisha  spoke  when 
Elijah  went  to  heaven.  He  wept  and  still  his  words  were 
the  words  of  unbelief,  as  if  with  Elisha's  death  "the  chariot 
of  Israel  and  the  horsemen  thereof,"  the  protection  and 
blessing  for  Israel  would  have  an  end.  Then  follows  the 
symbolical  shooting  of  the  arrows  and  the  smiting  of  the 
ground.  Half-heartedly  the  unbelieving  King  enters  into 
that  which  Elisha  had  made  so  plain.  It  was  Joash's  lack 
of  faith,  indicated  by  smiting  the  ground  but  thrice,  which 
made  the  complete  victory  over  the  Syrians  impossible. 
Only  "three  times  did  Joash  beat  him  (Hazael's  son  Ben- 
liadad)  and  recovered  the  cities  of  Israel."  (verse  25).  If  he 
had  faith  it  would  have  been  five  and  six  times. 

Elisha  had  died.  A  corpse  about  to  be  buried  was  hastily 
cast  into  the  sepulchre  of  Elisha,  where  his  bones  rested. 
"And  when  the  man  was  let  down,  and  touched  the  bones 
of  Elisha,  he  revived  and  stood  up  on  his  feet."  This  final 
miracle  bears  a  great  and  blessed  testimony.  Here  an  ap- 
plication must  be  made  concerning  Him  who  is  foreshadowed 
in  Elisha's  ministry  of  grace.  It  is  by  faith  in  Him  who 
died  that  sinners  receive  life  and  are  raised  up  from  the  dead. 
To  touch  Him  in  faith  means  to  live.  And  Israel,  moreover, 
is  typically  represented  by  the  dead  man  and  through  Him 
who  died  for  that  nation,  Israel  is  yet  to  live* 


S36  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

6.    Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah 

CHAPTER  XIV-XV 

1.  Amaziah's  Reign  Over  Judah.     1-7.     (2  Chron.  xxv). 

2.  The  Conflict  between  Israel  and  Judah.    8-11.      (2  Chron.  xxv: 

17-24.) 

3.  Judah's  Defeat  and  Jerusalem  Taken.     12-14. 

4.  Jehoash  and  His  Successor.     15-16. 

5.  Death  of  Amaziah.    17-20.    (2  Chron.  xxv;26-28). 

6.  Azariah  King  of  Judah.     21-22. 

7.  Jeroboam  II.     23-29. 

Amaziah,  a  son  of  Joash,  began  his  reign  over  Judah. 
His  mother  was  Jehoaddan  (Lord  is  pleased)  of  Jerusalem. 
He  did  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  and  yet  he  followed 
the  errors  of  his  father.  His  first  deed  was  to  deal  in  judg- 
ment with  the  two  servants  who  had  murdered  his  father 
in  Milo,  both  of  whom  were  sons  of  Gentile  women  (2  Kings 
xii:19-21;  2  Chron.  xxiv:26).  He  feared,  however,  the 
Word  of  God.  The  additional  record  which  is  found  in 
Chronicles  we  shall  not  follow  here,  but  do  so  in  the  annota- 
tions of  that  book.  He  raised  a  large  army  and  hired  besides 
100,000  Israelitish  mercenaries  at  a  tremendous  cost.  He 
gained  a  victory  over  Edom.  All  the  cruelties  practised 
then  we  shall  find  recorded  in  Chronicles.  He  became 
lifted  up  by  his  victories  and  then  challenged  Jehoash,  the 
King  of  Israel.  That  King  answered  by  a  parable.  The 
thistle  in  Lebanon  is  Amaziah;  the  cedar  is  Jehoash,  King 
of  Israel.  The  wild  beast  that  was  in  Lebanon  overcoming 
the  thistle  (Amaziah)  is  Jehoash's  army.  And  the  King  of 
Israel  gave  him  a  solemn  warning  to  desist.  But  proud 
Amaziah  paid  no  attention  to  Jehoash's  words.  God  was 
behind  it  all.  "It  came  of  God,  that  He  might  deliver  them 
into  the  hand  of  their  enemies,  because  they  sought  after 
the  gods  of  Edom"  (2  Chron.  xxv:20).  A  complete  defeat 
of  Amaziah  followed  and  Jerusalem  was  taken.  And 
Jehoash  "took  all  the  gold  and  the  silver,  and  all  the  vessels 
that  were  foimd  in  the  house  of  God  with  Obed-Edom,  and 
the  treasures  of  the  King's  house,  the  hostages  also  and  re- 
turned unto  Samaria."     After  this  humiliating  defeat  there 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  3S7 

followed  a  revolution  in  Jerusalem  and  the  unhappy  King 
fled  to  Lachish,  where  he  was  slain.  His  body  was  brought 
back  to  Jerusalem  for  burial. 

The  brief  record  of  the  reign  of  Jeroboam  II  conclude.^ 
this  chapter.  The  Prophet  Jonah,  the  son  of  Amittai  is 
here  mentioned.  This  same  Jonah  made  later  the  experi- 
ence which  the  book  of  Jonah  relates  and  to  which  our  Lord 
refers  as  a  historic  fact.  Hosea  and  Amos*  also  prophesied 
at  that  time  in  Israel. 


CHAPTER  XV 

1.  Reign  and  Death  of  Azariah  (Uzziah).    1-2.    (2  Chron.  xxvi). 

2.  Reign  and  Death  of  Zachariah.     8-12. 

3.  Reign  and  Death  of  Shallum.     13-15. 

4.  Menahem  King  of  Israel.     16-18. 

5.  Pul  of  Assyria  and  Menahem.     19-20.     (1  Chron.  v:26). 

6.  Death  of  Menahem.     21-22. 

7.  Pekahiah  and  His  Death.     23-26. 

8.  Pekah  and  His  Death.     Hoshea.     27-31. 

9.  Jotham  King  of  Judah.     32-38.     (2  Chron.  xxvii). 

Eight  kings  are  mentioned  in  this  chapter.  Of  five  it  is 
said  they  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  One  was  a 
leper;  four  were  miu-dered;  one  committed  unspeakable 
cruelties. 

Azariah  is  first  mentioned.  In  2  Chronicles  his  name 
IS  Uzziah;  but  he  is  also  called  by  this  name  in  the  present 
chapter  (verses  13,  30,  32  and  34).  Different  explanations 
of  the  use  of  this  double  name  have  been  given.  We  insert 
here  the  one  advanced  by  Edersheim  as  the  most  satisfactory. 

"The  usual  explanation  either  of  a  clerical  error  through 
the  confusion  of  similar  letters,  or  that  he  bore  two  names 
seem  equally  unsatisfactory.  Nor  is  the  meaning  of  the 
two  names  precisely  the  same — Azariah  being  'Jehovah 
helps';  Uzziah,  'My  strength  is  Jehovah.*  May  it  not  be 
that  Azariah  was  his  real  name,  and  that  when  after  his 


*The  books  of  Hosea  and  Amos,  especially  the  latter,  shed  much 
light  upon  the  history  of  that  kingdom  of  Israel  under  Jeroboam  and  h'n 
son.     This  will  be  pointed  out  in  annotations  of  both  books. 


338  TEE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

daring  intrusion  into  the  sanctuary  (2  Chron.  xxvi:16-20), 
he  was  smitten  with  lifelong  leprosy,  his  name  v/as  signifi- 
cantly altered  into  the  cognate  Uzziah — 'My  strength  is 
Jehovah' — in  order  to  mark  that  the  'help'  which  he  had 
received  had  been  dependent  on  his  relation  to  the  Lord, 
This  would  accord  with  the  persistent  use  of  the  latter  name 
in  2  Chronicles — considering  the  view-point  of  the  writer 
— and  with  its  occurrence  in  the  prophetic  writings  (Hosea 
i:l;  Amos  i:l;  Isa.  i:l,  vi:l,  vii:l).  And  tlip  explanation 
just  suggested  seems  confirmed  by  the  circumstance  that 
although  this  King  is  always  called  Uzziah  in  2  Chronicles, 
yet  the  Hebrew  word  for  'help',  which  forms  the  first  part 
of  the  name  Azariah,  recurs  with  marked  emphasis  in  the 
account  of  the  Divine  help  accorded  in  his  expeditions 
(2Chron.  xxvi:7,  13,  15)." 

As  his  intrusion  into  the  priestly  office  and  his  punishment 
for  it  is  found  in  full  in  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles,  we 
shall  follow  it  there. 

Then  follows  the  brief  record  of  Zachariah  ("The  Lord 
remembers"),  Xing  of  Israel.  He  became  Kmg  of 
Israel  in  the  thirty-eighth  year  of  Uzziah,  King  of  Judah. 
He  was  the  son  of  Jeroboam  II  and  the  fourth  and  last  ruler 
of  the  dynasty  of  Jehu.  Thus  was  literally  fulfilled  the 
Word  of  the  Lord  (2  Kings  x:30).  His  reign  lasted  only 
six  months.  Shallum  assassinated  him  in.  public.  The 
murderer  occupied  the  throne  only  one  month.  Shallum 
means  "Requital."  As  he  did  to  Zachariah  so  Menahem 
did  to  him.  All  was  now  lawlessness  in  apostate  Israel. 
Departure  from  God  and  the  true  worship  came  first  and 
that  opened  the  way  for  moral  corruption  and  lawlessness. 
The  same  is  true  of  this  present  Christian  age.  It  also 
ends  in  apostasy,  moral  corruption  and  lawlessness.  Hosea 
testified  faithfully  to  these  conditions.  "And  the  revolter? 
are  profound  to  make  slaughter,  though  I  have  been  a 
rebuker  of  them  all" — "They  will  not  frame  their  doings 
to  turn  unto  their  God,  for  the  spirit  of  whoredoms  is  in  the 
midst  of  them  and  they  have  not  kno\\Ti  the  Lord.  And 
•i.»  r>^de  of  Israel  doth  testify  to  his  face;    therefore  shall 


THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  S39 

Israel  and  Ephraim  fall  in  their  iniquity,  Judah  also  shall 
fall  with  them"  (Rosea  v:'2-4). 

Josephus  here  informs  us  that  Menahem  was  the  military 
leader  of  Zachariah,  the  murdered  King.  When  Tiphsah 
refused  his  authority  he  executed  a  terrible,  barbaric  pun- 
ishment. "All  the  women  therein  that  were  with  child 
be  ripped  up."  And  God  in  His  eternal  justice  permitted 
the  same  punishment  to  fall  upon  Samaria  (Hosea  xiii:16; 
Amos  i:13). 

And  now  for  the  first  time  the  Assyrian  is  mentioned,  the 
power  used  by  God  to  execute  judgment  uj^on  the  Kingdom 
of  Israel.  The  meaning  of  the  Assyrian  in  prophecy  we 
shall  point  out  later.  Pul,  King  of  Assyria,  came  against 
the  land.  In  verse  29  Tiglath-pileser  is  mentioned  as  King 
of  Assyria.  Are  these  two  different  Kings  or  are  they  the 
same  person  under  different  names?  The  identity  of  Pul 
with  Tiglath-pileser  II  has  been  proved,  after  the  most 
painstaking  research,  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  doubt. 
The  Assyrian  monuments  bear  witness  to  this  fact.*  In 
the  annals  of  Tiglath-pileser  the  record  is  found  that  he 
received  tribute  from  "Minikhimmi  Samiri7ia" — this  is 
Menahem  the  Samaritan.  Pul  was  evidently  one  name  of 
the  Assyrian  ruler  and  later  he  assumed  the  title  of  Tiglath- 
pileser  II.  This  does  not  clash  at  all  with  the  statement  in 
1  Chron.  vJiQ.  Through  paying  an  immense  amount  of 
tribute  (almost  two  million  dollars)  the  Assyrian  was  kept 
back.  Menahem's  son,  Pekahiah,  after  this  father's  death, 
ruled  two  years  in  Israel.  He  also  was  assassinated.  Pekah 
headed  the  conspiracy  and  killed  him.  Under  his  reign, 
doing  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord,  Tiglath-pileser  came 
again  and  devastated  a  part  of  the  land  "and  carried  them 
captive  to  Assyria."  This  marks  the  beginning  of  the  end. 
This  invasion  took  place  after  his  wicked  attack  upon  Jeru- 
salem with  Rezin  of  Damascus  during  the  reign  of  Ahaz, 


*" Assyrian  Echoes  of  the  Word"  by  Laurie  and  "Fresh  Light  from 
the  Ancient  Monuments"  by  Prof.  Sayce,  are  helpful  books  on  thei«  and 
other  questions. 


840  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

King  of  Judah.  He  tried  to  overthrow  the  house  of  David 
(2  Kings  xvi:l-8;  2  Chron.  xxviii;  Isa.  vii:4-8).  Wicked 
Pekah,  who  had  killed  so  many  Jews  (2  Chron.  xxviii  :6)  was 
murdered  by  Hoshea,  who  reigned  in  his  stead.  His  death 
had  been  predicted  by  Isaiah  (chapter  vii:16). 

The  full  record  of  Jotham,  King  of  Israel,  is  given  in  the 
Book  of  Chronicles.  It  was  in  those  days  that  the  Lord 
began  to  send  against  Judah  Rezin,  the  King  of  Syria,  and 
Pekah,  the  son  of  Remaliah.  Judah,  like  Israel,  was  de- 
generating fast  and  the  Lord  chastised  them  by  judgments. 

7.    King  Ahaz  and  Assjrria 
CHAPTER  XVI 

1.  King  Ahaz  and  His  Reign.     1-4.     (2  Chron.  xxviii). 

2.  The  Invasion  by  the  Two  Kings.     5—6. 

3.  Ahaz  Appeals  to  Assyria.     7-8. 

4.  Ahaz  in  Damascus  and  the  Idolatrous  Altar.     9-18. 

5.  Death  of  Ahaz.     19-20.     (2  Chron.  xxviii :26-27). 

Righteous  Jotham  had  for  his  successor  a  wicked  son. 
Ahaz  "walked  in  the  way  of  the  Kings  of  Israel,  yea,  and 
made  his  son  pass  through  the  fire*  according  to  the  abom- 
inations of  the  heathen,  whom  the  Lord  cast  out  from  before 
the  children  of  Israel."  For  additional  wickedness  he  com- 
mitted see  2  Chron.  xxviii  :2,  21-25.  He  burnt  incense  in 
the  valley  of  the  son  of  Hinnom  and  burnt  his  children  in 
the  fire. 

"But  this  was  to  revive  the  old  Canaanitish  and  Phoeni- 
cian worship,  with  all  its  abominations  and  all  its  defile- 
ments. The  valley  of  Gihon,  which  bounds  Jerusalem  on 
the  west,  descends  at  its  southern  extremity  into  that  of 
Hinnom,  which  in  turn  joins  at  the  ancient  royal  gardens 
the  valley  of  Kidron,  that  runs  along  the  eastern  declivity 
of  the  Holy  City.     There,  at  the  junction  of  the  valleys  of 


*It  means  the  horrible  rite  of  child-sacrifice.  Ahaz  was  the  first 
among  the  kings  who  did  this.  As  the  apostasy  increased  this  awful 
ceremony  became  more  frequent.  (2  Kings  xvii:17;  xxi:6;  xxiii:10; 
Mic.  vi:7;    Jerem.  vii:31;   xix:5). 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  341 

Ilinnora  and  Elidron,  in  these  gardens,  was  Topheth — 'the 
spitting  out,'  or  place  of  abomination — where  an  Ahaz,  a 
Manasseh,  and  an  Amon,  sacrificed  their  sons  and  daugh- 
ters to  Baal-Moloch,  and  burnt  incense  to  foul  idols.  Truly 
was  Hinnom  'moaning,'  and  rightly  was  its  name  Gehin- 
nom  (valley  of  Hinnom — Gehenna),  adopted  as  that  for 
the  place  of  final  sufifering.  And  it  is  one  of  those  strange 
coincidences  that  the  hill  which  rises  on  the  south  side  of 
this  spot  was  that  'potter's  field,'  the  'field  of  blood,'  which 
Judas  bought  with  the  wages  of  his  betrayal,  and  where 
with  his  own  hands  he  executed  judgment  on  himself.  His- 
tory is  full  of  such  coincidences,  as  men  call  them;  nor  can 
we  forget  in  this  connection  that  it  was  on  the  boundary- 
line  between  the  reigns  of  Jotham  and  Ahaz  that  Rome 
was  founded  (in  752  B.C.),  which  was  destined  to  execute 
final  judgment  on  apostate  Israel."* 

Isaiah,  Micah,  Hosea  and  Oded  then  exercised  their  pro- 
phetic offices.  When  Rezin,  King  of  Syria,  and  Pekah,  the 
son  of  Reraaliah,  King  of  Israel,  came  against  Jerusalem 
and  besieged  Ahaz,  he  appealed  to  Tiglath-pileser  to  save 
him  out  of  their  hands,  instead  of  crying  to  Jehovah  for  the 
deliverance  he  had  promised  to  His  people.  The  King 
also  took  the  silver  and  gold  from  the  Lord's  house  and 
presented  it  to  Tiglath-pileser.  Then  after  x\haz  had  de- 
clared himself  the  vassal  of  Assyria  ("I  am  thy  servant"), 
Tiglath-pileser  conquered  Damascus.  The  inscriptions  of 
Tiglath-pileser  mention  this  fact.  We  refer  again  to  Isaiah 
vii.  The  alliance  with  the  Assyrian  was  opposed  by  Isaiah. 
He  told  Ahaz  "at  the  end  of  the  conduit  of  the  upper  pool" 
to  ask  a  sign  of  any  kind  of  the  Lord  God,  to  allay  the  fears 
of  the  King  and  give  an  evidence  that  the  Lord  would  pre- 
serve the  house  of  David.  And  furthermore  Isaiah  had 
taken  with  him  his  son  Shear-jashub,  which  means  "the 
remnant  shall  return,"  prophetic  also  of  the  preservation 
of  a  remnant.  When  wicked  Ahaz  refused  the  prophet 
uttered  that  great  sign  which  was  to  take  place  over  seven 

*Edersheim. 


342  TEE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

hundred  years  after,  that  the  virgin  should  conceive  and 
bring  forth  a  son,  even  Immanuel.  The  house  of  David 
might  be  punished  and  chastised,  but  there  could  be  no  full 
end  of  the  royal  family,  for  the  promised  One  had  to  come 
from  David  and  receive  in  due  time  the  promised  Kingdom. 
And  Isaiah  also  predicted  that  the  Assyrian,  in  whom  Ahaz 
had  put  his  trust,  should  come  upon  them  (Isa.  vii:17). 
What  Pekah  did  to  Judah  and  Oded's  testimony  against 
Pekah  we  shall  learn  from  the  Chronicles. 

The  erection  of  a  new  altar  in  the  Temple  by  Ahaz  accord- 
ing to  the  pattern  of  the  idol-altar,  opened  the  door  wide 
for  the  unlawful  worship  in  the  Temple  of  God.  He  found 
a  willing  helper  in  Urijah  ("the  Lord  is  light"),  who  con- 
ducted the  worship  "according  to  all  that  King  Ahaz  com- 
manded." And  greater  profanation  followed.  He  even 
shut  up  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  (2  Chron.  xxviii : 
24),  which  probably  meant  a  complete  cessation  of  the 
services  in  the  Holy  Place.  The  gods  of  Damascus  were 
worshipped  by  him  in  connection  with  this  altar  (2  Chron. 
xxviii  :23).  And  in  Christendom  an  even  greater  profana- 
tion of  worship  has  come  to  pass.  True  Christian  worship 
is  in  Spirit  and  in  Truth.  Roman  Catholicism  has  erected 
altars  patterned  more  or  less  after  the  ancient  Babylonish 
worship. 

7.    Assyria  Conquers  Israel.    The  Captivity. 
CHAPTER  XVn 

1.  Hoshea,  Israel's  last  King.     1-2. 

2.  Shalmaneser  Imprisons  Hoshea.     3—4 

3.  Israel  Carried  into  Captivity.     5-6. 

4.  Retrospect  and  Israel's  Sins.     7-23. 

5.  The  Colonization  of  Samaria.     24-41. 

Israel's  last  King  was  Hoshea.  His  name  means  "de- 
liverance." It  indicates  what  might  have  been  had  he  and 
the  people  repented  of  their  sins.  The  record  of  his  char- 
acter is  brief.  "And  he  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sigh  I 
of  the  Lord,  but  not  as  the  Kings  of  Israel  before  hun.' 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  342 

This  does  not  mean  that  he  improved.  The  golden  calves 
had  been  taken  away  by  the  Assyrian  from  Bethel  and  Dan, 
so  that  he  could  no  longer  sin  like  Jeroboam,  the  son  of 
Nebat,  and  the  other  Kings  of  Israel.  Hosea  had  predicted 
this  (Hosea  x:5-8). 

Shalmaneser,  King  of  Assyria,  then  came  against  him, 
and  Hoshea  became  his  servant.  The  Biblical  account  is 
meagre,  but  the  Assyrian  inscriptions  have  a  great  deal  to 
say  about  this  period.  Shalmaneser 's  name  is  given  in 
these  inscriptions  as  "Salmanu-iissir"  and  Hoshea's  as 
"A-usi.''  From  these  inscriptions  we  learn  that  after  the 
siege  of  Samaria  had  lasted  two  years  Shalmaneser  was  suc- 
ceeded by  Sargon,  who  took  Samaria  in  the  first  year  of  his 
reign.  While  Sargon  is  not  mentioned  in  the  record  here 
it  is  significant  that  the  capture  of  Samaria  is  not  attributed 
to  Shalmaneser.  Both  passages,  2  Kings  xvii:6  and  xviii: 
10-11,  speak  only  of  the  King  of  Assyria.  These  inscrip- 
tions declare  that  Sargon  captured  Samaria,  led  away 
27,290  of  its  inliabitants  and  appointed  a  governor  over 
Samaria.  There  is  also  a  record  of  the  deportation  of 
Israel  and  the  colonization  of  the  land.  What  would 
these  interesting  ancient  inscriptions  mean  if  it  were  not 
for  the  Bible.  Again  we  say  they  are  proven  true  because 
the  Word  of  God  confirms  them. 

Hoshea  had,  after  he  had  become  the  vassal  of  the  King 
of  Assyria,  made  a  conspiracy  against  the  King  by  sending 
messengers  to  So*,  King  of  Egypt,  and  then  he  refused  to 
pay  the  tribute.  He  was  imprisoned  and  we  hear  nothing 
whatever  of  his  fate.f  Samaria  completely  in  the  hands 
of  the  King  of  Assyria  the  people  were  carried  away  cap- 
tives into  Assyria.  The  places  are  given,  but  beyond 
this  little  is  known.  Nor  do  we  know  anything  about  their 
subsequent  history.     They  did  not  return  from  the  cap- 


*The  proper  reading  is  given  as  Seve  or  Sava.  By  the  Greeks  he  is 
called  "Saba  Kon"  on  the  monumentr  'Shabaka,"  in  cuneiform  in- 
scriptions "Shabi-i." 

fHosea  x:7  tells  of  his  death. 


844  THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

tivity.  Various  attempts  have  been  made  to  locate  them. 
The  American  Indians,  the  i.\fghans,  Armenians,  Nestorians 
iind  others  have  been  mentioned  as  the  descendants  of  the 
ten  tribes,  but  no  substantial  evidence  can  be  given  to  verify 
this  supposition.  The  so-called  "Anglo-Israel  theory"  is 
so  full  of  unreasonable  speculations  and  inventions  that  it 
does  not  deserve  any  consideration.  God  knows  where 
they  are  located,  and  in  His  own  time  He  will  surely  gather 
them  and  together  with  the  remnant  of  the  house  of  Judah 
bring  them  back  to  their  land.  At  that  time  the  many  un- 
fulfilled promises  made  to  Israel  and  to  Judah  will  all  be 
literally  fulfilled. 

There  is  next  given  a  solemn  retrospect  of  the  history  of 
the  house  of  Israel.  Judah  is  also  mentioned.  The  record 
shows  the  awful  apostasy  and  the  great  patience  of  Jehovah 
in  delaying  the  threatened  judgment. 

The  account  of  the  colonization  of  Samaria  by  the  King 
of  Assyria  is  interesting.  It  gives  the  history  of  the  Sa- 
maritans, which  emanated  from  this  mixture  of  races  and 
religions  and  which  were  responsible  for  much  trouble  after 
the  return  of  the  Jewish  remnant  from  the  exile.  The  priest 
who  was  returned  from  Assyria  to  teach  religious  rites  to 
the  colonists  settled  in  Bethel,  where  Jeroboam  had  insti- 
tuted the  idolatrous  worship,  which  had  dragged  Israel 
down,  produced  a  new  religion,  partly  Israelitish  and  partly 
heathenish,  like  the  mixed  multitude  which  dwelt  in  the 
land. 

Thus  ended  the  Kingdom  of  Israel.  Out  of  the  nineteen 
Kings  which  reigned  seven  were  murdered,  one  died  from 
wounds  received  on  the  battlefield,  one  died  from  a  fall  out 
of  the  window,  one  was  struck  down  by  the  judgment  of 
God  and  one  committed  suicide. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  S4A 

IV.  The  Reign  of  Hezekiah,  Manasseh  and 

Amon. 

Chapters  xviii-xxi 
1.    Hezekiah  and  Sennacherib's  Invasion 

CHAPTER  XVni 

1.  Hezekiah,  King  of  Judah.     1-3.     (2  Chron.  xxix-xxxii). 

2.  The  Revival.  4-7. 

3.  Victory  over  the  Philistines.     8. 

4.  Israel's  Captivity.     9-12* 

5.  Sennacherib's  Invasion.     13-16. 

6.  Sennacherib's  Messengers  and  Message.      17-25.      (2  Chron. 

xxii:9-19.) 

7.  The  Request  of  Hilkiah,  Shebna  and  Joah.     26. 

8.  Rabshakeh's  Insulting  Answer.     27-37. 

Hezekiah  ("strength  of  Jehovah")  was  the  pious  son  of 
a  very  wicked  father.  It  is  refreshing  to  read  now  after 
the  long  Ust  of  Kings  who  did  evil  in  God's  sight  that 
Hezekiah  "did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord,  according  to  all  that  his  father  David  did."  Accord- 
ing to  the  Book  of  Chronicles,  the  first  thing  he  did  was  to 
open  the  doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  (which  Ahaz  his 
father  had  closed)  and  repair  them  (2  Chron.  xxix:3).  This 
was  a  true  beginning.  We  shall  find  in  Chronicles  the  de- 
tails of  the  great  revival  and  the  restoration  of  the  Temple- 
worship,  the  keeping  of  the  Passover  as  well  as  the  other 
reforms  which  took  place  under  his  reign.  All  these  will 
be  considered  in  the  annotations  on  Second  Chronicles.  He 
destroyed  also  all  forms  of  idolatry.  Especially  mentioned 
is  the  brazen  serpent  which  Moses  had  made.  This  inter- 
esting object  had  been  preserved  since  the  days  when 
Moses  had  lifted  it  up  in  the  wilderness,  the  wonderful  type 
of  Him  who  knew  no  sin  and  who  was  made  sin  for  us  on 
the  cross.  The  children  of  Israel  in  their  apostasy  had  made 
the  brazen  serpent  an  object  of  worship.  He  broke  it  in 
pieces  and  called    it    Nehushtan,  which  means  "brazen.** 


S46  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Thus  negatively  and  positively  a  great  reformation  was 
accomplished.  The  secret  of  it  all  we  find  tersely  stated  in 
one  sentence.  "He  trusted  in  the  Lord  God  of  Israel." 
Because  he  trusted  Jehovah,  Jehovah  was  with  him.  "And 
the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  he  prospered  whithersoever  he 
went  forth."  This  is  the  way  of  all  true  recovery  and  the 
way  to  blessing. 

The  evil  alliance  with  the  Kmg  of  Assyria,  which  his 
father  had  made,  the  God-fearing  King  refused  to  own. 
"He  rebelled  against  the  King  of  Assyria  and  served  him 
not."  tnmediatelj''  after  he  smote  the  ancient  enemy  of 
God's  people,  the  Philistine.*  In  annotations  of  Judges  we 
learned  the  typical  significance  of  the  Philistines.  They 
represent  ritualistic  Christendom.  After  Hezekiah's  res- 
toration of  the  true  worship  of  Jehovah  and  after  the  break- 
ing down  of  all  false  altars  and  idol  worship,  a  complete 
victory  over  the  Philistines  has  a  special  meaning.  Ritual- 
ism, the  deadly  foe  of  true  worship,  can  only  be  overcome 
by  a  return  to  that  true  worship  and  trust  in  the  Lord. 
Protestantism  attempted  this,  but  it  has  failed. 

The  rebellion  of  Hezekicxh  against  Assyria  may  have  been 
under  the  reign  of  Shalmaneser.  Then  followed  Sargon, 
who  was  succeeded  by  his  son  Sennacherib.  In  all  prob- 
ability Sennacherib  was  co-regent  with  his  father  Sargon. 
The  Assyrian  inscriptions  concerning  Sennacherib  covering 
this  period  are  very  interesting  though  not  always  correct 
and  often  mixed  and  confusing.  In  the  fourteenth  year  of 
Hezekiah,  Sennacherib  came  against  all  the  fenced  cities 
of  Judah  and  they  fell  before  him.  Isaiah  x  gives  us  addi- 
tional information  on  this  invasion.  True  Hezekiah's  faith 
was  severely  tested.  Sennacherib  had  not  yet  come  near 
to  Jerusalem  and  Hezekiah  sent  to  him  at  Lachish  saymg  "I 
have  offended;  return  from  me;  that  which  thou  puttest 
on  me  will  I  bear."     It  was  not  according  to  faith,  but  the 


*The  fate  of  Samaria,  the  kingdom  of  Israel  is  once  more  mentioned 
in  verses  9—12  obviously  because  chronologically  it  followed  Hezekiah's 
victory  over  the  Philistines. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  347 

godly  King  had  acted  in  fear  and  unbelief.  No  mention  is 
made  by  Isaiah  of  this  occurrence,  nor  do  we  find  a  record 
of  it  in  the  Chronicles.  The  tribute  was  very  heavy,  amount- 
ing to  over  one  million  and  a  half  dollars.  Hezekiah  had 
to  use  the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the  Temple  and  the  palace 
to  meet  this  obligation. 

Then  Sennacherib  decided  to  attack  Jerusalem.  Here 
we  have  three  accounts  of  what  took  place:  2  Kings  xviii- 
xix;  2  Chron.  xxxii  and  Isaiah  xxxvi-xxxvii.  These  Scrip- 
tures should  be  carefully  read  and  compared.  From  2  Chron. 
xxxii  :l-8  we  learn  the  wise  preparations  Hezekiah  made  in 
anticipation  of  the  coming  attack.  The  water  supply  for 
the  invading  array  was  cut  off;  he  made  strong  fortifica- 
tions; he  reorganized  the  army.  But  the  best  of  all  are 
the  words  he  addressed  to  the  people.  "Be  strong  and 
courageous,  be  not  afraid  nor  discouraged  for  the  King  of 
Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude  that  is  with  him;  for  there 
be  more  with  us  than  with  him.  With  him  is  an  arm  of 
flesh,  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God  to  help  us,  and  to 
fight  our  battles."  These  were  noble  words.  No  wonder 
the  people  leaned  upon  them  in  that  hour  of  trial.  We 
hear  in  them  an  echo  of  Isaiah's  faithful  ministry.  The 
head  of  the  expedition  and  negotiations  for  the  surrender  of 
Jerusalem  were  entrusted  to  the  "Tartan,"  the  commander- 
in-chief  of  the  army:  "Rabsaris,"  which  has  been  explained 
to  mean  "chief  of  the  eunuchs"  and  Rabshakeh,  the  Assy- 
rian title  of  "chief  captain."  The  message  which  Rab- 
sha-keh  brought  was  delivered  from  the  same  spot  where 
Isaiah  stood  when  he  gave  his  message  to  Ahaz  (Isa.  vii:3). 
The  words  of  the  emissary  of  Sennacherib  were  coarse; 
they  reveal  the  blindness  of  a  heathen,  who  thought  of 
Jehovah  having  been  offended  by  Hezekiah 's  great  reforma- 
tion (verse  22).  Politically  and  religiously  it  was  misrep- 
resentation. He  ended  with  a  lie  "the  Lord  said  to  me, 
Go  up  against  this  land  and  destroy  it." 

When  the  representatives  of  Hezekiali  requested  for  the 
sake  of  the  populace  not  to  speak  in  Hebrew,  but  in  Aramean, 
which  the  common  people  did   not   understand,  Rabshakeh 


348  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

became  very  abusive  and  shouted  a  vulgar  appeal  to  the 
people.  It  needs  no  further  commentations.  The  people 
were  obedient  to  the  King.  They  answered  not  a  word. 
And  the  King's  representatives  return  to  the  King  with 
clothes  rent. 


2.    Hezekiah  and  Isaiah.    The  Deliverance. 

CHAPTER  XIX 

1.  Hezekiah's  Message  to  Isaiah.     1-5. 

2.  Isaiah's  Answer.     6-7. 

3.  Sennacherib's  Message  to  Hezekiah.     8-13.     (2  Chron.  xxxii:17). 

4.  Hezekiah's  Prayer.     14-19.     (2  Chron.  xxxii:20). 

5.  Jehovah's  Answer  through  Isaiah.     20-34. 

6.  The  Deliverance.     35.     (2  Chron.  xxxii:21-22). 

7.  Sennacherib's  Death.     30-37. 

And  Hezekiah  also  rent  his  clothes.  In  deep  humilia- 
tion and  sorrow  the  pious  man  went  to  the  house  of  the  Lord 
and  sent  messengers  to  Isaiah.  This  is  most  blessed.  He 
did  not  call  a  counsel  of  his  advisers,  a  meeting  of  the  cap- 
tains to  talk  the  matter  over;  nor  did  he  send  first  to  the 
prophet.  Faith  knows  a  better  way  than  that.  He  went 
straight  into  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  the  sending  to 
Isaiah  was  secondary.  Many  of  our  failures  as  His  people 
are  due  to  the  fact  that  we  do  not  go  to  the  Lord  first. 

And  equally  beautiful  is  his  message  to  God's  prophet. 
He  mentions  not  himself  in  the  danger  of  Jerusalem.  It  is 
the  honor  of  Jehovah  which  is  at  stake;  the  honor  of  the 
living  God  is  at  stake.  The  Assyrian  had  deiJed  the  God 
of  Israel.  Yea,  Hezekiah's  comfort  was  that  Jehovah  had 
heard  it  all  and  knew  it  all.  What  lessons  and  what  com- 
forts are  here  for  us  also!     Then  he  requests  prayer. 

The  divine  answer  through  Isaiah  was  brief.  Be  not 
afraid!  The  blessed  assurance  for  faith  first — Fear  not! 
The  promise  of  deliverance  is  the  second  thing  in  Isaiah's 
answer. 

Another  message  in  the  form  of  a  letter  is  sent  by  Senna- 
cherib to  the  King.     Again  Hezekiah  goes  with  it  straight 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  349 

to  the  Lord.  He  read  it  and  went  up  into  the  house  of  the 
Lord  and  spread  it  before  the  Lord.  What  blessing  there 
would  be  in  the  lives  of  all  God's  people;  what  wonderful 
evidences  of  His  power  and  His  love  we  might  have  if  all 
things  which  happened  unto  us  were  at  once  taken  into 
the  presence  of  God  and  spread  before  Him! 

And  the  beautiful  answer  to  Hezekiah's  prayer  sent 
through  the  prophet!  The  Lord  had  heard,  He  had  seen. 
All  what  had  taken  place  He  knew  and  any  word  which 
had  been  spoken.  The  message  ends  with  the  assuring 
word,  "I  will  defend  this  city,  to  save  it,  for  mine  own  sake, 
and  for  my  servant  David's  sake." 

That  night  the  judgment  stroke  fell.  The  whole  Assyrian 
army  of  185,000  men  was  smitten  by  the  angel  of  the  Lord. 
Prophetically  it  stands  for  the  end  of  the  Assyrian  who  will 
enter  Israel's  land  during  the  great  tribulation  and  who 
will  perish  lilce  Sennacherib's  army. 

Sennacherib  dwelt  after  that  in  Nineveh.  There  he  was 
murdered  by  his  own  sons.  An  Assyrian  cylinder  in  the 
British  Museum  contains  a  record  of  this  deed. 

3.    Hezekiah's  Illness,  Recovery,  Failure  and  Death. 

CHAPTER  XX 

1.  Hezekiah's  Illness  and  Recovery.    1-11.    (2  Chron.  xxxii:24). 

2.  Hezekiah's  Failure.    12-19.    (2  Chron.  xxxii:25-31). 

3.  The  Death  of  Hezekiah.    20-21.    (2  Chron.  xxxii:32-33). 

Hezekiah's  sickness  must  have  occurred  about  the  second 
invasion  of  the  Assyrian.  Then  the  prophet  Isaiah  delivered 
to  him  the  message  of  approaching  death.  "Thus  saitli 
the  Lord,  Set  thine  house  in  order,  for  thou  shalt  die,  and 
not  live."  The  message  made  a  deep  impression  on  the 
sick  King.  He  turned  his  face  to  the  wall;  he  prayed  and 
wept  sore.  Though  he  was  a  pious  man  he  was  greatly 
agitated  and  deeply  moved  when  he  heard  the  announce- 
ment of  his  coming  departure.  The  meagre  knowledge 
God's  saints  had  in  Old  Testament  times  on  the  things  be- 
yond the  grave,  as  well  as  the  conception  that  an  untimely 
death  denoted  divine  disfavor  produced  no  doubt  much  of 


850  TEE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

this  grief.  How  differently  saints  in  New  Testaments  can 
face  death!  Life  and  immortality  is  now  brought  to  light 
by  the  Gospel,  and  we  know  that  absent  from  the  body 
means  to  be  present  with  the  Lord,  and  to  depart  and  be 
with  Christ  is  "far  better." 

Hezekiah's  prayer  was  at  once  heard  and  answered.  It 
is  one  of  the  most  striking  answers  to  prayer.  Isaiah  had 
not  gone  very  far,  he  had  just  reached  the  middle  of  the 
court,  when  he  was  commanded  to  turn  back  and  bring  to 
Hezekiah  the  answer.  Seven  things  are  contained  in  this 
new  message  to  the  weeping  King.  "I  have  heard  thy 
prayer";  "I  have  seen  thy  tears";  "I  will  heal  thee"; 
"Thou  shalt  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord"  "I  will  add 
unto  thy  days  fifteen  years";  "I  wiU  deliver  thee";  "I  will 
defend  the  city."  And  Isaiah  was  also  commanded  to  use 
means.  "Take  a  lump  of  figs.  And  they  took  and  laid  it 
on  the  boil  and  he  recovered."  If  this  simple  remedy  had 
been  neglected,  if  there  had  been  disobedience,  the  recovery 
would  not  have  taken  place.  The  third  day  is  mentioned 
on  which  he  sliould  go  up  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  For 
Israel  there  is  also  in  store  the  third  day,  when  they  will 
be  raised  up  nationally  and  worship  the  Lord  (Hosea  vi:2). 
Then  there  was  the  sign  of  the  shadow  turning  backward 
ten  degrees  on  the  dial  of  Ahaz.*  Hezekiah's  experience  is 
a  great  encouragement  for  God's  people  to  pray. 

*"It  is  interesting  to  learn  that  Ahaz  had — probably  on  his  visit  to 
Damascus  (2  Kings  xvi:10) — seen  and  brought  to  Jerusalem  some  of  the 
scientific  appliances  of  the  great  empire  of  the  East.  It  is  impossible  to 
determine  whether  this  mode  of  measuring  the  progress  of  time  (not 
.strictly  hours)  was  by  a  sun-dial,  the  invention  of  whicL  Herodotus 
ascribed  to  the  Babylonians.  According  to  Ideler  it  was  a  gnomon,  or 
index,  surrounded  by  concentric  circles,  by  which  the  time  of  the  day 
was  marked  by  the  lengthening  shadow.  But  the  term  'steps'  seems 
rather  to  indicate  an  obelisk  surrounded  by  steps,  the  shadow  on  which 
marked  the  hours,  so  that  the  shadow  falling  in  the  morning  westwards 
first  on  the  lowest  step,  gradually  ascended  to  the  plane  on  the  top, 
and  after  midday  again  descended  the  steps  eastwards.  As  the  text 
seems  to  imply  that  there  were  twenty  such  "steps,"  they  must  have 
marked  the  quarters  of  an  hour,  and  in  that  case  the  event  has  hap- 
pened about  half-past  two  o'clock  p.  m." — Bible  History. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  851 

And  the  promise  the  Lord  had  given,  "I  will  deliver  thee 
and  this  city  out  of  the  hand  of  the  King  of  Assyria;  and 
I  will  defend  this  city  for  mine  own  sake,  and  for  my  servant 
David's  sake,"  was  wonderfully  fulfilled  in  the  complete 
destruction  of  Sennacherib's  army.  The  last  we  hear  of 
this  great  King  is  the  failure  when  he  was  lifted  up  with 
pride  and  did  not  give  the  glory  to  God.  Merodach-bala- 
rlan,*  King  of  Babylon,  sent  letters  and  a  present  to  Heze- 
kiah  when  he  heard  of  his  sickness  and  his  miraculous 
recovery.  This  is  the  first  time  we  hear  of  a  King  of  Baby- 
lon. The  ambassadors  came  possibly  to  form  with  Heze- 
kiah  a  league  against  Assyria.  Hezekiah  was  favorably 
impressed,  "he  hearkened  unto  them,"  and  then  he  made 
a  display  of  all  his  possession.  He  had  hearkened  unto  them 
and  pleased  with  the  attention  shown  to  him  and  the  pres- 
ents the  King  of  Babylon  had  sent  to  him,  he  became  lifted 
up  in  his  heart,  he  boasted  of  his  wealth  and  his  possessions. 
Then  Isaiah  had  another  message  for  him.  The  Baby- 
lonian captivity  is  announced;  remarkable  in  itself.  How 
verses  17  and  18  were  fulfilled  is  well  known. 

4.    Manasseh  and  Amon. 
CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  Manasseh's  reign  of  Wickedness.   1-9.   (2  Chron.  xxxiii:2-9). 

2.  The  Word  of  the  Lord  Against  It.      10-15. 

.i.     Manasseh's  End.      16-18.     (2  Chron.  xxxiii:  18-20). 

4..     Reign  and  Death  of  Amon.     19-26.     (2  Chron.  xxxiii :20-25). 

Hezekiah  had  a  wicked  father  and  his  son  Manasseh  did 
not  follow  the  example  of  his  father,  but  became  even  more 
wicked  than  Ahaz,  his  grandfather.  Manasseh  means 
"forgetting."  No  doubt  Hezekiah  named  him  thus  because 
the  Lord  had  delivered  him  and  thus  made  him  forget  his 
troubles  and  trials.  He  was  born  three  years  after  Heze- 
kiah's  recovery  from  sickness.  And  now  Manasseh  forgot 
all  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  the  Lord  and  plunged  head- 
long into  the  worst  apostasy.     All  the  vile  practices  of  the 

*Berodach  is  the  error  of  some  scribe.     See  Isaiah  xxxix:l. 


352  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Canaanites  and  the  Sodomites  were  revived  by  him.  The 
Moloch-worship  flourished,  sorcery  and  the  practice  of 
demonism  as  well.  The  corruption  was  more  vile  than 
the  corruption  of  Samaria.  It  was  even  worse  than  the 
corruption  of  the  Canaanites.  "Manasseh  seduced  them 
to  do  more  evil  than  did  the  nations  whom  the  Lord  de- 
stroyed before  the  children  of  Israel."  And  still  more  evil 
is  recorded  of  this  King.  "Moreover  Manasseh  shed  inno- 
cent blood  very  much,  till  he  had  filled  Jerusalem  from  one 
end  to  the  another"  (verse  16).  Josephus  declares  that  he 
killed  all  the  righteous  in  Jerusalem  and  it  is  not  unlikely 
that  the  tradition  of  aged  Isaiah's  violent  death  under 
Manasseh's  reign  is  correct.  Then  the  Lord  sent  to  him 
his  judgment  message,  announcing  the  coming  doom  of 
Jerusalem.  Of  his  conversion  and  subsequent  reign  noth- 
ing is  said  in  Kings.  We  find  the  record  of  these  interest- 
ing events  in  Chronicles.  His  conversion  was  indeed  a 
miracle  of  grace. 

After  his  death  Amon  ruled  as  King  and  followed  all  the 
wickedness  of  his  father  Manasseh.  Terrible  is  the  record 
of  this  lost  soul.  "And  he  humbled  not  himself  before  the 
Lord  as  Manasseh  his  father  had  humbled  himself;  but 
Amon  trespassed  more  and  more"  (2  Chron.  xxxiii:23).  He 
was  murdered  by  his  servants. 


V.     The  Reign  of  Josiah 

Chapters  xxii-xxiii  :30 

1.    The  Revival. 
CHAPTER  XXII 

1.  Josiah  begins  to  Reign.     1-2.     (2  Chron.  xxxiv:l-2). 

2.  The  Temple  Repaired.     3-7.     (2  Chron.  xxxiv:8-13). 
8.     The  Law  Discovered.     8-9.     (2  Chron.  xxxiv:14-21). 

4.  The  Reading  of  the  Law  and  its  Results.     10-14. 

5.  The  Words  of  Huldah,  the  Prophetess.     15-20. 

After  the  violent  death  of  Amon  his  eight-year-old  son 
Josiah   ("sustained  by  Jehovah")   began  to  reign.     Under 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  858 

him  the  greatest  reformation  and  revival  took  place.  While 
he  was  yet  young  he  began  to  seek  after  the  God  of  David 
his  Father.  Afterward  he  began  to  purge  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem. The  carved  images  and  molten  images  as  well  as 
the  altars  of  Baal  were  destroyed  by  him.  "And  he  burnt 
the  bones  of  the  priests  upon  the  altars,  and  cleansed  Judah 
and  Jerusalem"  (2  Chron.  xxxiv:5).  Thus  was  fulfilled  the 
prophecy  uttered  more  than  three  hundred  years  before  by 
the  man  of  God  from  Judah  (1  Kings  xiii:2).  Perhaps  the 
prophecy  had  been  forgotten,  the  unbelievers  may  have 
ridiculed  its  fulfillment.  But  when  God's  time  came  He 
saw  to  the  literal  fulfillment  of  His  own  Word.  It  is  so 
today.  Rationalists  scoff  at  the  Word  of  God.  Others 
spiritualize  the  predictions  of  the  Bible  and  do  not  believe 
that  they  will  ever  be  fulfilled.  This  is  one  of  the  char- 
acteristics of  the  last  days  of  the  age  (2  Peter  iii:3-7). 

We  must  leave  it  to  the  reader  to  study  the  details  of  the 
great  reformation-revival  which  took  place  under  Josiah. 
In  the  annotations  on  Second  Chronicles  we  point  out  some 
of  its  lessons.  After  the  breaking  down  of  the  idols  and 
idol-altars  the  temple  was  repaired.  The  law  was  also 
found  by  Hilkiah  the  high-priest.  The  Word  of  the  Lord 
written  by  Moses  in  the  Pentateuch  had  most  likely  been 
hidden  away  by  Manasseh.  It  was  the  accusing  voice  of 
God  against  the  wickedness  of  the  King,  Strange  it  is  that 
it  is  not  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  repentance  and 
conversion  of  Manasseh.  And  when  the  Law  was  read  to 
the  King  by  Shaphan,  the  King  rent  his  clothes. 

"Here  we  have  a  tender  conscience  bowing  under  the 
action  of  the  Word  of  God.  This  was  one  special  charm 
in  the  character  of  Josiah.  He  was,  in  truth,  a  man  of  an 
humble  and  a  contrite  spirit,  who  trembled  at  the  Word  of 
God.  Would  that  we  all  knew  more  of  this!  It  is  a  most 
valuable  feature  of  the  Christian  character.  We  certainly 
do  need  to  feel,  much  more  deeply,  the  weight,  authority, 
and  seriousness  of  Scripture.  Josiah  had  no  question  what- 
ever in  his  mind  as  to  the  genuineness  and  authenticity  of 
the  words  which  Shaphan  had  read  in  his  hearing.     We  do 


S£4  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

not  read  of  his  asking,  'How  am  I  to  know  that  this  is  the 
Word  of  God?'  No;  he  trembled  at  it.  He  bowed  before 
it.  He  was  smitten  down  under  it.  He  rent  his  garments. 
He  did  not  presume  to  sit  in  judgment  upon  the  Word  of 
God,  but,  as  was  meet  and  right,  he  allowed  that  word  to 
judge  him. 

"Thus  it  should  ever  be.  If  man  is  to  judge  Scripture, 
then  Scripture  is  not  the  Word  of  God  at  all.  But  if  Scrip- 
ture is,  in  very  truth,  the  Word  of  God,  then  it  must  judge 
man.  And  so  it  is,  and  so  it  does.  Scripture  is  the  Word 
of  God  and  it  judges  man  thoroughly.  It  lays  bare  the 
very  roots  of  his  nature — it  opens  up  the  foundations  of  his 
moral  being.  It  holds  up  before  him  the  only  faithful  mirror 
in  which  he  can  see  himself  perfectly  reflected.  This  is  the 
reason  why  man  does  not  like  Scripture — cannot  bear  it — 
seeks  to  set  it  aside — delights  to  pick  holes  in  it — dares  to 
sit  in  judgment  upon  it.  It  is  not  so  in  reference  to  other 
books.  Men  do  not  trouble  themselves  so  much  to  discover 
and  point  out  flaws  and  discrepancies  in  Homer  or  Herodo- 
tus, Aristotle  or  Shakespeare.  No;  but  Scripture  judges 
them — judges  their  ways — their  lusts.  Hence  the  enmity 
of  the  natural  mind  to  that  most  precious  and  marvellous 
book  which  carries  its  own  credentials  to  every  divinely 
prepared  heart."* 

The  direct  result  of  reading  the  Word  of  God  was  more 
than  outward  grief  and  repentance.  The  King  gave  the 
command,  "Go  ye,  inquire  of  the  Lord  for  me,  and  for  the 
people  and  for  all  Judah."  Jeremiah  and  Zephaniah  were 
then  upon  the  scene,  but  we  do  not  read  anything  of  them 
in  the  record.  It  is  Huldah  the  prophetess,  the  wiie  of 
Shallum  ("retribution"),  the  son  of  Tikvah  (meaning  "Hope") 
the  son  of  Harhas  (meaning  "extremely  poor").  That  he 
had  to  inquire  of  a  woman,  the  weaker  vessel,  must  have 
been  humiliating  to  the  King.  And  Huldah's  message  is 
one  of  judgment.  To  Josiah  personally  good  is  promised. 
He  was  not  to  see  the  evil.     In  spite  of  the  great  reforma- 


♦From  "Things  New  and  Old." 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  355 

tion-revival,  judgment  would  fall  upon  Judah  and  upon 
Jerusalem  (verses  15-17). 

And  here  is  an  important  lesson  for  our  own  times.  Re- 
formations and  revivals  cannot  keep  back  the  decreed  judg- 
ments of  God.  Often  it  is  thought  that  great  waves  of 
reformation  and  revival  movements  are  evidences  that  the 
world  is  getting  better  and  that  only  good  is  in  store  for  this 
age.  It  is  forgotten  that  this  age  is  an  age  marked  by  de- 
parture from  God,  by  the  rejection  of  His  own  blessed  Son 
and  by  the  perversion  of  the  Truth  of  God.  It  will  cul- 
minate in  the  great  apostasy  and  the  manifestation  of  the 
man  of  sin — the  son  of  perdition.  Christendom  has  been 
even  more  unfaithful  than  Israel  in  Old  Testament  times. 
Judgment  is  in  store  for  this  age  and  for  that  which  claims 
to  be  the  church.  The  Lord  has  announced  this  long  ago 
and  it  will  surely  come  as  judgment  came  upon  Judah  for 
all  the  abommable  things  they  did.  Reformation-revival 
movements  are  evidences,  too,  that  the  threatened  judg- 
ment is  not  far  away.  As  the  end  approaches  God  warns 
us  and  His  Spirit  presses  home  the  Truth  once  more  to 
awaken  the  consciences  of  men.  In  2  Chron.  xxxvi:15  we 
read  the  following  words:  "And  the  Lord  God  of  their 
fathers  sent  to  them  by  his  messengers,  rising  up  betimes, 
and  sending;  because  He  had  compassion  on  His  people, 
and  on  His  dwellmg  place."  But  the  next  verse  declares 
the  failure  of  what  the  Lord  had  done  in  His  compassion. 
"But  they  mocked  the  messengers  of  God,  and  despised  His 
words,  and  misused  His  prophets,  until  the  wrath  of  the 
Lord  arose  against  His  people,  till  there  was  no  remedy." 
No  remedy!  an  awful  word  it  is.  Judah  in  spite  of  the 
gracious  revival  under  Josiah  hastened  on  to  the  predicted 
doom,  and  so  does  this  present  age. 


336  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

2.    The  Results  of  the  Revival.    The  Death  of  Josiah. 
CHAPTER  XXm:l-30 

1.  The  People  Hear  the  Law.     1-2.     (2  Chron.  xxxiv). 

2.  Josiah  makes  a  Covenant.     3. 

3.  The  Great  Reformations.     4-20. 

4.  The  Passover  Celebrated.     21-23.     (2  Chron.  xxxv). 

5.  Further  Statements  Concerning  Josiah.     24-27. 

6.  The  Death  of  Josiah.     28-30. 

It  is  a  great  scene  with  which  this  chapter  opens.  The 
King  feels  now  his  responsibility  towards  the  people.  All 
the  elders  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem  were  called  together  by 
him.  Then  there  was  a  great  procession  of  people  headed 
by  the  King,  followed  by  the  elders,  the  priests  and  the 
prophets  and  all  the  people  both  small  and  great.  The 
King  read  before  this  vast  assembly  all  the  words  of  the 
book  of  the  covenant.  The  King  standing  on  a  pillar,  or 
platform,  and  made  a  solemn  covenant  to  walk  after  the 
Lord  and  to  keep  His  commandments.  All  the  people  stood 
by  it.  But  it  did  not  last  very  long.  As  far  as  the  King 
was  concerned  there  can  be  no  question  that  it  was  real  with 
him.  However,  if  we  read  the  opening  chapters  of  Jeremiah 
we  find  that  the  people's  consecration  was  but  skin-deep. 
They  did  not  turn  unto  the  Lord  with  the  whole  heart,  but 
in  falsehood  (Jer.  iii:10). 

The  description  of  the  cleansing  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem 
of  all  the  abominable  things  (verses  4-20)  shows  the  awful 
depths  of  vileness  and  wickedness  into  which  the  profess- 
ing people  of  God  had  sunk.  All  the  abominations  of  the 
flesh  connected  with  the  worship  of  Baal  and  Ashera  and  a 
host  of  other  things  flourished  in  the  land.  "And  he  slew 
all  the  priests  of  the  high  places  that  were  there  upon  the 
altars,  and  burned  men's  bones  upon  them  and  returned  to 
Jerusalem"  (verse  20). 

The  keeping  of  the  Passover,  the  blessed  feast  of  remem- 
brance of  what  Jehovah  had  done,  follows  immediately  after 
the  cleansing  of  the  land.  The  full  account  we  find  in 
Chronicles  where  we  give  further  comment  (2  Chron.  jocxv: 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  857 

1-19).  But  the  record  declares  that  "there  was  not  holden 
such  a  passover  from  the  days  of  the  judges  that  judged 
Israel,  nor  in  all  the  days  of  the  Kings  of  Israel,  nor  of  the 
Kings  of  Judah."  The  same  was  said  of  Hezekiah's  pass- 
over  (2  Chron.  xxx:26).  Hezekiah's  passover  was  greater 
than  any  previous  one  and  Josiah's  feast  was  even  greater 
than  that  of  his  great-grandfather. 

And  all  the  workers  with  familiar  spirits  (the  demon  pos- 
sessed mediums)  and  other  wickedness  he  cut  off.  In  all 
this  Josiah  pleased  Jehovah  and  the  Spirit  of  God  testifies 
to  it.  "And  like  unto  him  was  there  no  king  before  him, 
that  turned  to  the  Lord  with  all  his  heart  and  with  all  his 
soul,  and  with  all  his  might,  according  to  all  the  law  of 
Moses;  neither  after  him  arose  there  any  like  him."  Yet 
after  these  words  there  stands  written  once  more  the  judg- 
ment message  so  soon  to  be  accomplished  upon  Judah  and 
Jerusalem. 

Josiah  died,  having  been  shot  on  the  battlefield  at  Megiddo. 
The  Chronicles  contains  the  details  of  his  death  (2  Chron. 
xxxv:20-27). 


VI.   Final  Apostasy  of  Judah  and  the 
Captivity 

Chapters  xxiii:31-xxv. 
1.    Jehoahaz  and  Jehoiakim 

CHAPTER   XXIII  :3 1-37 

1.  The  Three  Months'  Reign  of  Jehoahaz.  31-33.  (2  Chron.  xxxvi-1-2) 

2.  Jehoiakim  Made  King.     34-37.     (2  Chron.  xxxvi:4-5). 

Chronicles  tells  us  that  immediately  after  the  death  of 
Josiah,  the  people  of  the  land  took  Jehoahaz  (which  means 
"Jehovah  holds  up")  and  made  him  King.  He  was  not  the 
Txjrd's  choice,  but  the  people's  choice.  He  was  not  the 
eldest  son  and  therefore  the  action  of  the  people  was  an 
unlawful  and  a  lawless  one.     He  was  an  evil-doer;  Josephus 


358  THE   BOOK  OF  KINGS 

speaks  of  him  as  having  been  vile.  In  the  brief  period  h« 
reigned  he  may  have  attempted  to  restore  the  immoral 
rites  which  his  father  had  so  completely  crushed.  He  may 
have  opposed  Pharaoh-necho,  King  of  Egypt. 

"Necho  had,  after  the  battle  of  Megiddo,  continued  his 
march  towards  Syria.  Thither,  at  Riblah,  'in  the  land  of 
Hamath,'  the  victor  summoned  the  new  Jewish  King.* 
On  his  arrival,  Jehoahaz,  who  had  been  crowned  without 
the  leave  of  Necho,  was  put  in  bonds.  Necho  does  not  seem, 
on  this  occasion,  to  have  pursued  his  expedition  against 
Assyria.  The  great  battle  at  Carchemish,  to  which  the 
chronicler  refers  by  anticipation  (2  Chron.  xxxv:20),  was 
fought  on  a  second  expedition,  three  years  later,  when  the 
Egyptian  army  under  Necho  was  defeated  with  great  slaugh- 
ter by  Nebuchadnezzar,  the  son  of  Nabopalassar.  This  was 
after  the  fall  of  Nineveh,  and  when  the  Babylonian  or 
Chaldean  empire  had  taken  the  place  of  the  Assyrian.  But 
on  the  present  occasion  Necho  seems  to  have  returned,  before 
encountering  the  Assyrians,  into  Egypt,  whither  'he  brought' 
with  him  Jehoahaz,  who  died  in  captivity."! 

Then  the  King  of  Egypt  took  the  oldest  son  of  Josiah, 
Eliakim,  changed  his  name  to  Jehoiakim  and  made  him 
King  over  Judah.  Jehoiakim  means  "Jehovah  raiseth 
up";  this  name  was  probably  selected  to  impress  the  peo- 
ple. He  reigned  eleven  years.  It  was  a  most  disastrous 
time  and  the  beginning  of  the  end.  God's  mighty  prophets 
Jeremiah,  Ezekiel,  Habakkuk,  Zephaniah  and  also  Urijah 
Avere  then  warning  and  dehvering  their  great  messages. 

"The  reformatory  work  of  Josiah  gave  place  to  a  restora- 
tion of  the  former  idolatry  (comp.  2  Chron.  xxxvi:8).  As 
in  previous  reigns,  it  was  connected  with  complete  demoral- 
ization of  the  people  (comp.  Jer.  vii:9-15;  xvii:2,  xix:4-9; 
Ezek.  viii:9-18).  And  this  not  only  among  the  laity,  high 
and  low,  but  equally  among  the  priests  and  prophets  (comp. 
Jer.    xxiii:9-14).     All   the   louder   rose   the   voices   of   the 


*As  Josephus  explains  it. 
fSee  Jeremiah  xxii:ll-12. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  S59 

prophets  Jeremiah,  Urijah  and  Habakkuk.  But  their 
warnings  were  either  unheeded  and  scorned,  or  brought  on 
them  persecution  and  martyrdom  (2  Kings  xxiv:4;  Jer. 
xxvi:10,  11;  and  especially  verses  20-23).  Otherwise,  also, 
it  was  a  wretched  government,  characterized  by  public 
wrong,  violence,  oppression  and  covetousness.  While  the 
land  was  impoverished,  the  King  indulged  in  luxury  and 
built  magnificent  palaces,  or  adorned  towns,  by  means  of 
forced  labor,  which  remained  unpaid,  and  at  the  cost  of  the 
lives  of  a  miserable  enslaved  people  (Jer.  xxii:  13-18;  Hab. 
ii:9-17)."* 

The  Book  of  Jeremiah  will  give  us  much  more  of  the  his- 
tory of  this  wicked  king  and  our  annotations  will  lead  us 
back  to  the  ending  days  of  Judah  and  Jerusalem.  He  tried 
to  put  Urijah  to  death  because  he  prophesied  against  Jeru- 
salem. The  prophet  fled  to  Egypt.  Jehoiakim  sent  for 
him  and  slew  him  with  the  sword  and  threw  his  body  into 
the  graves  of  the  common  people  (Jer.  xxvi).  He  himself 
was  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass  (Jer.  xxii:18-19).  An- 
other infamous  deed  he  committed  was  the  cutting  with  the 
pen-knife  of  the  scroll  upon  which  Jeremiah  had  written 
the  Word  of  God,  casting  it  into  the  fire  (Jer.  xxxvi). 


2.     Jehoiachin  and  Zedekiah.    The  Beginning  of  Judah*s 

Captivity. 

CHAPTER   XXIV 

1.  Jehoiakim   Servant   of   Nebuchadnezzar.     His   Death.     1-5.        (2 

Chron.  xxxvi  :6— 7). 

2.  Jehoiachin.     6-10.     (2  Chron.  xxxvi:8-9). 
;{.     The  First  Deportation  to  Babylon.     11-16. 

4.     Zedekiah,  the  Last  King  and  His  Rebellion.     17-20. 

The  foe  of  Judah,  the  chosen  instrument  of  the  Lord  to 
execute  His  wrath  upon  the  people  and  the  city,  now  comes 
to  the  front.  Jeremiah  had  predicted  the  coming  judg- 
ment;  Isaiah  and  the  other  prophets  did  the  same.     Then 


*Dr.  A.  Edersheim. 


560  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

Jehoiakim  proclaimed  a  fast  (Jer.  xxxvi:9).  It  was  noth- 
ing but  hypocrisy.  Immediately  after  he  cut  the  scroll  to 
pieces  and  cast  it  into  the  fire.  Jeremiah  and  his  secretary 
Baruch  hardly  escaped  with  their  lives.  Nebuchadnezzar, 
King  of  Babylon,  bound  Jehoiakim  in  fetters  to  carry  him 
to  Babylon  (2  Chron.  xxxvi:6).  This  was  not  done  because 
Nebuchadnezzar  was  suddenly  called  to  Babylon.  The 
book  of  Daniel  introduces  us  more  fully  to  this  great  mon- 
arch, the  head  of  the  Times  of  the  Gentiles;  we  give  in  the 
annotations  on  that  book  more  information  about  his  char- 
acter and  history.* 

Jehoiakim  became  a  vassal  of  Nebuchadnezzar.  Three 
years  later  he  rebelled.  Punishment  follow^ed  swiftly.  It 
was  "at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord." 

After  the  death  of  Jehoiakim,  buried  with  the  burial  of 
an  ass  (Jer.  xxii:18-19),  his  son  Johoiachin  reigned  in  his 
stead.  He  was  eighteen  years  oldf  when  he  ascended  the 
throne  and  reigned  only  three  months  and  ten  days  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi:9).  He  is  also  known  by  the  names  of  Joiachin  (Ezek. 
i  :2)  and  Coniah  (Jer.  xxii  :24,  28,  xxxvii  :1) .  Then  Nebuchad- 
nezzar besieged  Jerusalem.     The  city  surrendered  and  the 


*"Nabopalassar,  founded  the  new  Babylonian  empire,  which  began 
the  period  of  the  Chaldees — as  they  are  chiefly  known  to  us  in  Scripture. 
Here  we  may  at  once  indicate  that  he  was  succeeded  by  his  son,  Nebu- 
chadrezzar (or  Nebuchadnezzar),  and  he  in  turn  by  his  son,  Evil- 
merodach,  who,  after  two  years'  reign,  was  dethroned  by  his  brother- 
in-law,  Neriglissar.  After  four  years  (559-556  B.  C.)  Neriglissar  was 
succeeded  by  his  youthful  son,  Laborosoarchod.  After  his  murder, 
Nabonidos  (Nabunit,  Nabuna'id)  acceded  to  the  government,  but 
after  seventeen  years'  reign  (555-539  B.  C.)  was  dethroned  by  Cyrus. 
The  eldest  son  of  Nabonidos,  and  heir  to  the  throne,  was  Belshazzar, 
whom  we  know  from  the  Book  of  Daniel,  where,  in  a  not  unusual 
manner,  he  is  designated  as  the  son,  that  is,  the  descendant  of  Nebu- 
chadrezzar (Dan.  v:2,  11,  18).  We  infer  that,  while  his  father, 
Nabonidos,  went  to  meet  Cyrus,  to  whom  he  surrendered,  thereby 
preserving  his  life,  Belshazzar  had  been  left  as  "king"  in  Babylon 
at  the  taking  of  which  he  perished  in  the  night  of  his  feast,  described 
in  Holy  Scripture." — See  "The  Prophet  Daniel,"  by  A.  C.  Gaebelein. 

t2  Chronicles  xxxvi:9  gives  his  age  as  eight  years;  it  is  evidently 
the  error  of  a  scribe. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  361 

long  predicted  punishment  was  executed.  At  the  first  in- 
vasion under  the  reign  of  Jehoiakim,  when  Nebuchadnezzar 
besieged  Jerusalem,  a  part  of  the  vessels  of  the  house  of 
God  were  transported  to  Babylon,  as  well  as  the  noble 
children,  among  whom  were  Daniel  and  his  companions 
(Dan.  i:l-6).  With  the  second  siege  and  conquest  of  Jeru- 
salem all  was  taken  and  the  people  were  taken  away  cap- 
tives, among  them  was  the  prophet  Ezekiel  (Jer.  lii:28; 
Ezek.  i:l-2;  Jer.  xxix:l).  A  remnant,  however,  was  left 
behind;  Jehoiachin  was  carried  into  captivity.  The  last 
chapter  of  this  book  gives  his  fate.  He  never  returned. 
Important  is  to  note  the  curse  which  was  pronounced  upon 
him.  Jeremiah  pronounced  it  upon  Coniah  (Jehoiachin). 
"Write  ye  this  man  childless,  a  man  that  shall  not  prosper 
in  his  days ;  for  no  man  of  his  seed  shall  prosper  sitting  upon 
the  throne  of  David  and  ruling  any  more  in  Judah."  (Jer. 
xxii:28-30).  He  had  children;  no  offspring  of  the  line  of 
Solomon  was  ever  to  occupy  the  throne  of  David.  But 
there  were  the  descendants  of  David  through  another  line, 
that  is,  Nathan's;  no  curse  rested  upon  that  line.  The 
virgin  Mary,  the  mother  of  our  Lord,  was  of  David  through 
Nathan  (Luke  iii:31).  Joseph,  to  whom  Mary  the  virgin 
was  espoused,  was  a  son  of  David  through  Solomon's  line. 

Nebuchadnezzar  made  Mattaniah,  the  youngest  son  of 
Josiah,  King  over  Judah  (compare  verse  18  with  chapter 
xxiii:31).  His  name  means  "the  gift  of  Jehovah"  and  he 
changed  it  into  Zedekiah,  "the  righteousness  of  Jehovah." 
Here  is  no  doubt  a  prophetic  hint.  When  Judah  and  Jeru- 
salem went  down  in  judgment,  in  unspeakable  ruin  and 
shame,  God  indicated  in  the  very  names  of  the  last  King 
that  there  would  yet  come  from  David's  line.  He,  who  is 
His  own  precious  gift  and  in  whom  righteousness  will  be 
given  and  established.  Zedekiah  filled  full  the  measure  of 
wickedness  and  finally  rebelled  against  the  King  of  Babylon. 


TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

3.    The  Siege  of  Jerusalem  and  Judah's  Complete  Over- 
throw. 

CHAPTER  XXV 

1.  The  Last  Siege  and  Complete  Overthrow.    1-21.    (2  Chron.  xxxvi: 

17—20). 

2.  Gedaliah.     22-26. 

3.  Jehoiachin's  Captivity  and  Release.     27-30. 

Zedekiah's  rebellion  was  a  great  offence.  He  had  sworn 
in  Jehovah's  name  to  be  loyal  to  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi  :13;  Ezek.  xvii:13).  We  find  more  light  throwTi  upon 
this  King  and  his  rebellion  in  the  book  of  Jeremiah.  Am- 
bassadors from  Edom,  Moab,  Ammon,  Tyre  and  Sidon 
came  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Zedekiah  (Jer.  xxvii).  A  combined 
revolution  was  probably  contemplated.  Zedekiah  sent  at 
the  same  time  a  message  to  Nebuchadnezzar  in  Babylon 
(Jer.  xxix:3);  the  prophet  Jeremiah  used  this  opportunity 
to  send  a  God-given  communication  to  the  exiles  in  Baby- 
Ion  (Jer.  xxix:l,  etc.).  The  news  of  Zedekiah's  schemes 
must  have  reached  the  captives,  for  they  expected  an  early 
return.*  False  prophets,  Satan's  instruments,  gave  them 
their  lying  messages.  Prominent  among  them  was  Hananiah 
who  received  his  deserved  punishment  for  his  lying  words 
(Jer.  xxviii).  Once  more  the  city  was  besieged.  A  great 
famine  prevailed.  What  happened  in  the  doomed  city  and 
Jeremiah's  great  ministry  as  well  as  suffering  may  be  learned 
from  his  prophecies.  Consult  especially  the  following  pas- 
sages: Jer.  xxi:l-2,  xxxvii:3,  xxxiv:2-6,  xxxviii.  Jeremiah 
charged  with  treacherous  designs  had  been  cast  into  a  dun- 
geon, but  was  later  delivered  out  of  the  miry  pit  and  brought 
before  the  King,  who  declared  himself  willing  to  follow 
Jeremiah's  advice.  What  followed  we  give  from  Eder- 
sheim's  Bible  history: 

"Meantime  the  siege  was  continuing,  without  hope  of  re- 
lief. Tyre  suffered  straits  similar  to  those  of  Jerusalem, 
while  Ammon,  Moab,  Edom  and  the  Philistines  had  not 


*The  Prophet  Ezekiel  was  especially  used  to  warn  against  these 
false  hopes.     See  annotations  on  Ezekiel. 


THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS  So'l 

only  withdrawn  from  the  alliance,  but  were  waiting  to  shjirc 
in  the  spoil  of  Judah  (Ezek.  xxv).  At  length  a  gleam  of 
hope  appeared.  An  Egyptian  army,  under  their  King 
Hophra,  the  grandson  of  Necho,  advanced  through  Phoe- 
nicia, and  obliged  the  Chaldeans  to  raise  the  siege  of  Jeru- 
salem (Jer.  xxxvii:5-7).  The  exultation  and  reaction  in 
Jerusalem  may  be  imagmed — and  it  was  probably  in  con- 
sequence of  it  that  Jeremiah,  who  still  predicted  calamity, 
was  cast  into  prison  (ib.  verse  4).  But  the  relief  of  Jerusa- 
lem was  brief.  The  Egyptian  army  had  to  retire,  and  the 
siege  of  Jerusalem  by  the  Chaldeans  was  resumed,  and  that 
under  even  more  disadvantageous  circumstances  to  the  be- 
sieged. To  the  other  calamities  that  of  famine  was  now 
added  (2  Kings  xxv:3).  Of  the  horrors  of  that  time  Jere- 
miah has  left  a  record  in  the  Book  of  Lamentations  (comp. 
i:19,  ii:ll,  12,  20,  iv:3-10).  The  last  resistance  was  soon 
overcome.  On  the  nmth  day  of  the  fourth  month  (Tam- 
muz),  in  the  eleventh  year  of  Zedekiah,  the  enemy  gaiaecl 
possession  of  the  northern  suburb  (2  Kings  xxv:4;  Jer. 
xxxix:2,  3,  lii:6,  7).  Before  the  middle  gate  the  Baby- 
lonian captains  held  a  council  of  war  (Jer.  xxxix:2,  3). 
Then  the  king  and  all  the  regular  army  sought  safety  in 
flight  during  the  darkness  of  the  night  (Jer.  xxxix:4).  As 
the  Chaldeans  held  the  northern  part  of  the  city,  they  fled 
southwards.  Between  the  two  walls,  through  the  Tyro- 
poeon,  then  out  of  the  'fountain-gate,'  and  through  the 
king's  garden,  they  made  haste  to  gain  the  Jordan.  But 
their  flight  could  not  remain  unobserved.  They  were  pur- 
sued and  overtaken  in  the  plains  of  Jericho.  The  soldiers 
dispersed  in  various  directions.  But  the  king  himself  and 
his  household  were  taken  captives,  and  carried  to  the  head- 
quarters at  Riblah,  where  Nebuchadnezzar  himself  was  at 
the  time.  Here  Zedekiah  was  formally  arraigned  and  sen- 
tence given  against  him.  His  daughters  were  set  free,  but 
his  sons  were  slain  before  him.  It  was  the  last  sight  the 
king  saw.  His  eyes  were  put  out;  he  was  boiuid  hand  and 
feet  with  double  fetters  of  brass,  and  so  carried  to  Babylon. 
There  he  died  in  ward  (Jer.  lii:ll). 


S64-  TEE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

"The  remainder  of  this  mournful  tale  is  soon  told.  After 
the  flight  and  capture  of  the  king,  the  city  could  not  long 
hold  out.  A  month  later,  and  on  the  seventh  day  of  the 
fifth  month  (Ab)  Nebuzar-adan  ('Nebo  gave  posterity') 
penetrated  into  the  city.  The  Temple  was  set  on  fire,  as 
well  as  the  king's  palace.  The  whole  city  was  reduced  to 
ruins  and  ashes,  and  the  walls  which  had  defended  it  were 
broken  down  (2  Kings  xxv:9,  10).  After  three  days  the 
work  of  destruction  was  completed;  and  ever  afterwards 
was  the  10th  (9th)  of  Ab  mourned  as  the  fatal  day  of  Jeru- 
salem's fall  (Jer.  liii:12;  Zech.  vii:3,  5,  viii:19).  'The  rest 
of  the  people  left  in  the  city,'  and  those  who  had  previously 
passed  to  the  enemy,  together  with  the  remnant  of  the  multi- 
tude,' were  carried  away  (2  Kings  xxvrll).  We  can  scarcely 
be  mistaken  ia  regarding  these  captives  as  the  chief  part  of 
the  non-combatant  population  of  Jerusalem   and  Judah." 

Jeremiah's  history  and  how  he  was  found  in  prison  when 
Jerusalem  fell  we  shall  learn  from  his  book. 

The  administration  of  the  conquered  country  was  then 
entrusted  by  Nebuchadnezzar  to  Gedaliah,  the  son  of  Ahi- 
kam  (2  Kings  xxii:12;  Jer.  xxvi:24).  Gedaliah  dwelt  in 
jMizpah.  He  held  his  office  only  two  months  and  was  mur- 
dered by  Ishmael,  the  son  of  Nethaniah  (see  Jer.  xl:8-16 
and  xli:l-9). 

Jehoiachin's  release  needs  no  further  comment.  In  the 
Second  Book  of  Chronicles  we  shall  follow  again  this  mourn- 
ful history.  The  seventy  year  captivity  was  on.  The 
Word  of  the  Lord  through  Jeremiah  that  "the  land  should 
enjoy  her  Sabbaths,  for  as  long  as  she  lay  desolate  she  kept 
Sabbath,  to  fulfill  three  score  and  ten  years"  (2  Chron. 
xxxvi:21). 

We  add  the  words  of  another: 

"Agaia  is  the  land  keeping  Sabbath.  And  again  is  it 
'stillness  unto  God,'  till  His  Voice  shall  waken  land  and 
people.  Whose  are  land  and  people,  dominion  and  peace: 
till  He  shall  come  Who  is  alike  the  goal  and  the  fulfillment 
of  all  past  history  and  prophecy — 'a  light  to  lighten  the 
Gentiles,  and  the  ^ory  ci  Thy  people  Israel,'  " 


TEE   BOOK  OF  KINGS  365 

Appendix 

THE  MOABITE  STONE. 

This  ancient  monument  was  discovered  by  R.  F. 
Klein  in  1868  at  Diban  in  Moab. 

The  inscription  consists  of  thirty-four  lines  (the  last  two 
being  undecipherable),  and  was  written  by  Mesha,  King  of 
Moab  to  commemorate  his  successful  revolt  from  the  yoke 
of  Israel,  recorded  in  2  Kings  i:l  and  chapter  iii;  and  to 
honor  his  god  Chemosh,  to  whom  he  ascribed  his  successes. 

The  writing  is  in  the  ancient  Hebrew  characters,  which 
continued  in  use  down  to  139  B.C.,  but  was  gradually  re- 
placed by  the  modern  square  Hebrew  characters  which  are 
in  use  today. 

1.  "I,  Mesha  son  of  Chemosh-Melech  king  of  Moab,  the  Di- 

2.  bonite.     My  father  reigned  over  Moab  thirty  years  and  I  reign- 

3.  ed  after  my  father.     I  made  this  monument  to  Chemosh  at  Kork- 

hah.     A  monument  of  sal- 

4.  vation,  for  he  saved  me  from  all  invaders,  and  let  me  see  my  desire 

upon  all  my  enemies.     Om- 

5.  ri  [was]  king  of  Israel,  and  he  oppressed  Moab  many  days,  for 

Chemosh  was  angry  with  his 

6.  land.     His  son  followed  him,  and  he  also  said:  I  will  oppress  Moab. 

In  my  days  Che[mosh]  said; 

7.  I  will  see  my  desire  on  him  and  his  house.     And  Israel  surely  per- 

ished for  ever.     Omri  took  the  land  of 

8.  Medeba  and  [Israel]  dwelt  in  it  during  his  days  and  half  the  days 

of  his  son,  altogether  forty  years.     But  there  dwelt  in  it 

9.  Chemosh  in  my  days.     I  built  Baal-Meon  and  made  therein  the 

ditches;   I  built 

10.  Kirjathaim.     The  men  of  Gad  dwelt  in  the  land  of  Ataroth  from 

of  old,  and  built  there  the  king  of 

11.  Israel  Ataroth;    and  I  made  war  against  the  town  and  seized  it. 

And  I  slew  all  the  [people  of] 

12.  the  town,  for  the  pleasure  of  Chemosh  and  Moab:   I  captured  from 

thence   the    Arel    of    Dodah    and    tore 

13.  him  before  Chemosh  in  Kerioth:    And  I  placed  therein  the  men  of 

Sh(a)r(o)n,  and  the  men 
li.  of   M(e)kh(e)rth.     And   Chemosh   said   to   me:     Go,   seize   Nebo 
upon  Israel;    and 


366  THE  BOOK  OF  KINGS 

15.  I  went  in  the  night  and  fought  against  it  from  Iul-  i,...ik  g"  dawn 

till  noon:     and  I  took 

16.  it,  and  slew  all,  7,000  men,  [boys?],  women,  [girls?] 

17.  and  female  slaves,  for  to  Ashtar-Chemosh  I  devoted  them.     And  I 

took  from  it  the  Arels  of  Yahveh,  and  tore  them  before  Che- 
mosh.     And  the  king  of  Israel  built 

18.  Jahaz,  and  dwelt  in  it,  while  he  waged  war  against  me;    Chemosh 

drove  him  out  before  me.     And 

19.  I  took  from  Moab  200  men,  all  chiefs,  and  transported  them  t  » 

Jahaz,  which  I  took, 

20.  to  add  to  it  Dibon.     I  built  Korkhah,  the  wall  of  the  forests  and 

the  wall 

21.  of  the  citadel:     I  built  its  gates,  and  I  built  its  towers.     And 

22.  I  built  the  house  of  Moloch,  and  I  made  sluices  of  the  water-ditches 

in  the  middle 

23.  of  the  town.     And  there  was  no  cistern  in  the  middle  of  the  town  of 

Korkhah,  and  I  said  to  all  the  people.  Make  for 

24.  yourselves  every  man  a  cistern  in  his  house.     And  I  dug  the  canals 

for  Korkhah  by  means  of  the  prisoners 

25.  of  Israel.     I  built  Aroer,  and  I  made  the  road  in  [the  province  of] 

the  Arnon.     [And] 

26.  I  built  Beth-Bamoth,  for  it  was  destroyed.     I  built  Bezer,  for  in 

ruins 

27.  [it  was.     And  all  the  chiefs]  of  Dibon  were  50,  for  all  Dibon  is 

subject;    and  I  placed 

28.  one  hundred  [chiefs]  in  the  towns   which  I  added  to  the  land:    I 

built 

29.  Beth-Medeba    and    Beth-diblathaim    and    Beth-Baal-Meon,    and 

transported  thereto  the  [shepherds]?     .     .     . 

30.  and  the  pastors]  of  the  flocks  of  the  land.     And  at  Horonaim  dwelt 

there 

31.  .     .     .     And  Chemosh  said  to  me.   Go  down,   make  war  upon 

Horonaim.     I  went  down  [and  made  war] 
82.  .     .     .     And  Chemosh  dwelt  in  it  during  my  days.     I  went  up 
from  thence         .     .     " 

Translation  by  Dr.  Neubauer, 


FIRST  CHRONICLES 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Introduction 369 

Division  of  the  First  Book  of  Chronicles 373 

Analysis  and  Annotations 375 

Appendix 413 


The  Books  of  the  Chronicles 

INTRODUCTION 

The  Books  of  the  Chronicles  are  called  in  the  Hebrew  "Dhri-Hay- 
yomim"  which  means  "words  of  the  days,"  that  is  the  events  of  the 
times.  In  the  Greek  translation  they  are  known  by  the  name 
"Paraleipomena",  that  is  "things  omitted."  Our  English  title 
"Chronicles"  is  adopted  from  the  Latin  translation,  the  Vulgate, 
because  the  title  there  is  "Liber  Chronicorum." 

In  the  English  Bible  the  Chronicles  occupy  a  different  place  from 
that  in  the  original  Hebrew  Bible.  As  stated  before,  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  are  divided  into  three  main  divisions;  the  Law,  the 
Prophets  and  the  Writings.  This  last  section  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
contains  the  following  books:  Psalms,  Proverbs,  Job;  the  five  books 
known  as  Megilloth,  Canticles,  Ruth,  Lamentations,  Ecclesiastes  and 
Esther.  These  are  followed  by  Daniel,  Ezra,  Nehemiah  and  Chronicles. 
The  Chronicles  therefore  stand  at  the  close  of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures. 
That  this  arrangement  is  not  without  meaning  in  connection  with  the 
New  Testament,  has  been  pointed  out  by  others.  "The  genealogies 
with  which  Chronicles  begins  lead  up  to  the  genealogy  of  Matthew  I 
and  the  commencement  of  the  New  Testament.  They  end  with  the 
ending  of  the  Kingdom,  and  the  question  of  Cyrus,"who  is  there?" 
(2  Chron.  xxxvi:23)  is  followed  by  another  "Where  is  He?"  (Mat- 
thew ii:2)  and  the  proclamation  of  the  Kingdom  by  the  true  King  and 
His  forerunner.  Chronicles  begins  with  the  first  Adam  and  leads  on  to 
the  last  Adam." 

AUTHORSHIP  AND  DATE. 

Ezra  has  been  mentioned  as  the  possible  author  of  Chronicles,  which, 
however,  cannot  be  proven.  Nothing  whatever  is  known  of  the 
instrument  who  was  used  to  write  these  historical  books.  From  the 
prominence  which  is  given  to  the  history  and  organization  of  the  Levitic 
priesthood  and  the  deep  interest  shown  in  the  minor  officials  of  the 
Temple,  especially  the  singers,  it  has  been  surmised  that  the  author 
may  have  been  a  Levite.  Beyond  this  nothing  definite  can  be  said. 
The  author  used  by  the  Spirit  of  God  must  remain  unknown  to  man, 
but  he  is  known  to  God.  In  the  books  are  mentioned  repeatedly  other 
books  and  histories  to  which  the  author  of  Chronicles  refers.  These 
include  the  following:     a  book  of    the  Kings  of  Israel  and  Judah, 

369 


S70        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

(2  Chron.  xxvii:7;  xxxv:27;  xxxvi:8);  a  book  of  the  Kings  of  Judah  and 
Israel  (2  Chron.  xvi:ll;  xxv:26;  xxviiJ:26;  xxxii:32);  a  book  of  the 
Kings  of  Israel  (2  Chron.  xxiv:27);  a  commentary  of  the  books  of 
Kings  (2  Chron.  xxiv:27);  a  history  of  the  prophets  Samuel,  Nathan  and 
Gad  (1  Chron.  xxix:29);  a  history  of  the  prophets  Nathan,  Abijah,  the 
Shilonite,  and  Iddo  (2  Chron.  ix:29);  a  history  of  the  prophets,  Shemaiah 
and  Iddo  (1  Chron.  xii:15);  a  history  of  the  prophet  Jehu  (2  Chron. 
xx:24);  a  commentary  of  the  prophet  Iddo  (2  Chron.  xiii:22);  Isaiah's 
history  of  Uzziah  (2  Chron.  xxvi:22);  a  history  of  the  prophet  Isaiah 
(2  Chron.  xxxii:32)  and  a  history  of  the  prophet  of  Manasseh's  day 
(2  Chron.  xxxiii:19).  It  will  be  seen  that  there  are  just  twelve  sources 
mentioned.  It  will  be  seen  that  the  first  four  are  historical  and  the 
remaining  eight  are  prophetic.  While  some  of  these  references  must 
have  been  books  and  histories  now  unknown  to  us,  the  main  references 
are  to  the  preceding  books  of  the  Kings  and  to  the  first  part  of  the 
prophet    Isaiah. 

The  date  of  Chronicles  is  fixed  by  the  first  book.  1  Chron.  vi:15 
shows  that  the  book  was  written  after  the  captivity.  We  find  also  the 
names  of  the  descendants  of  Zerubbabel  given  in  1  Chron.  iii:19-24. 
Inasmuch  as  Zerubbabel  was  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  exile,  who  returned 
from  the  captivity,  and  his  descendants  are  given.  Chronicles  must  have 
been  written  some  time  after  the  return  from  Babylon.  The  diction 
of  the  books  of  Chronicles  also  bears  witness  to  this.  The  Hebrew  is 
substantially  the  same  which  is  employed  in  the  books  of  Ezra, 
Nehemiah  and  Esther,  which  were  written  immediately  after  the 
captivity.  It  is  mixed  with  Aramaeisms,  which  marks  the  corruption 
of  the  pure  Hebrew  by  the  chaldaean  language  which  the  captives 
learned  in  Babylon.  The  pure  Hebrew  had  been  lost  in  Babylon. 
Even  the  orthography  bears  witness  to  it  as  every  Hebrew  scholar 
knows. 

RATIONALISTIC  OBJECTIONS. 

Rationalists,  the  so-called  higher  critics,  speak  much  of  the  dis- 
crepancies and  contradictions  contained  in  Chronicles.  That  there  are 
variations  from  previous  records  cannot  be  denied,  but  variations  are 
not  contradictions.  That  there  are  certain  corruptions  in  the  text 
must  be  acknowledged,  and  some  of  them  will  be  pointed  out  in  the 
annotations.  But  the  charge  that  the  writer  of  Chronicles  contradicts 
himself,  is  wholly  unfounded.  The  following  passages  have  been  used 
to  demonstrate  this  supposed  contradiction:  2  Chron.  xiv:l  and  2 
Chron.  xv:19;  2  Chron.  xiv:2  and  2  Chron.  xv:17;  2  Chron.  xvii:6  and 
2  Chron.  xx:33;  2  Chron.  xxx:26  and  xxxv:18.  A  careful  perusal 
will  show  that  there  is  nothing  contradictory  between  these  passages. 
Higher  criticism  is  often  superficial  and  we  fear  just  as  often  wilfully 
blind  and  even  ready  to  cast  doubt  upon  the  inspired  records. 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       371 

THE  MARKS   OF  INSPIRATION. 

The  omissions  and  additions  we  find  in  the  Chronicles  in  comparison 
with  the  books  of  Samuel  and  Kings  are  not  the  marks  of  an  imperfect 
human  hand.  They  are  the  marks  of  inspiration.  We  found  that  the 
books  of  Kings  contained  the  history  of  God's  government  in  Israel. 
Kings  omits  much  of  the  history  of  the  house  of  Judah  and  only  touches 
upon  that  which  relates  to  the  coilnection  of  Judaic  witiK  the  house  of 
Israel  during  that  period. 

"The  Books  of  Chronicles  give  us  the  history  of  the  same  period  under 
another  aspect,  that  is,  that  of  blessing  and  of  the  grace  of  God;  and, 
more  particularly,  they  give  us  the  history  of  the  house  of  David  with 
respect  to  which  this  grace  was  manifested.  We  shall  see  this  verified 
in  a  multitude  of  instances. 

"These  Books  preserve  God's  history  of  His  people,  recorded  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  as  He  loved  to  remember  it,  exhibiting  only  such  faults 
as  require  to  be  known  in  order  to  understand  the  instructions  of 
His  grace."* 

It  is  in  these  distinctions  we  discover  the  supernatural  guidance  of 
the  penman. 

*Synopsi3  of  the  Bible. 


372 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 


PARALLEL  PASSAOEt. 

A  comparison  with  the  books  of  Samuel,  Kinga  and  certain  chapters 
in  Isaiah  is  necessary  in  the  itudy  of  Chroniclci.  To  asiist  in  this,  we 
give  a  complete  list  of  the  parallel  passages  with  which  Chronicles 
should  be  studied. 


1  Sam.  27 

..1  Chron.  12:1-7 

2  Kings  1:1; 3:4, 5.2  Chron 

.  20:1-3 

29:1-3 

"       12:19-22 

8:16-19 

" 

21:2-7 

31 

"10 

8:20-22 

" 

21:8-15 

2  Sam.  5:1-5 

"       11:1-3 

8:23,  24 

" 

21:18-20 

5:6-10 

"       11:4-9 

8:25-27 

" 

22:1-4 

5:11-16. . . . . 

14:1-7 

8:28,  29;  9:1- 

28 

" 

22:5-7,  9 

5:17-25 

"       14:8-17 

10:11-14 

" 

22:8 

6:1-11   

"13 

11:1-3 

" 

22:10-12 

6:12-23 

"15  and  16 

11:4-20 

" 

23 

7 

"17 

11:21;  12:1-3. 

" 

24:1-3 

8 

"18 

12:6-16 

12:17,  18 

« 

24:4-14 

10 

"19 

24:23,  24 

11:1-27 

"       20:1 

12:19-21 

" 

24:25-27 

12:29-31 

"       20:1-3 

14:1-6 

" 

25:1-4 

23:8-39   . 

"        11:10-47 
"       21:1-6 

14:7 

« 

25:11-16 

24:1-9 

14:8-14 

25:17-24 

24:1-9 

"       27:23,  24 

14:17-20 

" 

25:25-28 

24:10-17 

"       21:7-17 

14:21,22:15:1 

-4 

♦' 

26:1-15 

24:18-24 

"       21:18-22:1 

15:6,  7,  27,  28 

" 

26:22,  23 

1  Xing.s  2:1 

"       23:1 

15:32-35 

'* 

27:1-8 

2:1-4 

"       28:20,  21 
"       29:23-30 

15:38 

« 

27:9 

2:10-12 

16:1,  2 

28:1,  2 

2:46 

.  .2  Chron.    1:1 

16:3,  4,  6.... 
16:7 

« 

28:3-8 

3:4-15 

1:2-13 

28:16-19 

5 

2 

15:29 

" 

28:20 

6 

3:1-14; 

16:8-18 

" 

28:21-25 

4:9 

16:19,  20 

" 

28:26,  27 

7:15-21 

3:15-17 

18:1-3 

" 

29:1,  2 

7:23-26 

4:2-5 

18:13 

.  . Isa. 

36:1 

7:38-46 

4:6,10,17 

18:14-16 

..2  Chron. 

32:2-8 

7:47-50 

4:18-22 

20:1-11  ... 

f2  Chron. 
■  \Isa.  38 
..Isa.  39:1 

f2  Chron. 

32:24; 

7:51 

5:1 

20:12-19 

18:17-37 

8 

5:2;  7:10 

-8 

9:1-9 

7:11-22 

32:9-11) 

9:10-28 

8 

llsa. 

86:2 

-22 

10:1-13 

9:1-12 

19-1-5 

/2  Chron. 

32:20 

10:14-25 

9:13-24 

Isa. 

37:1 

-4 

10:26-29 

9:25-28; 

19:6,  7 

..Isa. 

37:6 

,  7 

1:14-17 

19:8-19.  .  . 

2  Chron. 

32:17 

11:41-43 

9:29-31 

Isa. 

37:8 

-20 

12:1-19 

"10 

19-20  37 

2  Chron. 

32:21 

12:21-24 

11:1-4 

Isa. 

37:21-38 

12:25 

"       11:5-12 

20:20,  21 

.  2  Chron. 

32:32,  33 

12:26-31 

"       11:13-17 

21:1-16 

33:1-9 

14:22-24 

"       12:1 

21:17,  18 

33:18-20 

14:25-28 

"       12:2-12 

21:19-26 

33:21-25 

14:21,  29-31 . 

"       12:13-16 

22:1,2 

34:1-7 

15:1 

"        13:1,2 
"       13:2-31 
"        13:22;  14:1 

22:3-20 

23:1-3 

23:21-23 

34:8-28 

15:6 

34:29-32 

15:7,  8 

35:1-19 

15:11,  12 

"        14:1-5 

23:24-26 

34:33 

15:13-15 

"        15:16-18 

23:28-30 

35:20-27 

15:16-22 

"        16:1-6 

23:30-33.    .    .. 

36:1-3 

15:23,24 

"       16:11-14 

23:34-37 

36:4,  5 

22:1-40,  44... 

"18 

24:8,  9 

36:9 

22:41-43 

"       17:1; 

20:31-33 

24:15-17 

36:10 

24:18,  19 

36:11,  12 

22:45 

20:34 
"       20:35-37 

24:20 

36:13-16 

22:47-49 

25:8-21 

36:18-21 

22:50 

"       21:1 

The  reader  should  look  up  these  parallel  passages.  Especially 
should  the  previous  annotations  in  Samuel  and  Kings  be  read  in  cou- 
nection  with  Chronicles. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       373 


The   Division  of  the  First    Book  of 
Chronicles 

The  First  Book  of  Chronicles  begins  with  genealogies 
which  start  with  Adam  and  lead  up  to  the  time  of  the  res- 
toration from  the  captivity  and  sometime  after.  The  tables 
do  not  mention  all  the  names;  many  are  omitted.  This 
makes  clear  at  once  the  object  of  these  long  lists  of  names. 
Only  those  are  recorded  who  were  related  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  purpose  of  God  and  who  were  the  divinely 
chosen  channels  through  whom  tlie  Lord  carried  out  His 
purpose.  Many  lessons  may  be  gathered  from  these  gene- 
alogies, so  often  considered  unprofitable.  Even  to  those 
opening  chapters  of  Chronicles,  applies  the  statement  in 
2  Timothy  iii:16,  "All  Scripture  is  given  by  inspiration  of 
God,  and  is  profitable  for  doctrine,  for  reproof,  for  correc- 
tion, for  instruction  in  righteousness."  The  main  part  of 
the  book  begins  with  the  miserable  end  of  Saul,  the  crown- 
ing of  David  at  Hebron  and  the  establishment  of  his  king- 
dom. Especially  is  that  made  prominent  which  is  passed 
over  in  the  book  of  Kings,  David's  relation  to  the  public 
worship  of  God  and  to  the  building  of  the  Temple,  which 
his  son  Solomon  built  after  him. 

We  divide  the  first  Book  of  Chronicles  into  four  parts : 

I.    THE   GENEALOGIES.     Chapters  i-ix. 

1.  From  Adam  to  the  Edomites.    Chapter  i. 

2.  The  Sons   of   Israel   and   the   Tribe   of   Judah. 

Chapters  ii-iv:23. 

3.  Simeon,   Reuben,   Gad   and   Manasseh.    Chap- 

ter iv:24-v. 

4.  Levi.     Chapter  vi. 

5.  Issachar,    Naphtali,    half     ManasMh,    Ephraim 

and  Ashei-.    Chaptir  vii. 


374        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

6.  Benjamin.     Chapter  viii. 

7.  The  Record  of  the  Inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  after 

the  Return.     Chapter  ix. 

II.     THE  OVERTHROW  AND  END  OF  SAUL.  Chapter  x. 

HI.     THE  CROWNING  OF  DAVID  AND  ESTABLISH- 
MENT OF  HIS  KINGDOM.  Chapters  xi-xxi. 

1.  David  in  Hebron.     Chapter  xi. 

2.  David's  Warriors  and  Friends.     Chapter  xii. 

3.  The   Ark   removed  from  Kirjath-jearim.    Chap- 

ter xiii. 

4.  David's  Increase  and  Blessing.    Chapter  xiv. 

5.  The  Ark  Brought  to  Jerusalem.   Chapters  xv-xvi:3. 

6.  The  Great  Celebration.     Chapter  xvi:4-43. 

7.  The  Covenant  and  the  Promise.     Chapter  xvii. 

8.  David's  Wars  and  Successful  Reign.  Chapter  xviii. 

9.  The  Wars  with  Ammon,   Syria   and   the  Philis- 

tines.    Chapters  xix-xx. 
10.  The  Numbering  of  the  People  and  the  Punish- 
ment.    Chapter  xxi. 

IV.     PREPARATIONS  FOR  THE  BUILDING  OF  THE 

TEMPLE.      DAVID'S     DEATH.  Chapters 
xxii-xxix. 

1.  The    Preparations    and    Charge     to  Solomon. 

Chapter  xxii. 

2.  The  Numbering  and  Arrangement  of  the  Levites. 

Chapter  xxiii. 

3.  The  Twenty-four  Courses  of  the  Priests.    Chap- 

ter xxiv. 

4.  The   Singers    and    Musicians   of    the    Temple. 

Chapter  xxv. 

5.  The  Porters  and  other  Temple  Officers.    Chap- 

ter XX  vi. 

6.  The  Captains,  Princes  and  Various  Officers  and 

Counsellors.     Chapter  xxvii. 

7.  The  Last  Acts  of  David  and  His  Death.    Chap- 

ters xxviii-xxix. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES        375 


Analysis  and  Annotations 
I.    The  Genealogies 

Chapter  i-ix 
1.  From  Adam  to  the  Edomites 

CHAPTER  I. 

1.  Adam  to  Noah.     1-4. 

2.  The  Sons  of  Japheth.     5-7. 

3.  The  Sons  of  Ham.     8-16. 

4.  The  Sons  of  Shem.     17-23. 

5.  From  Shem  to  Abraham.     24-28. 

6.  Ishmael  and  his  Sons.     29-31. 

7.  Abraham's  Sons  from  Keturah.     32-33. 

8.  The  Sons  of  Isaac.     34. 

9.  The  Sons  of  Esau.     35-42. 

10.     The  Kings  and  Dukes  of  Edom.     43-54. 

The  nine  chapters  of  genealogical  tables  is  the  largest 
collection  of  Hebrew  names  in  the  Bible.  These  names  are 
full  of  the  deepest  interest,  as  they  often  bear  in  their  mean- 
ing a  message.  We  have  pointed  out  this  fact  many  times 
in  the  annotations  of  the  preceding  books.  Here  is  un- 
questionably a  mine  of  great  wealth  for  the  diligent  searcher: 
many  lessons  connected  with  these  names  have  been  but 
little  understood.*  The  names  given  in  this  chapter  are 
all  found  in  the  book  of  Genesis  (Chapters  v,  x,  xi,  xxv  and 
xxxvi).  The  ten  generations  before  the  flood,  ending  with 
Noah  begin  the  list.  The  descendants  of  Cain  are  not 
mentioned.  Then  follow  the  names  of  the  offspring  of 
Noah's  sons,  Japheth,  Ham  and  Shem.  Fourteen  nations 
descended  from  Japheth;  thirty -one  from  Ham  and  twenty- 
six  from  Shem.  No  person  is  able  to  trace  all  these  races 
in  history,  but  He  who  has  recorded  their  names  knows  also 

*A  good  Concordance  or  dictionary  of  these  names  and  their  meaning 
is  needed  for  such  research. 


S76        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

their  history  and  their  wanderings.  And  so  He  knows  all 
His  creatures.  But  above  all  does  He  know  His  own  people 
by  name. 

Shem's  line  is  followed  to  Abraham,  the  father  of  the  na- 
tion. The  sons  of  Abraham  are  mentioned  first  as  Isaac 
and  Ishmael,  not  in  their  right  order.  Ishmael  preceding 
Isaac.  The  sons  of  Ishmael  are  therefore  given  first,  as 
well  as  the  sons  which  Abraham  had  from  Keturah.  Then 
follows  the  statement,  "And  Abraham  begat  Isaac.  The 
sons  of  Isaac:  Esau  and  Israel"  (verse  34).  Esau's  sons 
and  descendants  are  given  before  the  sons  of  Israel;  these 
we  find  in  the  second  chapter.  Then  follows  the  list  of  the 
kings  and  dukes  (or  chiefs)  of  Edom.  King  Jobab  (verse  44) 
is  considered  by  some  to  be  Job  and  that  he  ruled  in  Dinahab 
(Genesis  xxxv:32). 

2.    The  Sons  of  Israel  and  the  Descendants  of  Judah 

CHAPTERS  n-IV:23 

1.  The  Sons  of  Israel.     1-2. 

2.  The  Sons  of  Judah.     3-12. 

3.  The  Offspring  of  Jesse.     13-17. 

4.  The  Descendants  of  Caleb.     18-24. 

5.  The  Descendants  of  Jerahmeel.     25-41. 

6.  Other  Descendants  of  Caleb.     42-55. 

After  the  twelve  sons  of  Israel  (Jacob)  are  named,  Judah 
and  his  sons  are  mentioned.  The  entire  chapter  is  devoted 
to  the  descendants  of  Judah.  Judah  is  given  the  prominent 
place,  because  from  this  tribe  the  promised  Messiah  was 
to  come  (Gen.  xlix:8-12).  The  sons  of  Jesse  (verses  13-17) 
are  given,  seven  in  number.  In  1  Sam.  xvi:5-ll  and  xvii:12- 
14  eight  are  mentioned.  This  is  not  a  discrepancy.  One 
of  these  sons  probably  died  childless  and  his  name  would 
therefore  have  no  place  in  this  genealogy.  Prominent  in 
this  chapter  are  the  sons  of  Hezron,  Jerahmeel,  Ram  (the 
Aram  of  Matt.  i:3)  and  Chelubai.  The  latter  is  Caleb. 
Caleb  is  here  given  as  a  son  of  Hezron.  Is  this  the  same 
Caleb  who  was  one  of  the  spies,  the  son  of  Jephunnt^  (Num, 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      377 

xiii:6,  30,  xiv:0,  24,  etc.)?  Critics  claim  that  he  is  the  son 
of  Jephunneh  and  pointed  this  out  as  one  of  the  inaccuracies. 
However,  it  is  impossible  that  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezron, 
could  be  identical  with  Caleb,  the  son  of  Jephunneh.  Caleb 
the  son  of  Hezron  was  the  great-grandfather  of  Bezaleel 
(verses  19-20),  who  was  selected  with  Aholiab  to  do  the 
work  in  connection  with  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxi:l). 
He  must  therefore  have  been  the  ancestor  of  Caleb  the  son 
of  Jephunneh.  And  furthermore,  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephun- 
neh is  mentioned  in  Chapter  iv:15.  That  in  verse  49  a 
daughter  of  Caleb  (Achsah)  is  mentioned  is  not  sufficient 
proof  that  the  son  of  Jephunneh  is  meant. 

From  David  toZedekiah 

CHAPTER  m 

1.  The  Sons  of  David.     1-9. 

2.  David's  Line  to  Zedekiah.     10-15. 

3.  The  Sons  of  Jeconiah.     16-24. 

Six  sons  were  born  to  David  during  his  reign  in  Hebron. 
Four  are  mentioned  as  the  offspring  from  Bath-shua,  an- 
other name  for  Bath-sheba  (2  Sam.  xi:3).  Then  follow  the 
names  of  other  nine  sons.  As  the  name  Elishama  appears 
twice,  it  has  been  suggested  that  one  is  Elishua  (2  Sam. 
v:14).  Eglah  is  called  David's  wife.  Some  claim  that  it 
is  Michal,  who  became  childless  after  her  mockery  when 
David  danced  before  the  ark.  Then  the  line  of  Solomon  is 
traced  up  to  Zedekiah.  The  usurping  Queen  Athaliah 
(2  Kings  xi:3)  is  omitted,  for  she  was  not  of  the  house  of 
David.  Then  follows  the  list  of  the  sons  of  Jeconiah.  The 
name  "Assir"  which  follows  Jeconiah  in  verse  17  means 
"the  captive."  "Jeconiah,  the  captive",  is  the  proper  ren- 
dering. His  son  Salathiel  was  therefore  born  in  the  cap- 
tivity (Matt.  i:12).  Jeconiah  was  written  "childless," 
which  does  not  mean  that  he  was  to  have  no  sons,  but  that 
no  son  of  his  should  sit  upon  the  throne  of  David  (Jer. 
xxii:30).  The  son  of  Salathiel  was  Zerubbabel  (Matt.  i:12; 
Ezra  iii:  2,  v:  2;  Hag.  i:l,  12).  It  seems  that,  in  some  way,  the 


S78       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

different  names  as  they  appear  in  the  Hebrew  text  wer« 
dislocated.  The  following  arrangement  has  been  suggested 
to  remove  the  difl&culty. 

"And  the  sons  of  Jeconiah,  the  captive,  Salathiel,  his  son. 
And  the  sons  of  Salathiel;  Zerubbabel  and  Shimei;  and  the 
sons  of  Zerubbabel;  MeshuUam,  Hananiah  and  Shelomith 
their  sister.  And  Hashubah,  and  Ohel,  and  Berechiah,  and 
Hasadiah,  Jushab-hezed.  And  Malchiram,  and  Rephaiah, 
and  Shenazar,  Jecamiah,  Hoshama,  and  Nedabiah.  The 
sons  of  Hananiah;  Pelatiah  and  Jesiah;  the  sons  of  Rep- 
haiah; his  son  Arnan,  his  son  Obadiah,  his  son  Shecaniah." 


Additional  Genealogies  of  Judah 

.CHAPTER  IV:l-23 

1.  The  Sons  of  Judah.     1-8. 

2.  Jabez  more  Honorable.     9-10. 

3.  Further   Descendants    of   Judah.     11-20. 

4.  Descendants  of  Shelah.     21-23. 

Hur  and  Shobal,  mentioned  in  the  first  verse,  were  the 
sons  of  Caleb  the  son  of  Hezron.  The  families  of  the 
Zorathites  sprang  from  Reaiah,  the  son  of  Shobal.  Jabez 
is  especially  mentioned.  Jabez  means  "He  causes  pain." 
"And  Jabez  called  on  the  God  of  Israel,  saying.  Oh  that  thou 
wouldest  bless  me  indeed,  and  enlarge  my  coast,  and  that 
thine  hand  might  be  with  me,  and  that  thou  wouldest  keep 
me  from  evil,  that  it  may  not  grieve  me  !  And  God  granted 
him  that  which  he  requested."  The  occasion  when  this 
prayer- vow  was  uttered  is  not  given;  probably  it  was  made 
in  connection  with  the  expulsion  of  the  Canaanites  from  the 
land  and  the  acquisition  of  their  territory.  It  was  a  simple 
prayer  of  child-like  faith.  For  blessing,  for  increase, 
for  companionship  and  for  preservation  Jabez  cast  himself 
upon  the  God  of  Israel,  and  He  granted  him  his  request. 
Blessing  came  to  Jabez's  soul;  his  coast  was  enlarged;  the 
hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him  and  kept  him  from  evil. 
God  never  disappoints  faith. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       379 

Then  we  have  mentioned  in  this  chapter  the  craftsmen; 
Geharashim  (verse  14)  means  "valley  of  the  craftsmen;  the 
workers  in  fine  linen  (verse  21);  and  those  who  were  potters 
(verse  23). 


3.    Simeon,  Reuben,  Gad  and  Manasseh 

CHAPTER  IV:24-V 

1.  The  Sons  of  Simeon.     24-43. 

2.  The  Sons  of  Reuben.     Chapter  V:l-10. 

3.  The  Children  of  God  and  half  Manasseh.     V:ll-26. 

The  account  of  the  Simeonites  is  interesting.  Some  of 
their  families  had  increased  so  much  that  they  had  no  pas- 
ture for  their  flocks.  Some  went  then  to  Gedor  and  found 
fat  pasture  and  quietness.  Others  went  to  Mount  Seir,  and 
five  hundred  of  them  smote  the  Amalekites. 

Reuben  was  the  firstborn,  and  the  Chronicles  state  briefly 
why  Reuben  was  not  mentioned  first  in  these  genealogies. 
His  birthright  was  given  to  the  sons  of  Joseph.  Judah, 
however,  had  the  pre-eminence  "of  him  came  the  prince." 
This  refers  to  David  and  to  Him  who  came  from  him  after 
the  flesh,  Messiah  the  Prince.  The  Syriac  version  makes 
this  paraphrase,  "of  Judah  is  the  King,  the  Messiah."  In 
verse  6  Tiglath-pileser*  is  mentioned.  He  carried  away 
Beerah,  the  Prince  of  the  Reubenites. 

The  Hagarites,  mentioned  in  verse  10,  were  no  doubt  the 
descendants  of  Hagar  through  Ishmael.  They  were  nomads, 
who  wandered  over  the  desert  lands  of  the  trans-Jordan 
territory.  The  tribe  of  Gad  occupied  the  lands  north  of 
Reuben  and  eastward  from  the  Jordan  to  the  desert.  The 
genealogies  of  the  chiefs  mentioned  here  were  compiled 
during  the  reign  of  Jotham  of  Judah  and  Jeroboam  of  Israel 
(verse  17).  Another  warf  with  the  Hagarites  is  recorded 
in  verses  18-22.  Here  prayer  is  mentioned  again.  "They 
cried  to  God  in  the  battle,  and  He  was  entreated  of  them, 

*Not  Tiglath-pilneser;  it  is  an  erroneous  spelling. 

fSome  take  that  this  is  the  same  war  mentioned  in  verse  10 


S80        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

because  they  put  their  trust  in  Him."    The  Lord  delights 
to  record  those  who  trust  in  Him. 


4.    Levi 

CHAPTER  VI 

1.  The  High-prlestly  Line.     1-15. 

2.  Levitical  Genealogies.     16-30. 

3.  David's  chief  Musicians.     31-48. 

The  high -priestly  line  is  first  given,  starting  with  Levi, 
and  followed  down  to  the  exile.  From  Eleazar  the  son  of 
Aaron,  twenty -two  generations  are  named.  Moses  is  not 
mentioned  in  this  list.  With  Aaron  his  brother  he  is  called 
a  priest  (Psalm  xcix:6),  yet  he  was  chosen  as  the  great  leader 
of  the  people  before  the  consecration  of  the  levitical  priest- 
hood. This  is  the  reason  why  his  name  is  not  found  here. 
The  last  priest  named  before  the  captivity  is  Jehozadak, 
(also  called  Zozadak).  He  was  carried  into  captivity  and 
was  the  father  of  Joshua,  the  high-priest,  who  returned  from 
Babylon  (Ezra  iii:2,  v:2;  Neh.  xii:26;  Hag.  i:l,  12;  Zech. 
vi). 

After  the  genealogies  of  the  sons  of  Levi,  who  were  not 
priests,  the  list  of  the  names  of  David's  singers  and  musi- 
cians is  given.  "These  are  they  whom  David  set  over  the 
service  of  song  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  after  that  the  ark 
had  rest.  And  they  ministered  before  the  dwelling  place 
of  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation  with  singing,  until 
Solomon  had  built  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem,  and 
then  they  waited  on  their  office  according  to  their  order." 
Heman  sta^nds  first.  He  was  Samuel's  grandson.  Psalm 
Ixxxviii  is  by  Heman,  the  Ezralite.  Asaph,  the  son  of  Bera- 
chiah,  (verse  39)  was  the  poet-prophet.  Psalms  1  and  Ixxiii- 
Ixxxiii  bear  his  name.  The  sons  of  Asaph  are  later  men- 
tioned as  choristers  of  the  temple  (1  Chron.  xxv  :l-2;  2  Chron. 
xx:40;  Ezra  ii:41,  etc.).  Two  other  prominent  persons 
bore  the  name  of  Asaph;  Asaph,  the*  recorder  to  King  Heze- 
kiah,  (2  Kings  xviii:18;    Isaiah  xxxvi:3),  and  Asaph,  the 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       381 

forester  under  Artaxerxes  (Neh.  ii:8).  Ethan  or  Jeduthun 
ix:16,  xvi:41,  xxv:l;  2  Chron.  xxxv:15,  is  the  author  of 
Psalm  Ixxxix. 


5.    Issachar,  Naphtali,  half  Manasseh,  Ephraim  and  Asher 

CHAPTER  Vn 

1.  Issachar.     1-5. 

2.  Of  Benjamin.     6-12. 
S.     Naphtali.     13. 

4.  Half  Manasseh.     14-19. 

5.  Ephraim.     20-29. 

6.  Asher.     30-40. 

The  other  tribes  are  given  except  Dan  and  Zebulun,  which 
are  missing.  Issachar's  had  the  territory  between  the  high- 
lands and  the  Jordan  valley.  Their  warriors  numbered 
87,000,  taken  most  likely  from  David's  census.  Only  three 
sons  of  Benjamin  are  mentioned  in  verse  6;  five  are  given 
in  chapter  viii:l.  What  became  of  the  other  five  ?  In 
Genesis  xlvi;21  we  find  ten  names.  The  others  had  most 
likely  become  extinct  in  the  awful  slaughter  recorded  in 
Judges  (see  Chap.  xx).  All  these  tables  are  more  or  lesiS 
imperfect.  This  does  not  in  anyway  affect  the  question  of 
inspiration.  No  doubt  there  are  deeper  lessons  connected 
with  many  of  these  names  and  arrangement  of  them,  which 
we  do  not  know. 

"These  genealogies  were  imperfect.  The  condition  of 
Israel  bore  the  impress  of  the  ruin  which  had  befallen  them; 
but  also  that  of  the  goodness  of  God  who  had  brought  back 
a  remnant,  and  who  had  preserved  all  that  was  needful  to 
place  those  who  formed  it  in  the  record  of  His  people.  If 
the  needful  proof  to  give  them  a  title  to  this  were  wanting, 
such  as  were  of  the  people  ceased  to  enjoy  their  proper  privi- 
leges, and  the  priests  their  sacredotal  position,  until  a  priest 
stood  up  with  Urim  and  with  Thummim.  For  these  gene- 
alogies served  as  a  means  to  recognize  the  people.  Happy 
he  who  had  preserved  his  own,  and  who  had  so  appreciated 
the  heritage  of  Jehovah  as  to  attach  value  to  it !    It  was 


382        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

a  proof  of  faith;   for  it  might  have  been  said,  Of  what  use 
are  these  genealogies  in  Babylon  ?"* 

6.    Benjamin 

CHAPTER  Vm 

1.  The  Genealogies  of  Benjamin.     1-28. 

2.  The  House  of  Saul.     29-40. 

In  comparing  this  list  with  Gen.  xlvi:21  we  find  some  dif- 
ferences. The  names  of  Benjamites  include  many  who  were 
born  in  the  captivity  and  who  returned  to  the  land  and 
dwelt  in  Jerusalem.  Twice  we  read  "those  dwelt  in  Jeru- 
salem" (verses  28,  32).  Some  of  the  names  are  found  in  the 
list  of  restored  exiles  in  Ezra  (Chap.  ii).  Benjamin  being 
brought  back  from  the  exile,  their  loyalty  to  Judah  and  the 
temple  was  rewarded  by  God.  The  following  passages  will 
give  further  light  on  Benjamin's  connection  with  Judah 
and  sharing  the  blessing  of  the  return  from  Babylon  (Ezra 
i:5,  ii;  iv:l;  Neh.  vii;  xi:4,  7,  31;  xii:34). 

The  genealogy  of  Saul  stands  last  in  this  chapter.  The 
overthrow  of  Saul  in  Chapter  x  forms  the  beginning  of  the 
historical  records  in  Chronicles.  The  son  of  Jonathan  men- 
tioned in  verse  34  as  Merib-baal  is  Mephibosheth  (2  Sam. 
ii:8;  iv:4). 

7.    The  Record  of  the    Inhabitants   of    Jerusalem   after 
the  Return 

CHAPTER  IX 

1.  The  Restoration.     1-2. 

2.  Different  Residents  in  Jerusalem.     3-9. 

3.  The  Priests.     10-13. 

4.  The  Levites.     14-16. 

5.  Porters    and  Levites;    their    Duties.     17-34. 

6.  The  House  of  Saul.     35-44. 

All  Israel  was  reckoned  by  genealogies,  which  means  that 
from  the  beginning  of  the  nation,  public  records  were  kept. 
The  name  of  every  individual  and  the  family  and  tribe  to 

*Synopsis  of  the  Bible. 


THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       383 

which  they  belonged  were  carefully  registered.  This  com- 
plete registry  was  contained  in  the  book  of  the  Kings  of 
Israel  and  Judah,  which  does  not  mean  the  two  books  of 
Kings.  The  genealogies  contained  in  the  preceding  chap- 
ters were  condensed  from  the  larger  registry  in  the  archives 
of  Israel  and  Judah.  Such  genealogical  registers  were  like- 
wise kept  during  the  captivity.  The  names  registered  in 
the  rest  of  this  chapter  are  the  names  of  the  inhabitants  of 
Jerusalem  after  the  exile.  Almost  all  the  names  are  also 
found  in  Nehemiah  xi  with  some  marked  differences.  The 
genealogy  of  the  house  of  Saul  is  repeated  once  more  (see 
viii:29-38),  evidently,  as  the  connecting  link  with  the  next 
chapter. 

It  is  beyond  the  scope  of  our  work  to  follow  these  gene- 
alogical registries  at  greater  length,  or  to  attempt  the  solu- 
tion of  many  supposed  difficulties. 


384        TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 


II.    The  Overthrow  and  End  of  Saul 

CHAPTER  X. 

1.  The  Overthrow  and  Death  of  Saul.     1-7. 

2.  The  Burial  of  Saul  and  his  Sons.     8-12. 

3.  The  Cause  of  Saul's  Failure.     13-14. 

1  Samuel  xxi  contains  the  same  record  of  Saul's  miserable 
end  and  trial.  The  writer  of  Chronicles  uses  the  departure 
of  Saul  to  introduce  the  history  of  the  King  after  God's 
own  heart,  why  God  had  dealt  with  Saul  in  judgment,  and 
that  the  Kingdom  was  turned  unto  David,  the  Son  of  Jesse. 
The  fatal  battle  between  the  Philistines  and  Israel  took 
place  in  Mount  Gilboa.  Gilboa  is  south-east  of  the  plain  of 
Esdrachon  which  runs  from  Carmel  to  the  Jordan  valley. 
The  cause  of  this  war  is  unknown.  Saul  suffered  a  great 
defeat  and  many  were  the  slain  of  Israel  which  fell  in  Gilboa. 
Among  them  were  Saul's  three  sons,  Jonathan,  Abinadab 
(also  called  Ishui  (1  Sam.  xiv:49)  and  Melchi-shua.  Then 
Saul  himself  was  hit  by  an  archer  and  wounded.  Fearing 
abuse  and  insults  from  the  Philistines,  he  requested  his 
armor  bearer  to  draw  his  sword  and  to  kill  him,  but  he  was 
afraid,  because  Saul  was  the  Lord's  anointed.  Then  the 
unhappy  King  took  his  own  sword  and  fell  upon  it.  The 
armor  bearer  also  committed  suicide.  The  reader  will 
find  in  annotations  on  2  Sam.  chapter  i  the  story  of  the 
Amalekite  explained. 

The  victory  of  the  Philistines  was  complete.  The  people 
forsook  their  cities  and  these  were  occupied  by  the  Philis- 
tines. When  the  plunderers  came  searching  for  the  slain, 
in  order  to  strip  them  of  their  belongings,  the  bodies  of  Saul 
and  his  sons  were  found.  Then  the  body  of  Saul  was 
stripped  and  beheaded  and  the  armor  was  brought  in  the 
house  of  their  gods*  and  the  gory  head  fastened  as  a  trophy 
in  the  house  of  Dagon.     1  Sam.  xxxi:10  tells  us  that  the 

*Ashtaroth,  the  Phoenician  Venus  (1  Sam.  xxxi:10). 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       385 

body  was  fastened  to  the  wall  of  Beth-shan,  but  here  we 
read  that  only  the  head  was  fastened  in  the  house  of  Dagon. 
Beth-shan  was  a  mountain  fortress,  and  here  the  bodies  of 
Saul  and  his  unfortunate  sons  were  fastened. 

"And  now  night  with  her  dark  mantle  once  more  covered 
these  horrible  trophies.  Shall  the  eagles  and  vultures  com- 
plete the  work  which,  no  doubt,  they  had  already  begun? 
The  tidings  had  been  carried  across  the  Jordan,  and  wakened 
echoes  in  one  of  Israel's  cities.  It  was  to  Jabesh-gilead 
that  Saul,  when  only  named  but  not  yet  acknowledged  king, 
had  by  a  forced  night-march  brought  help,  delivering  it  from 
utter  destruction  (1  Sam.  xi).  That  had  been  the  morning 
of  Saul's  life,  bright  and  promising  as  none  other;  his  first 
glorious  victory,  which  had  made  him  king  by  acclamation, 
and  drawn  Israel's  thousands  to  that  gathering  in  Gilgal, 
when,  amidst  the  jubilee  of  an  exultant  people,  the  new 
kingdom  was  inaugurated.  And  now  it  was  night;  and  the 
headless  bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons,  deserted  by  all,  swung 
in  the  wind  on  the  walls  of  Beth-shan,  amid  the  hoarse  music 
of  vultures  and  jackals. 

"But  it  must  not  be  so;  it  cannot  be  so.  There  was  still 
truth,  gratitude,  and  courage  in  Israel.  And  the  brave  men  of 
Jabesh-gilead  marched  all  the  weary  night;  they  crossed 
Jordan;  they  climbed  that  steep  brow,  and  silently  detached 
the  dead  bodies  from  the  walls.  Reverently  they  bore  them 
across  the  river,  and  ere  the  morning  light  were  far  out  of 
reach  of  the  Philistines.  Though  it  had  always  been  the 
custom  in  Israel  to  bury  the  dead,  they  would  not  do  so  to 
these  mangled  remains,  that  they  might  not,  as  it  were, 
perpetuate  their  disgrace.  They  burned  them  just  sufl&- 
ciently  to  destroy  all  traces  of  insult,  and  the  bones  they 
reverently  laid  under  their  great  tamarisk  tree,  themselves 
fasting  for  seven  days  in  token  of  public  mourning.  All 
honor  to  the  brave  men  of  Jabesh-gilead,  whose  deed  Holy 
Scripture  has  preserved  to  all  generations!"* 

Sad  and  solemn  is  the  final  record  of  King  Saul  in  these 
historical    books.     "So    Saul    died    for    his    transgression 

*Bible  History. 


386        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

which  he  committed  against  the  Lord,  even  against  the 
Word  of  the  Lord,  which  he  kept  not,  and  also  for  asking 
counsel  of  one  that  had  a  familiar  spirit,  to  inquire  of  it" 
(1  Sam.  xxviii:6-7).  He  had  disobeyed  God,  rejected  His 
Word  and  then  turned  to  the  agency  of  Satan,  to  a  demon 
instrument  for  help  and  advice.  This  is  the  road  of  apostasy. 
The  road  of  the  apostasy  in  Christendom  so  prominent  in  the 
closing  days  of  our  age  is  the  same.  It  is  departure  from 
the  faith  and  giving  heed  to  seducing  spirits  and  doctrines 
of  demons  (1  Tim.  iv:l).  It  is  a  turning  away  from  the 
truth,  the  Word  of  God,  and  turning  to  fables  (2  Tim.iv:4). 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  QF  CHRONIC  LEU 


III.     The   Crowning   of    David    and   the 
Establishment  of  His  Kingdom 

Chapters  xi-xxi 
1.  David  at  Hebron. 

CHAPTER  XI 

1.  David  Crowned  King.     1-3. 

2.  Jerusalem  becomes  David's  Capital.     4-9, 

3.  The  Record  of  David's  Mighty  Men.     10-47. 

From  the  Second  book  of  Samuel  we  learned  that  the 
crowning  of  David  in  Hebron  occurred  after  the  death  of 
Ishbosheth  (2  Sam.  v).  The  previous  reign  of  David  for 
seven  and  a  half  years  and  his  failures  are  here  omitted. 
We  shall  find  that  Chronicles  does  not  record  all  the  failures 
and  sins  of  David  and  Solomon.  The  blessing  and  the 
grace  of  God  toward  the  house  of  David  are  made  prominent 
throughout.  Acknowledged  by  all  Israel  as  belonging  to 
them,  a  great  leader,  Jehovah's  choice  to  feed  His  people 
Israel  and  to  be  their  prince,  all  the  elders  came  to  Hebron 
before  the  Lord  and  anointed  David  King. 

The  conquest  of  Jerusalem  (Jebus)  followed.  It  was  still 
in  the  hands  of  the  Jebusites,  but  David  took  the  stronghold 
of  Zion.  Joab  distinguished  himself  and  became  chief. 
This  is  unmentioned  in  2  Sam.  v.  He  built  the  city  from 
Millo.  Millo  means  "filling  up"  so  that  it  may  have  been 
a  big  embankment  which  connected  the  city  of  David  with 
the  Temple  mount.     See  1  Kings  ix:15  and  2  Chron.  xxxii:5. 

The  record  of  David's  mighty  men  are  mentioned  here  in 
the  beginning  of  his  reign.  In  Second  Samuel  we  read  of 
them  at  the  end  (2  Sam.  xxiii:8-39),  preceding  Solomon's 
reign.  WTien  the  true  King  begins  His  reign,  typified  by 
both  David  and  Solomon,  those  who  were  loyal  to  the  Lord 
and  faithful  to  Him  will  be  remembered.  The  first  name 
mentioned  is  Jashobeam,  a  Hachmonite.  In  Samuel  his 
name  is  given  as  Josheb-basshebeth,  the  Tachmonite.   They 


388        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

were  probably  alternative  names  for  the  same  person. 
Jashobeam  means  "the  people  shall  return"  and  his  other 
name  in  Samuel  means  "one  who  sits  in  a  seat."  Hachmonite 
means  translated  "the  wise."  According  to  Samuel  he 
slew  800  and  here  in  Chronicles  he  slew  300  at  one  time. 
Probably  these  are  both  correct;  he  slew  800  at  one  occassion 
and  300  at  another.  The  second  name  is  Eleazar  ("help  of 
God")  the  son  of  Dodo  ("his  Beloved").  His  deed  is  more 
fully  given  in  2  Sam.  xxiii  :9.  Shammah,  the  third  one  of 
the  three  mighties  is  omitted  here  (2  Sam.  xxiii  :11)  . 

Bethlehem  shows  the  deepest  devotion  to  David  from  the 
three  who  broke  through  the  line  in  response  to  David's 
wish.  It  was  not  a  command  but  only  a  desire  expressed, 
yet  they  were  ready  to  give  their  lives,  for  they  were  am- 
bitious to  please  David.  May  we  think  here  of  Him  who  is 
greater  than  David.  He,  who  sat  on  Sychar's  well  said  to 
the  woman  "give  me  to  drink."  He  longs  for  the  refresh- 
ment from  His  own  and  we  must  be  ambitious  to  please  Him. 
It  means  to  break  through  the  hostile  ranks  of  our  enemies, 
as  the  three  men  did. 

Abishai  ("father  of  gift")  the  younger  brother  of  Joab 
and  nephew  of  David  slew  300  men.  Benaiah's  deeds 
include  the  slaying  of  an  Egyptian  giant  almost  eight  feet 
tall.  In  the  list  of  the  mighty  men  Uriah,  the  Hittite 
(verse  41)  is  included.  He  was  a  brave  and  devoted  warrior 
which  makes  David's  deed  so  much  more  abhorrent  (2  Sam. 
xi). 

2.    David's  Warriors  and  Friends 
CHAPTER  xn 

1.  The  Benjamite  Warriors  with  David  at  Ziklag.     1-7. 

2.  The  Other  Warriors.     8-22. 

3.  Those  who  Came  to  make  him  King.     23-40. 

And  now  those  are  given  by  name  who  stood  by  David, 
when  he  was  an  outcast,  rejected  and  persecuted  by  Saul. 
They  were  mighty  men,  his  helpers  in  war.  The  leading 
company  were  of  Benjamin,  the  tribe  to  which  Saul  be- 
longed.   These  joined  him    when  he    was  at  Ziklag.     In 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       389 

the  wilderness  of  Judah  certain  of  the  Gadites  separated 
themselves  unto  him,  "whose  faces  were  like  the  faces  of 
lions  and  they  were  as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains." 
May  we  remember  again  that  all  this  is  written  for  our 
learning.  Our  Lord  is  rejected  and  we  can  stand  by  Him, 
as  these  mighty  men  stood  by  David.  Men  with  faces  like 
lions,  bold  and  courageous,  are  needed,  as  well  as  those  as 
swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains,  in  doing  His  bidding  in 
true  service.  They  braved  the  floods  of  Jordan  and  swept 
all  hindrances  out  of  the  way  to  reach  David,  and  when 
David  spoke  to  them  to  ascertain  why  they  had  come,  the 
Spirit  of  God  sent  through  Amasai  a  message  which  must 
have  greatly  cheered  his  heart.  "Thine  are  we,  David,  and 
on  thy  side,  thou  son  of  Jesse."  May  we  say  to  Him  whose 
we  are  and  whom  we  serve,  "Thine  we  are,  O  Lord,  and  on 
thy  side,  thou  Son  of  God."  Other  valiant  men  of  Manasseh 
also  joined  him  and  helped  him  greatly. 

Then  a  wonderful  gathering  took  place.  From  every- 
where they  gathered  to  make  David  King.  Even  from 
the  most  northern  parts  of  the  land,  from  Issachar,  Zebu- 
lun  and  Naphtali  they  came  for  one  of  the  greatest  events 
which  happened  in  Israel's  history.  If  we  tabulate  the 
figures  given  in  verses  23-37  we  have  the  following  results: 

Of  Judah 6,800  men 

"  Simeon 7,100   " 

"  Levi 4,600   " 

With    Jehoiada,    the    "prince"    (not 

high-priest  of  Aaron) 3,700   " 

Zadok  and  his  father's  house ...       22  chiefs. 

Of  Benjamin 3,000   " 

"  Ephraim 20,800   " 

"  half  Manasseh 18,000   " 

"  Issachar .  .  .     200  leaders. 

"  Zebulon 50,000    " 

"  Naphtali 37,000    "      ...  1,000  chiefs. 

"  Dan 28,600   " 

"  Asher 40,000   " 

"  the  2}^  tribes  east  of  Jordan 120,000   " 

iZ^i-Kr  

^    Total 339,600  men . .  .  1,222  chUfi,  etc. 


m 


390        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES    . 

This  immense  company  of  people  came  and  they  had  all 
one  desire  and  one  thought,  "to  make  David  king."  They 
were  not  of  a  double  heart.  There  was  no  dissenting  voice; 
they  were  of  one  heart,  they  came  with  a  perfect  heart  to 
make  David  king. 

A  great  feast  was  kept.  They  brought  bread  on  asses 
and  on  camels  and  on  mules  and  on  oxen,  and  meat,  meal, 
cakes  of  figs,  and  bunches  of  raisins,  and  wine  and  oil 
and  oxen  and  sheep  abundantly.  There  was  joy  in  Israel. 
But  how  much  greater  will  be  the  joy,  and  what  a  feast  will 
be  made,  when  He  is  made  King,  not  alone  over  Israel,  but 
when  He  will  be  enthroned  as  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of 
lords  ! 

3.    The  Ark  Removed  from  Eirjath-jearim 
CHAPTER  xm 

1.  The  Consultation  about  the  Ark.  1—5. 

2.  The  Attempt  and  the  Failure.     6-14. 

The  first  thing  after  the  coronation,  which  concerned 
Davidi  was  the  Ark.  This  reveals  the  fact  that  the  king  had 
the  things  of  the  Lord  upon  his  heart.  He  at  once  con- 
sulted with  the  captains  about  bringing  the  ark  from  Kirjath- 
jearim.  The  ark  is  mentioned  forty-six  times  in  the  two 
Books  of  Chronicles*  In  Chronicles  David's  gracious  words 
are  recorded,  which  he  addressed  to  the  assembly  of  Israel, 
"If  it  seem  good  unto  you  and  that  it  be  of  the  Lord  our  God 
.  .  .  let  us  bring  again  the  ark  of  our  Lord  to  us;  for  we 
inquired  not  at  it  in  the  days  of  Saul."  The  whole  scene 
manifests  a  true  religious  enthusiasm  and  deep  concern  to 
follow  the  ways  of  Jehovah.  David  and  all  Israel  went  up 
to  Kirjath-jearim  and  carried  the  ark  upon  a  new  cart. 
David  and  all  Israel  played  before  God  with  all  their  might, 
even  with  songs  and  with  harps  and  with  psalteries,  with 

*The  titles  are  the  following:  Ark,  15  times;  the  Ark  of  God,  12 
times;  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  the  Lord,  11  times;  the  Ark  of  the 
Lord,  4  times;  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant  of  God,  of  Thy  Strength,  of  our 
God  and  thy  holy  Ark,  Mich  ono«. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       S91 

cymbals  and  trumpets.  But  in  all  this  great  and  human  re- 
joicing, David  did  not  conform  to  Jehovah's  ways.  Accord- 
ing to  God's  laws  covering  the  handling  of  the  ark,  only  the 
Levites  were  to  touch  it.  They  were  to  carry  it  on  their 
shoulders  and  not  to  place  it  in  a  cart  (Num.  iv:5,  15).  All 
this  had  been  violated.  The  divine  displeasure  was  fully 
manifested  when  Uzza  put  forth  his  hands  to  hold  the  ark, 
because  the  oxen  had  stumbled.  Uzza  was  stricken  with 
sudden  death.  He  forgot  that  the  ark  was  the  emblem  of 
Jehovah's  presence  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  See  anno- 
tations on  2  Sam.  vi. 


4.    David's  Increase  and  Blessing 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  Hiram.     1-2. 

2.  David's  Family.     3-7. 

3.  The  Philistines  Defeated.     8-17. 

The  reader  is  referred  to  2  Sam.  v:ll-16  for  the  comment 
on  verses  1-7.  Beeliada  is  called  in  2  Sam.  v:16  Eliada. 
Beeliada  was  probably  changed  to  Eliada.  David's  great 
victory  over  the  Philistines  is  also  recorded  in  2  Sam.  v:17- 
25.  He  inquired  of  God  and  being  permitted  to  go,  he 
smote  them  at  Baal-perazim,  where  also  the  idol  images 
were  burned  with  fire.*  It  was  a  great  victory.  Baal- 
perazim  means  "possessor  of  breaches."  In  the  Prophet 
Isaiah  the  victory  over  the  Philistines  is  used  as  a  prophecy 
of  the  coming  future  judgment  of  the  earth.  "For  the  Lord 
shall  rise  up  as  in  mount  Perazim,  He  shall  be  wroth  as  in 
the  valley  of  Gibeon,  that  He  may  do  His  work,  His  strange 
work,  and  bring  to  pass  His  act.  His  strange  act"  (Isa. 
xxviii:21).  A  second  time  the  Philistines  came,  and  David, 
obedient  to  the  divine  instructions,  gained  another  great 
victory.  His  fame  went  into  all  lands  and  the  fear  of  him 
was  brought  by  the  Lord  upon  all  nations. 

*Iii  obedience  to  Deut.  vii:5,  25. 


392        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 
5.    The  Ark  Brought  to  Jerusalem 

CHAPTER   XV-XVI:3 

1.  The  True  Preparation  to  Fetch  the  Ark.     1-15. 

2.  The  Great  Procession.     16-24. 

3.  The  Ark  Brought  Back.     25-XVI:3. 

The  ark  rested  in  the  house  of  Obed-edom  for  three 
months.  During  that  time  David  prepared  a  place  for  the 
ark  of  God  and  pitclied  a  tent.  Warned  by  v/hat  had  hap- 
pened, his  conscience  aroused,  David  said,  "None  ought  to 
carry  the  ark  of  God  but  the  Levites,  for  them  hath  the 
Lord  chosen  to  carry  the  ark  of  God,  and  to  minister  unto 
Him  forever."*  All  Israel  and  especially  the  Levites  were 
gathered  together.  All  is  now  done  according  to  the  di- 
vine directions.  The  former  failure  was  o"Rned  and  the 
priests  and  Levites  sanctified  themselves  to  bring  up  the 
ark.  They  carried  the  ark  of  God  upon  their  shoulders 
with  the  staves  as  God  had  commanded. 

A  great  procession  was  also  requested  by  David  and 
arranged  by  the  Levites,  David  loved  singing  and  music 
as  the  expression  of  praise  unto  the  Lord.  The  instruments 
mentioned  are  the  psaltery,  which  was  like  a  long  box  with 
a  convex  sounding  board,  over  which  wire  strings  were 
stretched;  the  harp  and  the  cymbal.  The  latter  was  a 
brass  instrument  with  a  ball  attached.  The  great  proces- 
sion was  headed  by  a  choir  of  singers  and  musicians  under 
the  leadership  of  Heman,  Asaph  and  Ethan,  In  the  middle 
of  the  procession  was  the  ark,  preceded  by  Chenaniah 
("established  by  the  Lord"),  the  chief  of  the  Levites.     Then 

*"It  is  to  be  observed,  that,  although  the  death  of  Uzza  had  its 
origin  in  the  guilty  forgetfulness  of  David,  it  nevertheless  gave  occa- 
sion through  grace  to  his  being  set  in  his  true  position  for  the  regulation 
and  appointment  of  all  that  concerned  the  Levites'  service.  It  is 
always  thus  with  regard  to  faith,  for  the  purposes  of  God  are  fulfilled 
in  favor  of  it.  Man  in  his  zeal  may  depart  from  the  will  of  God,  and 
God  will  chasten  him,  but  only  to  bring  him  into  more  honor,  by 
setting  him  more  completely  in  the  position  which  God  has  purposed, 
and  in  the  understanding  of  His  ways,  according  to  which  He  will 
magnify  His  servant." — Synopsis. 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       393 

there  were  the  two  door-keepers  of  the  ark,  Berechiah 
("blessed  of  the  Lord")  and  Elkanah  ("God  has  purchased") 
and  seven  priests,  who  sounded  the  trumpets  before  the 
ark,  and  two  more  door-keepers.  "Alamoth"  in  verse  20 
must  have  been  a  choir  of  virgins  (Alamoth  means  virgins). 
Such  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  in  the  inscription  of  Psalm 
xlvi.  In  Psalm  Ixviii*,  where  a  great  procession  is  men- 
tioned in  connection  with  the  removing  of  the  ark  (no 
doubt  commemorating  the  return  of  the  ark  to  Jerusalem) 
we  read  of  women  publishing  the  tidings  (verse  11  marginal 
reading)  and  there  we  hear  also  of  the  damsels  in  the  pro- 
cession. "The  singers  went  before;  the  players  of  the  in- 
struments followed  after,  among  them  were  the  damsels 
playing  with  timbrels"  (verse  25).  But  the  Sixty-eighth 
Psalm  describes  prophetically  another  great  procession  and 
celebration,  when  He  comes  in  great  power  and  glory. 
"Sing  unto  God,  ye  kingdoms  of  the  earth;  O  sing  praises 
unto  the  Lord — to  Him  that  rideth  upon  the  heaven  of 
heavens"  (Psalm  kviii:32-33). 

And  so  the  ark  was  brought  to  Jerusalem  and  set  in  the 
midst  of  the  tent.  It  was  a  time  of  great  rejoicing  and 
feasting.  But  what  will  it  be  when  not  an  ark,  the  symbol 
only  of  the  divine  presence,  is  in  the  midst  of  the  people, 
but  when  the  once  rejected  King  appears  in  the  midst  and 
receives  the  homage  and  praise  of  Israel  If 

6.    The  Great  Thanksgiving  Psalm 

CHAPTER   XVI:4-43 

1.  David's  Appointment.     4-6. 

2.  The  Psalm  of  Praise  and  Thanksgiving.     7-36. 

3.  The  Levites  and  the  Public  Worship.     37-43. 

A  great  thanksgiving  Psalm  was  then  delivered  by  David 
into  the  hand  of  Asaph  and  his  brethren.     The  view  of  mod- 

*Read  also  Psalm  cxxxii  and  notice  its  connection  with  the 
event   of   this   chapter. 

tComment  on  Michal  and  her  mockery  is  made  in  the  parallel 
passage  in  2  Samuel.  We  omit  in  annotation  in  Chronicles  all  which 
has  been  prpvinu^ly  nientioned  in  Samuel  and  Kings, 


S94        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

ern  critics,  that  this  Psalm  is  post-exilic,  does  not  call  for  any 
refutation,  for  the  text  declares  that  David  himself  delivered 
the  hymn  to  Asaph.  The  Psalm  is  made  up  of  portions  of 
different  Psalms.  See  Psalm  cv:l-15;  xcvi:l-13;  cvi:  47—48; 
cviirl;  cxxxvi.  A  careful  study  will  show  the  far  reaching 
meaning  of  this  composite  Psalm.  It  is  a  great  Prophecy. 
It  begins  with  the  celebration  and  praise  of  what  Jehovah 
has  done.  Israel  is  called  to  remember  His  covenant.  It 
is  not  the  covenant  at  Sinai,  vnth  its  conditional  promises, 
but  the  unconditional,  the  grace-covenant,  made  with  Abra- 
ham, an  everlasting  covenant  that  his  seed  is  to  have  the 
land.  But  prophetically  the  Psalm  points  to  the  time 
when  "His  judgments  are  in  all  the  earth";  it  is  at  that 
time  when  the  covenant  made  with  Abraham  will  be  re- 
membered. Such  a  time  will  come  according  to  the  pro- 
phetic Word.  Verse  22,  "Touch  not  mine  anointed,  and 
do  my  prophets  no  harm,"  speaks  of  Israel's  preservation; 
for  Israel  is  his  anointed,  a  kingdom  of  kings  and  priests. 
The  day  must  come  when  the  covenant  made  with  Abra- 
ham will  be  realized  and  when  Israel  shall  possess  the  land, 
after  their  wanderings  from  nation  to  nation  (verL'e  20). 
Then  there  will  be  a  throne  in  Zion  and  a  King  shall  reign 
in  righteousness,  even  Christ  (Psalm  ii). 

Then  Psalm  xcvi  is  quoted.  It  is  a  Psalm  which  looks 
forward  to  the  kingdom  on  earth,  when  the  nations  acknowl- 
edge Jehovah  and  bow  in  His  presence.  The  blessed  age 
of  glory,  of  which  the  Prophets  have  so  much  to  say,  the 
unreached  goal  of  the  glorious  future  of  the  earth,  the  mil- 
lennium, is  pictured  in  this  Psalm. 

"Fear  before  Him,  all  the  earth 

"The  World  is  established,  it  cannot  be  moved, 

"Let  the  heavens  be  glad, 

"And  let  the  earth  rejoice. 

"And  let  them  say  among  the  nations, 

"The  Lord  reigneth." 

"Let  the  sea  roar,  and  the  fulness  thereof, 

"Let  the  fields  rejoice  and  all  there  is  therein; 

"Then  shall  the  trees  of  the  wood  sing  out, 

"At  the  Presence  of  the  Lord, 

"Because  He  cometh  to  judge  the  earth." 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       $95 

The  Praise  of  Israel  concludes  the  Thanksgiving  Psalm. 
We  repeat,  it  is  prophetic.  It  looks  onward  to  the  time 
when  the  Lord  will  deliver  His  people,  when  the  promises 
made  to  the  fathers  will  all  be  fulfilled,  when  the  nations 
of  the  earth  will  know  the  Lord  and  when  He  will  reign 
over  all.  Such  is  Israel's  future.  When  He  has  been  merci- 
ful to  His  land  and  to  His  people,  the  nations  will  rejoice 
(Deut.  xxxi:43). 

At  the  close  of  this  chapter  we  notice  how  King  David 
regulates  everything  that  was  to  be  done  before  the  ark. 

"The  placing  of  the  Ark  in  the  capital  of  Israel,  thus  mak- 
ing it  'the  city  of  God,'  was  an  event  not  only  of  deep  na- 
tional, but  of  such  typical  importance,  that  it  is  frequently 
referred  to  in  the  sacred  songs  of  the  sanctuary.  No  one 
will  have  any  difficulty  in  recognizing  Psalm  xxiv  as  the 
hymn  composed  for  this  occasion.  But  other  Psalms  also 
refer  to  it,  amongst  which,  without  entering  on  details  that 
may  be  profitably  studied  by  each  reader,  we  may  mention 
Psalm  XV,  Ixviii,  Ixxviii,  and  especially  Psalm  ci,  as  indicat- 
ing, so  to  speak,  the  moral  bearing  of  the  nearness  of  God's 
ark  upon  the  king  and  his  kingdom."* 

7.    The  Covenant  and  the  Promise 
CHAPTER  XVn 

1.  David's  Plan  to  build  a  House.     1-6. 

2.  The  Covenant  and  the  Promise.     7-15. 

3.  David's  Praise  and  Prayer.     16-27. 

After  the  Ark  had  found  its  resting  place  in  a  tent  the 
king  became  deeply  concerned  about  the  building  of  a 
house.  He  contrasted  his  own  house  of  cedars  with  the 
humble  dwelling  place  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant.     The 

*Faith,  apprehending  the  counsels  and  the  work  of  God,  could  see 
in  the  establishment  of  the  ark  in  Zion,  the  progress  of  God's  power  and 
intervention  towards  the  peaceful  and  glorious  reign  of  the  Son  of 
David.  The  sure  mercies  of  David  were  as  bright  to  the  eye  of  faith 
as  the  dawn  of  day,  in  that  the  ark  of  the  covenant  had  been  set  up  by 
David  the  king  in  the  mountain  which  God  had  chosen  for  His  ever- 
\asting  rest. — Synopsis. 


396        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

desire  to  build  a  house  for  the  Lord  was  expressed  to  Nathan, 
who  told  David,  without  having  consulted  the  Lord,  "Do 
all  that  is  in  thine  heart,  for  God  is  with  thee."  That  night 
the  message  came  to  Nathan,  "Go  and  tell  David  my  serv- 
ant. Thus  saith  the  Lord,  Thou  shalt  not  build  me  a  house 
to  dwell  in,  for  I  have  not  dwelt  in  a  house  since  the  day 
that  I  brought  up  Israel  unto  this  day,  but  have  gone  from 
tent  to  tent,  and  from  one  tabernacle  unto  another.  Where- 
soever I  have  walked  with  all  Israel,  spake  I  a  word  to  any 
of  the  judges  of  Israel,  whom  I  commanded  to  feed  my 
people,  saying.  Why  have  ye  not  built  me  a  house  of 
cedars  ?"  What  condescension  and  what  identification  with 
His  people  these  words  reveal  !* 

As  we  have  already  considered  the  great  Davidic  cove- 
nant and  its  meaning  (2  Sam.  vii)  as  well  as  David's  wor- 
ship and  prayer,  we  refer  the  reader  to  the  annotations  of 
that  chapter.  Solomon,  David's  son,  is  first  in  view,  but 
he  is  only  a  type  of  Christ,  David's  greater  Son  and  David's 
Lord  as  well.  In  Christ  alone,  this  great  covenant-promise 
is  to  be  fulfilled.  It  is  still  all  future,  for  the  Son  of  David, 
rejected  of  His  own,  does  not  sit  and  rule  upon  the  throne 
of  His  father  David.  He  has  gone  to  heaven,  occupying 
the  throne  of  God,  sitting  at  His  right  hand  up  to  the  time 
when  His  enemies  will  be  made  His  footstool.  Then,  when 
He  appears  the  second  time,  the  angelic  announcement  will 
come  true,  "and  the  Lord  God  shall  give  unto  Him  the  throne 
of  His  father  David." 

And  what  words  David  spoke  to  Him,  whose  grace  had 

*When  Israel  was  a  slave,  God  became  his  Redeemer;  when  he 
dwelt  in  tents,  God  abode  in  one  also;  when  in  conflict,  God  presented 
Himself  as  captain  of  Jehovah's  host;  when  settled  in  peace,  God  estab- 
lishes Himself  in  the  house  of  His  glory.  The  interval  was  the  proba- 
tion of  His  people  on  earth.  God  abode  in  the  tent,  and  even  His  ark  is 
taken.     He  interposes  in  grace  for  deliverance. 

Christ  also,  since  we  were  born  of  woman,  is  born  of  a  woman;  since 
His  people  were  under  the  law.  He  is  born  under  the  law;  now  that  He 
will  have  a  heavenly  people.  He  is  on  high  for  us;  when  He  comes  in 
glory,  we  shall  come  with  Him,  and  reign  when  He  reigns,  but  in  these 
last  we  are  with  Him. — Synopsis. 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       397 

made    such    promises !    Humility,    faith    and    confidence 
answered  grace. 


8.    David's  Wars  and  Successful  Reign 


CHAPTER  XVm 

1. 

War  with  the  Philistines.     1. 

2. 

War  with  Moab.     2. 

S. 

War  with  Zobah.     3-4. 

4. 

War  with  Damascus.     5-11. 

5. 

Wars  with  Edom.     12-13. 

6. 

David's  Administration.     14-17. 

After  such  glorious  experiences  David  went  forth  as  the 
victorious  warrior-king  to  conquer  the  enemies  of  Israel. 
He  first  smote  the  Philistines,  subdued  them  and  took  Gath 
and  her  towns.  Gath,  the  chief  city  of  the  Philistines,  is 
called  in  2  Sam.  viiirl  "Metheg-ammah,"  which  means 
"the  bridle  of  the  mother  city."  Then  he  smote  Moab  and 
they  became  his  servants  and  brought  presents.  Great  are 
the  conquests  and  victories  of  David  recorded  in  this  chap- 
ter. From  Hadarezer,  King  of  Zobah,  he  took  1,000  chariots, 
7,000  horsemen  and  20,000  footmen.*  Then  the  Syrians 
came  to  help  the  King  of  Zobah  and  lost  22,000  men.  Then 
the  Syrians  also  became  his  servants  and  brought  presents. 
"And  the  Lord  gave  victory  to  David  whithersoever  he 
went."  In  all  this  we  see  foreshadowed  the  triumphs  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  He  comes  as  the  victorious 
King  and  His  enemies  shall  all  be  subdued. 

All  the  spoil  taken,  the  shields  of  gold,  were  brought  to 
Jerusalem.  From  Tibhath  and  from  Chun,  cities  which  be- 
longed to  Hadarezer,  David  took  very  much  brass.  The 
brazen  sea,  the  pillars  and  the  vessels  of  brass  for  the  temple 
were  made  by  Solomon  out  of  this  material.  Silver  and 
gold  which  he  carried  away  from  all  the  conquered  nations 
was  all  dedicated  unto  the  Lord.  And  in  a  future  day  shall 
the  silver  and  the  gold  of  the  Gentiles  be  brought  to  Jeru- 

•2  Sam.  viii:4  has  700,  which  is  a  copyist's  error. 


398        TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

salem  (Isa.  lx:6,  17;  Psalm  lxxii:10).  So  David  reigned 
over  all  Israel,  and  executed  judgment  and  justice  among 
all  his  people. 


9.    The  Wars  with  Ammon,  Syria  and  the  Philistines 
Chapters  xix-xx 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  Hanun's  Insult  to  David's  Servants.     1-5. 

2.  Joab's  Victory.     6-16. 

3.  David's  Victorious  Campaign.     17-19. 

See  annotations  on  2  Sam.  Chapter  x.  The  occasion  of 
the  war  with  the  Ammonites  was  the  insult  to  the  messen- 
gers of  David  whom  he  had  sent  to  the  son  of  King  Nahash. 
Nahash  had  died  and  David  sent  the  messengers  to  comfort 
Hanun  concerning  his  father.  It  gives  a  little  glimpse  of 
the  tenderness  of  David,  "But  the  princes  of  the  children 
of  Ammon  said  to  Hanun,  Thinkest  thou  that  David  doth 
honor  thy  father,  that  he  hath  sent  comforters  unto  thee  ? 
Are  not  his  servants  come  unto  thee  for  to  search  and  to 
overthrow  and  to  spy  out  the  land  ?"*  When  the  Ammon- 
ites realized  the  insult  to  David's  messengers,  they  spent 
1,000  talents  of  silver  (about  $375,000)  to  hire  chariots  and 
horsemen.  Joab  was  victorious.  Then  the  king  himself 
took  charge  and  gathered  all  Israel.  A  great  victory  was 
the  result. 

In  2  Samuel  the  great  sin  of  David  follows  the  victory 
over  the  Syrians.  In  our  comment  on  the  fall  of  David, 
we  have  pointed  out  the  connection  between  the  victory  of 
David  and  his  sin.  David's  fall  is  omitted  in  Chronicles 
because  the  grace  of  God  is  the  prominent  feature  and 
grace  had  completely  covered  David's  great  sin. 

*"When  grace  is  despised  by  those  to  whom  it  is  manifested,  the 
king's  judgment  follows.  Opposition  and  rebellion  only  serve  to  estab- 
lish his  authority  in  the  very  place  where  resistance  is  attempted.  It 
is  useless  to  strive  against  the  power  of  God's  chosen  king." 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       399 
Joab  and  David  take  Rabbah 

CHAPTER  XX 

1.  Rabbah  Destroyed.     1-3. 

2.  The  Philistine  Giants  Slain.     4-8. 

Rabbah  was  the  capital  of  Ammon  (Deut.  iii:ll;  Josh. 
xiii:25)  and  was  taken  by  Joab.  David  tarried  in  Jerusa- 
lem (so  fatal  to  him,  2  Sam.  xi:l)  and  Joab  smote  Rabbah 
and  destroyed  it.  Then  David  appeared  also  upon  the  scene. 
Joab  had  summoned  David  to  help  in  the  overthrow  of  the 
city  (2  Sam.  xii:27,  etc.).  The  crown  mentioned  was  prob- 
ably the  crown  of  Milcom,  their  idol-king.  It  was  of  solid 
gold  set  with  precious  stones.  David  received  the  crown 
and  precious  stones,  even  as  our  Lord  Jesus  receives  the 
glory  and  will  appear  crowned  with  many  crowns  (Rev. 
xix:12).  On  verse  3  see  annotations  2  Sam.  xii:31.  The 
overthrow  of  the  giants  followed.  First  Sibbechai  slew  Sippai 
of  the  children  of  the  giants;  in  2  Sam.  xxi  his  name  is  given 
as  Saph.  Elhanan  slew  Lahmi  of  Goliath.*  Then  David's 
nephew  Jonathan,  the  son  of  Shimea,  David's  brother,  slew 
the  last  of  the  giants.  He  had  six  fingers  on  each  hand  and 
six  toes  on  each  foot  and  was  of  great  stature.  These  giants 
were  the  special  instruments  of  the  power  of  darkness.  They 
have  a  typical  significance. 

"The  notion  of  a  giant  in  Scripture  is  always  connected 
with  evil,  the  lifting  up  of  man  against  God,  the  symbol  of 
pride  and  self-suflBciency,  as  well  as  of  oppressive  power. 
He  is  the  opposite  of  the  little  and  the  lowly,  the  humble 
in  heart,  with  whom  God  delights  to  dwell;  but  thus  may 
stand  for  the  tyranny  of  a  lust,  as  in  the  case  of  Og,  or  of  a 
Satanic  delusion,  as  with  Goliath  himself.  In  those  before 
us  we  must  see,  what  we  have  seen  in  their  kinsman,  the 
monstrous  delusions  which  abide  in  a  system  of  error  such 
as  Philistinism  depicts,  the  ecclesiastical  "mystery  of  law- 
lessness" of  Christian  times." f 

*The  words  "the  brother  of"  are  in  italics  and  must  be  omitted. 
It  was  another  giant  who  had  the  same  name  as  the  giant  of  1  Sam.  xvii. 
tNumerical  Bible- 


400        TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

And  in  the  last  one  overcome  by  Jonathan  ("gift  of  the 
Lord"),  we  see  a  type  of  the  final  ecclesiastical  leader  of  the 
apostasy,  the  man  of  sin.  The  number  "six"  points  to  this 
(Rev.  xiii:ll-18). 

10.    The  Numbering  of  the  People  and  the    Punishment 

CHAPTER  XXI 

1.  David's  Failure  in  Numbering  the  People.     1-7. 

2.  David's"  Confession  and  the  Message  of  God.     8-12. 

3.  David's  Answer  and  the  Punishment.     13-17. 

4.  The  Altar  in  the  Threshing  Floor  of  Oman.     18-30. 

On  the  alleged  discrepancy  between  the  statement  in 
2  Sam.  xxiv:l  "And  again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled 
against  Israel,  and  He  moved  (literal:  'He  suffered  him  to  be 
moved)  David  against  them  to  say,  Go,  number  Israel  and 
Judah,"  and  1  Chron.  xxi:l  "And  Satan  stood  up  against 
Israel  and  provoked  David  to  number  Israel,"  see  pages 
232  and  233  on  2  Sam.  xxiv.  Israel  had  committed  some 
sin  and  deserved  punishment.  This  is  clear  from  the 
statement  in  2  Sam.  xxiv:l.  The  direct  cause  of  the  visita- 
tion, however,  was  David's  pride,  and  may  have  been  con- 
nected with  the  desire  of  constituting  his  kingdom  as  a 
great  military  power.  He  wanted  to  know  the  strength  of 
the  nation  and  glory  in  it,  and  the  king  forgot  that  the 
Lord  had  increased  Israel  and  all  he  was  and  had  was  of 
God.  What  a  difference  between  David  here  and  David 
sitting  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord  after  hearing  Nathan's 
message!  (xvii:16).  Nothing  humbles  so  as  being  in  the 
presence  of  the  Lord.  The  lust  of  the  flesh  in  seK-indul- 
gence  had  led  to  his  awful  sin  with  Bathsheba,  and  now  the 
lust  of  the  eyes  and  the  pride  of  life  had  entangled  him. 
Satan  stood  behind  it  all  and  the  sin  committed,  pride  and 
self-exaltation,  was  according  to  Satan's  character.  Then 
David  confessed  (verse  8)  and  the  Lord  sent  the  prophet 
Gad  to  him  announcing  the  modes  of  punishment  from 
which  he  was  to  make  his  choice.  The  recovery  of  David, 
his  real  knowledge  of  God  and  the  working  of  His  grace 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       401 

in  his  heart  are  manifested  by  the  fact  that  he  committed 
himseK  to  God,  choosing  rather  to  fall  into  the  hands  of 
God  than  into  the  hands  of  his  enemies.  The  Lord  sent  the 
pestilence.  David  saw  the  angel  of  the  Lord.  Then 
David  and  the  elders  clothed  in  sack  cloth  were  on  their 
faces.  At  the  sight  of  the  angel  with  his  drawn  sword 
stretched  over  Jerusalem,  David  confessed  again,  but  his 
prayer  becomes  an  intercession;  he  takes  the  sin  upon 
himself  and  prays  "let  thine  hand,  be  on  me,  and  on  my 
father's  house;  but  not  on  thy  people  that  they  should  be 
plagued."  This  prayer  was  speedily  followed  by  mercy. 
The  site  of  the  future  house  of  the  Lord  was  then  acquired 
(see  comment  on  2  Sam.  xxiv).  Oman  and  his  four  sons 
had  also  seen  the  angel  and  they  were  afraid  (verse  20). 
And  the  Jebusite  was  willing  to  give  the  threshing-floor 
and  all  within  it.  And  when  the  site  had  been  acquired  by 
purchase  and  the  altar  was  built,  burnt-offerings  and  peace- 
oflferings  were  brought.  Heaven  answered  by  fire.  "And 
the  Lord  commanded  the  angel;  and  he  put  up  his  sword 
again  into  the  sheath  thereof."  All  is  blessedly  typical  of 
Him  who  is  the  true  burnt-oJBfering,  as  well  as  the  peace- 
offering.* 

*"It  is  interesting  to  see  the  order  unfolded  here  in  the  establish- 
ment of  the  relations  of  sovereign  grace:  first  of  all,  the  heart  of  God 
and  His  sovereign  grace  in  election,  suspending  the  execution  of  the 
deserved  and  pronounced  judgment  (verse  15);  next,  the  revelation 
of  this  judgment,  a  revelation  which  produces  humiliation  before  God 
and  a  full  confession  of  sin  before  His  face.  David,  and  the  elders  of 
Israel,  clothed  in  sackcloth,  fall  upon  their  faces,  and  David  presents 
himself  as  the  guilty  one.  Then,  instruction  comes  from  God,  as  to 
that  which  must  be  done  to  cause  the  pestilence  judicially  and  defini- 
tively to  cease,  namely,  the  sacrifice  in  Oman's  threshing-floor.  God 
accepts  the  sacrifice,  sending  fire  to  consume  it,  and  then  He  com- 
mands the  angel  to  sheathe  his  sword.  And  sovereign  grace,  thus 
carried  out  in  righteousness  through  sacrifice,  becomes  the  means  of 
Israel's  approach  to  their  God,  and  establishes  the  place  of  their  access 
to  Him." 


402        TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES, 


IV.     Preparations  for  the  Building  of  the 

Temple 

Chapter  xxii-xxix. 
1.  The  Preparations  and  Charge  to  Solomon 

CHAPTER  XXn 

1.  The  Material.     1-5. 

2.  The  Charge  to  Solomon.     6-16. 

3.  The  Charge  to  the  Princes.     17-19. 

God  had  accepted  the  sacrifice.  The  judgment  had  passed. 
Prayer  had  been  answered  and  David,  therefore,  could 
truthfully  say  "this  is  the  house  of  the  Lord  God,  and  this 
is  the  altar  of  the  burnt-offering  for  Israel."  The  place 
had  therefore  ])een  pointed  out  on  which  the  Temple  was 
to  be  reared.  And  from  now  on  up  to  the  twenty-eighth 
verse  of  Chapter  xxvi  all  concerns  the  house  which  is  to  be 
built.  The  Temple  is  from  now  on  prominently  ui  the 
foreground  and  that  which  the  book  of  Kings  does  not 
mention,  David's  great  interest  in  making  preparations  for 
it,  is  recorded  in  these  chapters.  And  so  we  see  David 
with  great  energy  making  vast  preparations.  It  shows 
again  how  grace  had  worked  in  his  heart.  All  else  seems  to 
have  been  forgotten  by  him.  Only  one  desire  controls  the 
king,  to  make  provision  of  everything  necessary  for  the 
construction  of  the  Temple.  And  the  house,  according  to 
David's  conception  "must  be  exceeding  magnificient,  of 
fame  and  of  glory  throughout  all  countries."  His  heart 
burned  with  zeal  to  glorify  Jehovah,  whose  mercy  and 
grace  he  knew  so  well  and  who  had  kept  and  prospered  him 
in  all  his  ways.  "I  will  therefore  now  make  preparation  for 
it,"  David  said.  Then  he  prepared  abundantly  before  his 
death.  David,  making  preparation  for  the  temple  his  son 
was  to  put  up.  is  not  without  a  very  striking;  typical  mean- 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       403 

ing.  Both  David  and  Solomon  are  types  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  David  tyjjifies  lliui  is  His  humiliation  and  suffer- 
ing, Solomon  in  His  exaltation  and  Glory.  What  Christ  has 
done  in  His  Grace  results  in  the  coming  Glory.  This  is  fore- 
shadowed in  tlie  preparations  David  made  for  the  house 
and  the  glorious  reign  of  his  son.  If  this  is  kept  in  mind 
these  historical  statements  will  take  on  a  blessed  meaning. 

He  gathered  the  strangers  (the  descendants  of  the  Canaan- 
ites)  and  he  set  them  at  work.  Stones,  iron  and  timber  all 
were  prepared  before  hand  on  a  large  scale.  Then  he 
called  for  Solomon,  young  and  tender  in  years,  and  addressed 
him.  First  he  restated  the  reason  why  he  had  been  barred 
from  building  llie  house.  Then  he  recited  the  promise 
made  to  him  tliat  his  son  should  have  rest  and  build  a 
house  for  Hi.s  iKimc.  "For  his  name  shall  be  Solomon,  and 
I  will  give  peace  and  quietness  unto  Israel  in  his  days.  He 
shall  build  a  house  for  my  name."  David  believed  all  the 
Lord  had  spoken  througiA  Nathan,  and,  believing  the  promise, 
he  had  made  all  preparations  and  was  telling  his  son  about  it. 

Then  he  exhorted  him  to  build  the  house,  to  keep  the  law 
of  the  Lord  and  to  take  heed.  "Be  strong,  and  of  good 
courage  and  dread  not  nor  be  dismayed."  Once  more  he 
speaks  of  all  he  had  done  in  preparation  of  the  house  of  the 
Lord.  Even  in  the  d;;ys  of  trouble  and  adversity  he  had 
prepared  for  the  house  and  remembered  the  claims  of 
Jehovah.  Immense  amoinits  of  gold  and  silver,  the  spoils 
of  wars,  had  been  stored  up  ];y  him.  Many  millions  of 
dollars  in  gold  and  silver  were  in  his  possession  and  devoted 
for  the  one  object.  x\nd  Solomon  was  to  add  unto  it. 
Then  he  told  him  to  arise  and  to  he  doing.  In  the  same  way 
he  commanded  the  princes  of  Israel  to  help  his  son  Solomon. 

May  this  teach  us  who  know  the  riches  of  the  Grace 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  to  be  as  devoted  to  Him, 
as  zealous  to  glorify  Him,  as  David  was  in  making  these 
preparations  for  the  building  of  the  Temple. 


404        TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

2.    The    Numbering   and   Arrangement   of    the    Levites 

CHAPTER  XXm 

1.  Solomon  Made  King.     1. 

2.  The  Number  of  the  Levites.     2-6. 

3.  The  Gershonites.     7-11. 

4.  The  Sons  of  Kohath.     12-20. 

5.  The  Sons  of  Merari.     21-23. 

6.  The  Service  of  the  Levites,     24-32. 

David,  in  his  seventieth  year,  made  Solomon  king.  It  is 
the  first  time,  and  afterwards  (xxix:22)  he  was  made  king 
the  second  time. 

"The  first  time  Solomon  was  made  king,  when  grace  was 
fully  established  in  the  altar  built  on  the  threshing-floor  of 
Oman,  where  the  son  of  David,  as  the  prince  of  peace, 
was  to  build  the  temple.  Solomon  is  introduced  as  the 
head  of  all  that  was  being  established,  and  as  holding 
the  first  and  supreme  place  in  the  mind  of  God — the 
one  on  whom  all  the  rest  depended,  which  could  not  even 
exist  now  without  him.  The  house,  the  whole  order  of 
the  house,  and  its  government,  all  referred  to  Solomon; 
and  thus  his  identification  with  David,  in  that  both  were 
on  the  throne  at  the  same  time,  makes  it  much  easier  to 
understand  the  type  of  Christ  in  this.  It  is  one  person, 
whom  His  sufferings  and  victories  place  on  the  throne  of 
glory  and  of  peace.  For  at  this  moment,  although  the 
result  of  the  glory  was  not  yet  manifested,  God  had  given 
rest  unto  His  people,  that  they  might  dwell  at  Jerusalem."* 

After  he  had  made  Solomon  king,  David  devoted  himself 
still  more  to  the  house  of  the  Lord.  He  ordered  and  arranged 
everything.  So  when  the  Temple  was  built,  Solomon  had 
only  to  carry  out  the  plans  his  father  in  divine  wisdom  had 
made.  All  is  typical  of  Him  who  has  ordered  all  things 
in  His  infinite  grace. 

The  census  of  the  Levites  gave  their  number  from  thirty 
years  and  upwards,  at  38,000.  Of  these  24,000  were  ap- 
pointed to  attend,  set  forward  the  work  of  the  house  of  the 

*Synopsis. 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       405 

Lord;  6,000  were  oflficers  and  judges;  4,000  were  porters 
and  4,000  praised  the  Lord  with  the  instruments  David 
had  made  to  praise  therewith  (see  Amos  vi:5). 

3.    The  Twenty-four  Courses  of  the  Priests 

CHAPTER  XXIV 

1.  The  Twenty-four  Courses.     1-19. 

2.  The  Organization  of  Other  Levites.     20-31. 

In  the  previous  chapter  we  read  of  24,000  Levites  set 
apart  for  the  service.  In  the  next  chapter  we  find  twenty- 
four  leaders  of  song  and  music  appointed,  and  here  David 
instituted  twenty-four  Courses  of  Priests.  Each  of  these 
ministered  a  full  week,  from  one  Sabbath  to  the  next.  These 
courses  were  not  only  continued  by  Solomon,  but  also  by 
Hezekiah  and  Josiah.  From  Luke  i  :5,  we  learn  the  same 
order  was  still  followed  in  the  days  our  Lord  was  born. 
Zecharias  belonged  to  the  eighth  course,  that  of  Abijah. 

In  the  book  of  Revelation  (Chap,  iv,  etc.),  we  read  of 
twenty-four  elders  clothed  in  white  raiment,  crowned  and 
seated  upon  twenty-four  thrones.  They  represent  sym- 
bolically all  the  redeemed  brought  into  glory.  This  number 
is  obviously  an  allusion  to  the  arrangement  of  the  priest- 
hood made  by  David  for  the  service  of  the  Temple  under 
the  glorious  reign  of  Solomon,  the  blessed  type  of  the  reign 
of  Christ  in  glory.  As  these  twenty-four  Courses  of  Priests 
were  to  minister  during  Solomon's  glorious  reign,  they  are 
typical  of  the  redeemed,  the  holy  and  royal  priesthood, 
associated  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  when  He  occupies 
His  throne  of  Glory. 

4.    The  Singers  and  Musicians  of  the  Temple 

CHAPTER  XXV 

1.  Sons  of  Asaph,  Jedutbun  and  Heman.     1-7. 

2.  Their  Division  by  Lot  into  Twenty-four.     8-31. 

As  we  have  seen  before,  Asaph,  Jeduthun  (Ethan)  and 
Heman  were  the  master  leaders  in  song  and  music;    their 


406        THE  FIRST   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

service  was  eminently  spiritual,  for  we  read  "they  should 
prophesy."  Heman  especially  is  called  the  king's  seer  in 
the  words  of  God.  This  is  a  significant  expression.  How 
much  there  is  in  what  is  termed  "worship",  which  has  noth- 
ing whatever  of  the  words  of  God  in  it.  In  most  of  the 
songs  used  in  our  times  there  is  little  of  the  words  of  God 
and  many  contain  unscriptural  and  sentimental  phrases, 
Israel's  worship  in  song  and  music  was  to  be  spiritual,  proph- 
esying and  in  the  words  of  God.  Christian  worship  is  not 
less.  It  is  to  be  in  Spirit  and  in  Truth.  "Let  the  Word  of 
Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom;  teaching  and  ad- 
monishing one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual 
songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the  Lord"  (Col. 
iii:16).  Asaph  had  four  sons,  Jeduthun  six,  and  Heman 
fourteen,  equal  to  twenty-four.  They  were  divided  into 
twenty-four  courses  of  twelve  men  each,  equal  to  288,  who 
served  a  week  in  turn.  The  names  of  six  of  the  sons  of 
Heman  form,  in  the  Hebrew,  a  complete  sentence.  Giddalti, 
Romamti-ezer,  Joshbekashah,  Mallothi,  Hothir  and  Maha- 
zioth  (verse  4)  may  be  rendered  in  English: 

I  have  magnified  and  I  have  raised  up  help; 

Sitting  in  trouble,  I  have  spoken  oracles  plentiful. 

This  fact  has  aroused  the  suspicion  of  the  critics  regard- 
ing the  genuineness  of  this  entire  list  of  names.  "Now  this 
sentence,"  saith  a  critic,  "is  either  an  obscure  and  ancient 
prayer  which  hath  been  mistaken  for  a  list  of  names  by  the 
compiler,  or  else  the  compiler  has  purposely  strung  together 
those  significant  names  in  such  order  as  to  form  a  sentence."* 
But  it  is  not  the  mistake  of  the  compiler  or  an  invention. 
We  read  that  God  gave  to  Heman  these  sons  and  the  pious 
Israelite  named  his  sons  so  as  to  produce  this  meaning. 
There  are  many  such  messages  in  names  throughout  the 
Bible.     (See  annotations  on  Genesis  v). 

*W.  R.  Harvey- Jellie. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       407 

5.    The  Porters  and  other  Temple  Officers 

CHAPTER  XXVI 

1.  The  Porters.     1-12. 

2.  The  Keepers  of  the  Gates.     13-19. 

3.  The  Levites  over  the  Treasures.     20-28. 

4.  Officers  and  Judges.     29-32. 

Ninety-three  porters  are  mentioned,  which  held  the  posi- 
tion of  chiefs.  The  whole  number  of  porters  was  4,000 
(Chap.  xxiii:5).  Asaph  in  verse  1  must  be  changed  to 
Ebiasaph  (ix:19),  for  Asaph  was  not  a  Korahite,  but  a  Ger- 
shonite.  Obed-edom  is  especially  mentioned.  God  blessed 
him  (verse  5).  He  had  sheltered  the  ark  (xiii:14),  "and  the 
Lord  blessed  the  house  of  Obed-edom,  and  all  that  he  had." 
And  here  the  blessing  is  seen  in  a  remarkable  increase.  "All 
these  of  the  sons  of  Obed-edom;  they  and  their  sons  and 
their  brethren,  able  men  for  strength  for  the  service,  were 
three  score  and  two  of  Obed-edom"  (see  Psalm  cxxvii:3). 
How  faithful  the  Lord  is.  He  did  not  forget  Obed-edom's 
service  and  rewarded  him  richly. 

Then  there  were  the  gate  keepers.  The  Temple  was  still 
unbuilt,  no  plans  had  been  drawn  by  man,  but  the  Lord 
had  revealed  the  plan  to  David  (xxviii:ll-13),  and  he  ordered 
the  keepers  of  the  gates  according  to  the  divine  plan.  Then 
follows  the  appointment  of  the  Levites  who  had  charge 
over  the  treasures  and  the  appointment  of  officers  and 
judges.  Their  number  was  6,000  (Chap.  xxiii:4).  They 
were  divided  into  three  classes:  1.  For  the  outward  busi- 
ness of  Israel  (verse  29).  2.  Those  who  had  the  oversight 
of  Israel  beyond  Jordan  westward,  1,700  persons,  for  all 
the  business  of  the  Lord,  and  for  service  of  the  King  (verse 
30).  3.  The  third  class  consisted  of  2,700  who  were  rulers 
for  every  matter  pertaining  to  God,  and  affairs  of 
the  king  (verses  31-32).  All  was  divinely  planned  and 
arranged  through  David  in  anticipation  of  the  glorious 
reign  of  his  son.  And  even  so  all  is  planned  and  appointed 
for  the  coming  reign  of  the  King  of  righeousness  and 
the  King  of  Peace. 


408        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 
6.    The  Captains,  Princes  and  Various  Officials 

CHAPTER  XXVII 

1.  The  Twelve  Captains.     1-15. 

2.  The  Princes  of  the  Twelve  Tribes.     16-22. 

3.  The  Unfinished  Numbering.     23-24. 

4.  Various  OflBcers.     25-34. 

We  have  here  the  military  organization  of  David's  king- 
dom. The  army  comprised  all  males  over  twenty  years  of 
age.  The  host  had  twelve  divisions  each  of  24,000.  It  is 
remarkable  how  the  number  twenty -four  occurs  again  and 
again.  Twelve  is  the  governmental  number  and  twice 
twelve,  that  is,  twenty-four,  would  indicate  a  perfect  and 
complete  government  such  as  will  be  established  when 
Heaven's  King  of  Glory  is  enthroned.  In  the  list  of  the 
Princes  of  Israel  the  tribe  of  Dan  is  numbered  last.  There 
is  something  significant  about  this.  Dan,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  not  mentioned  in  the  chronological  register,  nor  is  this 
tribe  mentioned  in  Rev.  vii.  Dan  is  called  a  serpent  (Gen. 
xlix:17);  it  may  be  that  the  coming  false  Messiah  will  come 
out  of  Dan.     Gad  and  Asher  are  not  mentioned  in  the  list. 


7.    The  Last  Acts  of  David  and  His  Death 
Chapters  xxviii-xxix 

The  Great  Assembly 

CHAPTER  XXVIII 

1.  The  Address  of  David  to  the  Assembly.     1-10. 

2.  The  Patterns,  the  Gold  and  the  Silver  Delivered  to  Solo- 

mon.    11-19. 

3.  His  Encouraging  Words  to  Solomon. 

The  events  in  this  chapter  connect  with  Chapter  xxiii:!. 
There  we  find  the  brief  statement  that  David  was  old  and 
full  of  years  and  that  Solomon  his  son  was  made  king  over 
Israel.  Then  follow  the  chapters  which  acquaint  us  with 
the  preparations  David  had  made  for  the  building  of  the 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       409 

Temple  and  the  arrangements  of  the  Levites,  etc.,  for  the 
Temple  service.  And  now  the  threads  of  the  narrative 
which  were  dropped  are  taken  up  again.  A  great  and  rep- 
resentative audience  was  called  by  David  when  he  made 
Solomon  king.  All  the  princes  of  Israel  and  the  captains 
and  mighty  men  in  Jerusalem  came  together.  As  we  know 
from  the  book  of  Kings  the  aged  monarch  was  weak  in  his 
body.  But  when  the  hour  came  to  address  the  great  assem- 
bly he  arose  and  stood  upon  his  feet.  The  three  attitudes 
of  David  are  suggestive.  He  was,  on  his  face,  a  penitent, 
(2  Sam.  i:12,  16;  1  Chron.  xxi:16);  he  sat  in  His  presence 
as  a  worshipper  (1  Chron.  xvii:16),  and  how  he  stood  on 
his  feet  as  a  servant.  The  words  he  spoke  before  the  assem- 
bly are  similar  to  those  he  addressed  to  his  son  Solomon 
in  private  (Chap.  xxii).  After  he  had  spoken  all  these  words, 
in  which  he  once  more  traced  the  gracious  dealings  of  the 
Lord  with  him,  he  admonished  his  son  to  know  the  God  of 
his  father,  to  serve  Him  with  a  perfect  heart  and  a  willing 
mind.  "If  thou  seek  Him,  He  will  be  found  of  thee;  but 
if  thou  forsake  Him,  He  will  cast  thee  off  forever."  Then 
he  exhorted  him  again  to  build  the  house.  "Be  strong  and 
do  it." 

After  this  David  handed  over  the  patterns  of  the  porch, 
the  temple  houses,  the  treasuries,  the  upper  chambers  and 
the  inner  rooms  and  of  the  place  of  the  mercy  seat.  How 
did  the  king  obtain  these  patterns  ?  He  had  them  by  the 
Spirit.  The  authorized  version  prints  Spirit  with  a  small 
"s."  It  was  not  his  own  spirit  who  planned  it.  A  certain 
commentator  says  it  means  that  these  patterns  had  been 
"floating  in  his  mind."  The  sentence  "the  pattern  of  all 
that  he  had  by  the  Spirit"  means  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had 
revealed  it  all  to  him.  It  was  given  to  him  by  inspiration 
as  the  pattern  of  the  tabernacle  and  all  belonging  to  it  had 
been  given  to  Moses  also  by  revelation.  Then  he  turned 
over  to  Solomon  the  immense  quantities  of  gold  and  silver 
and  other  materials  he  had  so  faithfully  collected  for  the 
construction  of  the  Temple. 


410        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 
The  Final  Words  and  Actions  of  David.    His  Deacli. 

CHAPTER   XXIX. 

1.  The  Exhortation.     1-5. 

2.  The  Response.     6-9. 

3.  David's  Praise  and  Prayer.     10-20. 

4.  The  Sacrifices  and  Enthronement  of  Solomon.     21-25. 

5.  The  Reign  of  David.     His  Death.     26-30. 

Then  David  spoke  once  more  to  the  assembled  princes  and 
captains.  What  tenderness  and  concern  as  well  as  devotion 
his  words  reveal!  "Solomon  my  son,  whom  alone  God  hath 
chosen,  is  yet  young,  and  tender,  and  the  work  is  great, 
for  the  palace  is  not  for  man,  but  for  the  Lord  God,"  Once 
more  the  aged  king  speaks  of  the  vast  preparations  he  had 
made  for  the  house  of  God.  He  would  also  contribute  largely 
from  his  own  treasures.  The  gold  and  silver,  precious  and 
glistening  stones  amounted  in  value  to  many  million  dollars. 
The  gold  of  Ophir  mentioned  was  the  purest  and  finest  known 
in  that  day  (Job  xxii:24;  xxviii:16;  Isaiah  xiii:  12).  And  all 
he  had  done  was  because  he  had  set  his  affection  to  the  house 
of  my  God.  He  loved  it  so  much  and  therefore  he  gave 
and  consecrated  such  vast  treasures.  And  here  we  may 
remember  Him  who  was  richer  than  David,  who  gave  more 
than  David  ever  could  give.  "For  ye  know  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  though  He  was  rich,  yet  for  your 
sakes  He  became  poor  that  ye  through  His  poverty  might 
be  rich"  (2  Cor.  viii:9).  After  he  had  told  of  his  own 
devotion  he  said,  "And  wlio  then  is  willing  to  .lionsecrate 
his  service  this  day  unto  the  Lord.^*"  The  Hebrew  is  "to 
fill  his  hand  to-day  to  Jehovah."  It  means  that  whosoever 
gave  willinglj^  as  he  himself  had  done,  would  fill  his  hand 
with  a  free  will  offering  unto  the  Lord.  Christian  giving 
should  always  be  looked  upon  in  this  light.  It  is  giving 
unto  the  Lord.  And  David's  great  liberality  and  example 
brought  a  great  response.       An  immense  offering  was  given.* 

*"Drams"  is  in  Hebrew  "Daric",  a  Persian  gold  coin  weighing  about 
130  grains.  The  word  is  found  also  in  Ezra  viii:27.  It  was  probably 
called  "daric"  after  Darius  and  therefore  shows  that  Chronicles  was 
written  after  the  captivity. 


TEE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       411 

"Then  the  people  rejoiced,  for  that  they  offered  will- 
ingly, because  with  perfect  heart  they  offered  willingly 
to  the  Lord,  and  David  the  King  also  rejoiced  with 
great  joy."  The  joy  of  giving  took  hold  of  all.  "It  is 
more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive"  (Acts  xx:35).  How 
great  must  have  been  the  joy  of  the  King  as  he  beheld  the 
fruits  of  his  own  devotion  in  the  willingness  of  His  people! 
And  here  again  we  must  think  once  more  of  our  Lord.  It 
is  His  gracious  example  in  giving  Himself  for  us,  His  people, 
which  will  lead  us  on  to  sacrifice,  to  give,  to  spend  and  be 
spent.  And  how  great  His  joy  if  His  people  follow  thus  after 
Hun. 

It  is  a  great  inspired  outburst  of  David  which  follows. 
How  He  praises!  Verses  10-13  is  one  of  the  greatest  out- 
bursts of  praise  and  worship  found  in  the  Old  Testament. 
Then  what  humility!  "But  who  am  I,  and  what  is  my 
people  that  we  should  be  able  to  offer  so  willingly  after 
this  sort?  for  all  things  come  of  thee,  and  of  thine  own 
have  we  given  thee  ...  all  this  store  that  we  have 
prepared  to  build  thee  a  house  for  thine  holy  name  cometh 
of  thine  hand,  and  is  all  thine  own."  A  most  beautiful 
sight  is  an  aged  Saint  whom  God  hath  used  and  honored 
and  who  is  humble.  Alas!  how  many  become  lifted  up  and 
walk  in  pride.  Then  David  prayed  for  the  people  and  for 
his  son  Solomon.  "And  all  the  congregation  blessed  the 
Lord  God  of  their  fathers,  and  bowed  down  their  heads,  and 
worshipped  the  Lord,  and  the  King"  (verse  20).  All  fore- 
shadows that  day  of  which  we  read  in  Psalm  cx:3,  "Thy 
people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of  thy  power."  That 
will  be  when  the  King,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  will  take  His 
glorious  throne,  when  He  begins  to  rule. 

After  the  large  number  of  sacrifices  had  been  brought 
and  they  had  eaten  before  the  Lord  on  that  day  with  great 
gladness,  Solomon  was  made  king  the  second  time,  even 
as  his  father  David  passed  through  the  same  experience. 
This  double  event  has  no  doubt  a  definite  typical  meaning 
in  connection  with  our  Lord  in  as  much  as  both,  David  and 
Solomon,  are  types  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.    When  Solomon 


412       THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

was  made  king  the  first  time  he  was  but  anointed  with  oil 
(1  Kings  i:39)  and  acclaimed  as  king,  but  he  did  not  occupy 
the  kingly  throne.  But  when  he  was  made  king  the  second 
time  he  sat  upon  the  throne  "and  all  Israel  obeyed  him." 
"The  Lord  magnified  Solomon  exceedingly  in  the  sight  of 
all  Israel  and  bestowed  upon  him  such  royal  majesty  as  had 
not  been  on  any  king  before  him  in  Israel."  We  see  therefore 
(though  no  commentaries  mention  it)  that  these  two  occasions 
are  typical  of  the  first  and  the  second  coming  of  our  Lord. 
Our  Lord  was  anointed  king  when  He  came  the  first  time, 
but  He  received  not  the  throne.  When  He  comes  the  second 
time  He  receives  the  throne  and  God  will  bestow  upon  Him 
"royal  majesty"  and  "all  Israel"  will  obey  Him. 

Then  follows  the  record  of  the  reign  and  death  of  David. 
There  is  no  clash  between  the  account  of  David's  last  days 
in  the  closing  chapters  of  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel  and 
the  opening  chapters  of  First  Kings.  The  record  in  Chron- 
icles is  in  fullest  keeping  with  the  purpose  and  object  of  this 
book.  Blessing  and  grace  is  manifested  to  the  end,  and 
David's  failings  are  passed  over. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       413 


Appendix. 


CHRONOLOGICAL  TABLE, 

AccoBoiNG  TO  Peofessob  Keil,  from  the  Exodus  to  the  Building 

OF  THE  Temple  bt  Solomon. 

(Comp.  Judges  xi:26  and  1  Kings  vi:l.) 


PRINCIPAL  EVENTS. 


The  Exodus 


Giving  of  the  Law  on  Mount  Sinai 

Death  of  Moses  and  Aaron 

Conquest  of  Canaan  by  Joshua 

Division  of  Canaan  to  the  invasion  of  Chus 

han  Rishathaim      .... 
Death  of  Joshua  .... 

Wars  of  Israel  against  the  Canaanites 
Expedition  against  Benjamin  (Judges  xx.) 
Oppression  by  Chushan  Rishathaim 
Othniel,  and  rest  of  Israel 
Oppression  by  the  Moabites 
Ehud,  and  rest  of  Israel 
Victory  of  Shamgar  over  the  Philistines 
Oppression  by  Jabin  .... 
Deborah  and  Barak,  and  rest  of  Israel 
Oppression  by  yhe  Midianites 
Gideon,  and  rest 
Abimelech    . 
Tola      .... 
Jair        .... 
Eli  for  forty  years 
Then:     In  the  East. 
Oppression  by  the  Am 

monites,     18     years 


Years  of 

their 
duration. 


in  the 
40th    year 

7 

10 


In  the  West. 
By   the   Philistines 


1134-1116  . 
Jephthah,      6 
1116-1110 


years: 


Ibzan,   7  years:   1110- 

1103 
Elon   10   years:    1103- 

1093 
Abdon.  8  years:  1093- 

1086 


I  Loss  of  the  Ark 

[Samson's  deeds 
I  Samuel         as 
prophet 

I  Samuel  judge 
I  Saul  king 

David    at    Hebron 

David  at  Jerusalem 
Solomon      to      the 
building  of  Tem- 
ple 

Total 


40 
18 
80 

20 
40 

7 
40 

3 
23 
22 


40 


19 

20 

7 
83 


Date  before 
Christ. 


1492 
from 
1492  to  1491 

>   ..    1453 

1452  ••  1445 

1445  "  1435 


about 
from 

about 
1435  to 
1427  " 
1387  " 
1369  " 

1289 
1269 
1229 
1222 
1182 
1179 
1156 
1154 


1442 
1442 
143rf 
1427 
1387 
1369 
1289 

1269 
1229 
1222 
1182 
1179 
1156 
1134 
1114 


1134  "  1094 
about  1114 

1116  to  1096 
from  1114 

1094  to  1075 

1075  "  1055 

1055  "  1048 
1048  "  1015 

1015  "  1012 


480  years. 


SECOND  CHRONICLES 


CONTENTS 

Page 

Division  of  the  Second  Book  of  Chronicles 417 

Analysis  and  Annotations 419 


The  Division  of  the  Second  Book 
of  Chronicles 

Originally  the  two  books  of  Chronicles  formed  one  book 
and  were  undivided.  The  period  of  the  history  of  the 
people,  Israel,  covered  in  this  book  is  the  same  as  in  the 
books  of  Kings.  It  begins  with  the  Solomonic  reign,  the 
building  and  dedication  of  the  Temple,  and  ends  with  the 
captivity  of  Judah.  The  closing  of  Chronicles  proves  the 
post-exilic  time  of  its  composition,  for  it  mentions  Cyrus 
the  King  of  Persia  and  his  restoration  proclamation.  The 
history,  however,  is  almost  exclusively  the  history  of  the 
house  of  Judah.  Israel's  history  is  very  briefly  touched 
upon.  Inasmuch  as  Chronicles  is  written  from  the  priestly 
and  the  divine  viewpoint,  everything  centers  around  the 
Temple  of  Jehovah.  There  are  most  interesting  descriptions 
of  Solomon's  reign,  the  Temple  and  the  Worship,  which  we 
do  not  find  in  the  parallel  chapters  in  the  first  book  of 
Kings.  The  reader  should  make  use  of  the  parallel  pas- 
sages given  in  connection  with  the  introduction  to  the 
Chronicles  on  page  372,  and  then  read  the  annotations  in 
Kings,  as  we  shall  not  repeat,  in  the  annotations  of  this 
second  book  of  Chronicles,  what  has  already  been  given. 
We  shall  point  out  what  is  peculiar  to  Chronicles.  We 
divide  the  book  into  four  sections. 

I.    THE  REIGN  OF  SOLOMON.     Chapters  i-ix. 

1.  The  Beginning  of  His  Reign  and  the  First  Vision. 

Chapter  i. 

2.  The  Building  of  the  Temple.    Chapters  ii-iv. 

3.  The  Dedication  of  the  Temple.    Chapters  v- 

vii:10. 

4.  The  Second  Vision.    Chapter  vii:ll-22. 

5.  Solomon's  Prosperity  and  Activities.  Chapter  viii. 

6.  The  Queen  of  Sheba.    Solomon's  Death.  Chap- 

ter ix. 

417 


418       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

n.    THE  REBELLION  OF  THE  TEN  TRIBES.    Chap, 
ter  X. 

HI.  THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  KINGS  OF  JUDAH. 
EVENTS  LEADING  UP  TO  THE  CAPTIVITY. 
Chapters  xi:10-xxxvi;14. 

1.  Declme   and   Apostasy   under   Rehoboam   and 

Abijah.    Asa  and  his  Refonnation  and  Fail- 
ure.    Chapters  xi-x\  i. 

2.  Reformation  under  Jehoshaphat.    Chapters  xvii- 

XX. 

3.  Decline  and  Apostasy  under  Jehoram,  Ahaziah 

and  AthaUah.     Chapters  xxi-xxii. 

4.  Reformation  under  Joash,  and  Joash's  Apostasy. 

Chapters  xxiii-xxiv. 

5.  Decline  and  Apostasy  imder  Amaziah,  Uzziah, 

Jothan  and  Ahaz.     Chapters  xxv-xxviii. 

6.  Reformation  under  Hezekiah.    Chapters  xxix- 

xxxii. 

7.  Decline    and    Apostasy    under    Manasseh    and 

Amon.     Chapter  xxxiii. 

8.  Reformation    under    Josiah.    Chapters    xxxiv- 

XXXV. 

9.  The    Final    Decline    and    Apostasy.    Chapter 

xxxvi:l-14. 

IV.    THE  CAPTIVITY  AND  THE  EPILOGUE.    Chapter 
xxxvi:15-23k 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES       419 

Analysis  and  Annotations. 
I.   The  Reign  of  Solomon. 

Chapters  i-ix. 

1.    The  Beginning  of  Solomon's  Reign  and  the  First  Vision. 
CHAPTER  I. 

1.  The  Lord  was  with  Him.     1. 

2.  At  Gibeon.     2-6. 

3.  The  First  Vision.     7-12. 

4.  His  Riches  and  Prosperity.     13-17. 

The  events  connected  with  the  beginning  of  Solomon's 
reign  and  recorded  in  1  Kings  i-iii:3  are  omitted  in  Chron- 
icles. Second  Chronicles  begins  with  the  statement  that 
Solomon  was  strengthened  in  his  kingdom,  and  the  Lord 
his  God  was  with  him,  and  magnified  him  exceedingly. 
This  shows  the  keynote  of  Chronicles.  It  is  Jehovah's 
gracious  dealing  with  the  house  of  David  and  the  bestowal 
of  the  promised  blessing.  In  1  Kings  iii:3  we  read  that 
Solomon  loved  the  Lord. 

Here  more  of  Gibeon  is  mentioned  than  in  Kings.  "Gibeon 
was  a  great  city,  as  one  of  the  royal  cities"  (Joshua  x:2). 
Later  Gibeon  became  the  possession  of  the  tribe  of  Ben- 
jamin and  was  made  a  priest-city.  It  was  about  two  hours 
from  Jerusalem.  When  Saul  had  destroyed  Nob,  the 
tabernacle  was  removed  to  Gibeon,  where  it  remained  till 
Solomon  built  the  house  of  the  Lord  (1  Chron.  xvi:39,  xxi:29; 
1  Kings  iii:4;  1  Chron.  i:3).  The  ark  had  been  brought 
from  Kirjath-jearim,  not  far  from  Gibeon,  to  the  tent  which 
David  had  pitched  for  it  in  Jerusalem  (2  Sam.  vi:2;  1  Chron. 
xiii:5-6),  with  the  tabernacle  and  the  brasen  altar,  that 
Bezaleh,  the  son  of  Uri,  the  son  of  Hur,  had  made  remained 
at  Gibeon.  The  high  place  at  Gibeon  means  the  elevation 
upon  which  the  tabernacle  and  the  altar  stood.  Originally 
theP2  was  at  the  same  spot  a  Canaanitish  place  for  the  wor- 
ship of  idols.  As  long  as  the  temple,  that  central  place  for 
worship  chosen  by  God  (Deut.  xiirll),  was  not  standing. 


420      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

the  worship  of  Jehovah  m  the  Gibeon  high  place  was  not 
sinful.  After  the  temple  was  built  the  high  places  became 
centers  of  idolatrous  practices.  Solomon  and  all  the  con- 
gregation with  him  gathered  at  Gibeon  and  sought  the 
brasen  altar  and  offered  a  thousand  burnt  offerings  upon  it. 
He  began  with  this  act  of  worship  and  it  was  the  same  night 
that  God  appeared  unto  Solomon.  The  Lord  drew  gra- 
ciously near  to  him  as  the  result  of  the  sacrifices  upon  the 
brasen  altar.  The  burnt-offering  is  the  type  of  the  perfect 
devotion  and  sacrifice  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  it  is 
this  which  makes  us  nigh.  On  the  meaning  of  the  great 
vision,  God's  offer  to  Solomon,  the  King's  answer,  see  1  Kings 
iii,  pages  253  and  254. 

After  the  vision  and  the  Lord's  promise,  "I  will  give  thee 
riches  and  wealth  and  honor,"  we  hear  of  Solomon's  horses, 
horsemen  and  chariots.  In  1  Kings,  we  find  the  same  para- 
graph in  another  setting,  that  is,  in  chapter  x:26-29.  He 
had  1,400  chariots  and  12,000  horsemen  and  4,000  stalls  for 
horses.  A  great  commerce  seems  to  have  been  fostered  by 
Solomon.  While  this  showed  the  promise  fulfilled,  in  that 
the  Lord  gave  him  riches  and  wealth,  it  also  showed  an  un- 
lawful desire  for  increase  which  was  forbidden  (see  Deut. 
xvii:16).     Read  comment  on  1  Kings  x:26-29,  page  270. 

2.    The  Building  of  the  Temple. 

Chapters  ii-iv. 

The  Beginning  and  Appeal  to  Huram. 
CHAPTER  n. 

1.  Solomon's  Purpose.     1. 

2.  The  Workmen.     2. 

3.  The  Message  to  Huram,  King  of  Tyre.     3-10. 

4.  Huram's  Answer.     11-16. 

5.  Solomon  Numbers  the  Strangers.     17-18. 

In  1  Kings  v,  Solomon  purposed  to  begin  the  great  work 
to  which  he  had  been  called,  to  build  an  house  for  the  name 
of  the  Lord  and  an  house  for  his  kingdom  (1  Kings  vii:l; 
2  Chron.  viii:l).  Then  he  levied  a  very  large  body  of  men 
from  among  the  people  to  labor  in  cutting  the  timber  and 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      421 

hewing  stone  for  the  Temple  and  the  palace  of  Solomon. 
Of  these  70,000  were  carriers;  80,000  were  quarry  men  and 
3,600  overseers.  In  1  Kings  v:13,  we  read  of  a  levy  of  30,000 
men.  These  must  be  considered  additional  workmen,  for 
they  were  sent  to  Lebanon. 

Solomon  then  sent  a  message  to  Huram,*  the  King  of 
Tyre.  Hiram  had  sent  before  messages  to  Solomon,  when 
he  heard  of  his  enthronement.  They  of  Tyre  had  already 
brought  cedar  trees  in  abundance  to  David  for  the  building 
of  the  Temple  (1  Chron.  xxii:4).  He  loved  Solomon  as 
much  as  he  loved  his  father  David,  for  when  Hiram  heard 
the  words  of  Solomon  he  rejoiced  greatly  and  said,  "Blessed 
be  the  Lord  this  day,  who  hath  given  unto  David  a  wise 
son  over  this  great  people."  To  him  Solomon  sent  a  message. 
He  reminded  him  of  the  dealings  his  father  David  had  with 
him,  and  requested  "even  so  deal  with  me."  He  acquainted 
him  with  his  work,  "Behold  I  build  an  house  for  the  name 
of  the  Lord  my  God,"  and  that  it  would  be  a  great  house, 
"for  great  is  our  God  above  all  gods."  Then  he  requested 
that  Hiram  would  send  him  a  master-workman  and  more 
material,  cedar  trees,  fir  trees  and  algumf  trees  out  of  Leb- 
anon. In  return  he  offered  to  Hiram's  servant  wheat, 
barley,  wine  and  oil,  twenty  thousand  measures  of  each. 
1  Kings  v:ll  tells  us  that  besides  this  gift  to  the  workers  in 
timber,  twenty  thousand  measures  of  wheat  and  oil  were 
yearly  given  by  Solomon  to  the  household  of  Hiram. 

And  Huram's  answer  reveals  that  he  was  a  believer  in 
Jehovah,  for  he  acknowledged  Him  as  the  Creator  and  as 
the  lover  of  His  people  (verses  11-12).  The  King  sent 
Huram,  a  skilful  worker  whose  mother  was  a  Jewess  (1  Kings 
vii:14).  This  Gentile  co-operation  in  the  construction  of 
the  Temple  is  interesting,  and  also  prophetic.  Jews  and 
Gentiles,  Israel  and  the  nations  will  yet  unite  to  glorify  the 
Lord.  And  the  strangers  who  were  in  Israel,  also  Gentiles, 
were  the  servants  of  the  King. 

*The  same  as  Hiram. 

tOr  almug  trees  (1  Kings  x:ll)  the  red  sandalwood  which  was  highly 
valued  among  the  ancient  nations. 


422      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 


The  Building  of  the  Temple. 
CHAPTER  m. 

1.  The  Place.     1-2. 

2.  The  Dimensions.     3. 

3.  The  Porch  and  Holy  Place,     4-7. 

4.  The  Most  Holy.     8-14. 

6.     The  Brazen  Pillars.     15-17. 

First,  the  place  is  mentioned  where  the  house  of  the  Lord 
was  built,  "in  Mount  Moriah  (Gen.  xxii:2),  where  the  Lord 
appeared  unto  David  his  father,  in  the  place  that  David 
had  prepared  in  the  threshing  floor  of  Oman  the  Jebusite." 
The  building  began  in  the  second  day  of  the  second  month 
in  the  fourth  year  of  Solomon's  reign.  From  1  Kings  vi:l 
we  learn  that  this  was  the  480th  year  from  the  Exodus. 
Counting  forty  years  to  one  generation  we  have  exactly 
twelve  generations.  This  figure  can  be  chronologically 
verified.  The  internal  measurement  given  in  verse  3  is 
sixty  cubits  long  (about  ninety  feet),  twenty  cubits  wide 
(about  thirty  feet),  and  thirty  cubits  high  (about  forty-five 
feet).  Then  there  was  the  porch.  The  height  of  the  porch 
is  given  as  120  cubits,  which  is  evidently  the  error  of  a 
copyist;  it  should  be  twenty  cubits,  or  perhaps  thirty. 
For  the  full  description  see  annotations  on  1  Kings  vi  (pages 
258-262).  Notice  again  the  description  of  the  cherubim 
overlaid  with  gold.  These  are  not  the  cherubim  upon  the 
ark,  but  they  were  great  figures  made  by  Solomon.  Each 
was  four  cubits  high.  Their  great  wings  met  over  the  mercy 
seat  upon  which  were  the  cherubim,  which  look  down  upon 
the  mercy-seat.  The  Solomonic  cherubim  looked  outwards. 
The  word  "inward"  in  verse  13  is  a  wrong  translation.  On 
the  meaning  of  this  attitude  of  these  gigantic  cherubim,  see 
comment  on  1  Kings  vi:23-30  (page  262).  In  verse  14,  the 
veil  is  mentioned,  of  which  we  read  nothing  in  1  Kings  vi. 
This  veil  was  woven  of  the  same  material  and  in  the  same 
maimer  as  the  one  in  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxvi:31). 

The  two  pillars  called  Jachin  ("He  will  establish")  and 
Boaz  ("In  Him  is  strength")  are  the  symbols  of  the  sta- 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      423 

bility  of  the  government  of  this  earth  m  the  glorious  reign 
of  Christ,  which  is  typified  by  the  reign  of  Solomon  and  the 
house  he  built. 

The  Vessels  that  were  for  the  House. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

1.  The  Altar  of  Brass.     1. 

2.  The  Molten  Sea.     2-5. 

3.  The  Ten  Loaves.     6. 

4.  The  Ten  Candlesticks.     7. 
6.     The  Ten  Tables.     8. 

6.  The  Court.     9-10. 

7.  The  Work  of  Huram.     11-17 

8.  The  Work  of  Solomon.     18-22. 

The  altar  of  brass,  twenty  cubits  long,  twenty  cubits 
broad  and  ten  cubits  high,  is  not  mentioned  in  the  book  of 
Kings.  In  the  south-east  of  the  court  of  the  temple,  stood 
the  molten  sea,  which  rested  upon  twelve  oxen,  three  looking 
northward,  three  looking  westward,  three  southward  and 
three  eastward.  It  received  and  held  3,000  measures  of 
water.*  The  molten  sea  was  for  the  priests  and  the  Levites 
to  perform  their  ablutions.  It  is  typical  of  that  cleansing 
which  His  people  need  and  which  is  so  graciously  provided 
by  the  Lord  Himself.  The  immense  quantity  of  water 
contained  in  the  molten  sea  suggests  the  unlimited  provision 
grace  has  made.  In  Revelation  iv  :6,  we  read  that  before  the 
throne  was  a  sea  of  glass  like  crystal.  This  sea  of  glass  is 
an  allusion  to  the  molten  sea  in  Solomon's  temple.  But  it 
is  not  a  sea  of  water,  but  of  glass  like  crystal,  because  the 
redeemed  (symbolically  seen  in  the  twenty-four  elders) 
in  glory  do  no  longer  need  cleansing.  They  have  entered 
upon  a  perfect  and  fixed  state  of  holiness.  The  ten  lavers 
with  their  bases  were  for  the  washing  of  the  sacrifices.  We 
see  that  instead  of  one  laver  there  were  ten;  and  there  were 
also  ten  candlesticks  and  ten  tables.  Everything  was  an 
increase  and  on  a  large  scale,  while  the  whole  house  and  its 
contents  represented  an  untold  wealth.     It  all  foreshadows 

*3,000  measures  was  the  full  amount  it  could  contain;  the  usual 
contents,  however,  were  2,000  measures  (1  Kings  vii:26). 


424      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

that  coming  glorious  Kingdom  of  Christ.  Then  there 
will  be  the  increase  and  the  blessing  typified  by  the  ten 
lavers,  the  ten  candlesticks  and  the  ten  tables.  The  brasen 
scaffold,  five  cubits  long,  five  cubits  broad  and  three  cubits 
high  which  Solomon  had  made  and  upon  which  he  stood  and 
kneeled  in  prayer  (2  Chron.  vi:13)  is  not  mentioned  in  this 
chapter. 

The  Priest's  court  was  inclosed  by  a  wall  of  hewn  stones 
and  a  row  of  cedar  beams  (1  Kings  vi:36).  It  had  massive 
gates  covered  with  brass.  What  Huram  had  v/orked  for 
Solomon  and  Solomon's  own  work  concludes  this  chapter 
and  the  account  of  the  building  of  the  temple. 

3.    The  Dedication  of   the   Temple. 
Chapter  v-vii:10. 

The  Ark  Brought  in  the  Temple. 

CHAPTER  V. 

1.  The  Completion  of  the  Temple.     1. 

2.  The  Assembly  Called  by  Solomon.     2-3. 

3.  The  Ark  Carried  to  its  Place.     4-9. 

4.  The  Contents  of  the  Ark.     10. 

5.  The  Praise  and  the  Glory.     11-14. 

The  reader  will  find  the  comments  on  the  dedication  of 
the  temple  in  the  book  of  Kings  (1  Kings  viii.  Pages  264- 
267).  Verses  11-13  are  not  given  in  the  record  of  the 
first  book  of  Kings.  The  Levites  exercised  their  holy 
office.  What  a  sight  it  must  have  been  when  Asaph,  Heman 
and  Jeduthun  in  the  lead  with  their  sons  and  brethren,  all 
clothed  in  white  linen,  with  cymbals,  psalteries  and  harps, 
stood  at  the  east  end  of  the  altar,  and  with  them  an  hundred 
and  twenty  priests  sounding  the  trumpets!  And  they  were 
as  one,  to  make  one  sound.  It  expresses  the  unity  of  God's 
people.  The  one  supreme  thought  and  aim  was  to  praise 
and  thank  the  Lord.  This  was  the  one  mind  in  which  they 
all  were  as  one.  Then  the  mighty  volume  of  many  voices, 
the  sound  of  the  trumpets,  cymbals  and  instruments  of 
music  broke  forth.     The  one  note  in  praise  was  "He  is  good; 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      425 

for  His  mercy  endureth  forever."  ^Vhen  the  foundation 
of  the  second  house  was  laid  this  praise  was  again  uttered 
(Ezra  iii:ll).  It  must  be  remembered  that  David  in  his 
great  prophetic  psalm  of  praise  ended  with  this  note  of 
praise  "O  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord;  for  He  is  good;  for 
His  mercy  endureth  forever.  .  .  .  Blessed  be  the  Lord 
God  of  Israel  for  ever  and  ever.  And  all  the  people  said 
'Amen'  and  praised  the  Lord"  (1  Chron.  xvi:34-36).  In 
Psalm  cxxxvi  we  find  twenty-six  times  "His  mercy  en- 
dureth." How  rich  was  that  mercy  towards  Israel!  He 
had  graciously  guided  and  kept  them.  He  brought  them 
into  the  land  and  all  their  enemies  had  been  subdued.  The 
house  had  been  built  and  all  had  been  accomplished.  And 
greater  mercy  is  for  Israel  in  the  future.  He  will  re-gather 
them.  All  their  enemies  will  be  silenced.  Another  house 
will  once  more  stand  in  Jerusalem  and  the  covenant-promise 
made  to  David  wiU  be  completely  realized  in  the  enthrone- 
ment of  the  coming  King  upon  the  hill  of  Zion  (Psalm  ii). 
Wliat  praises  His  redeemed  and  restored  people  will  then 
utter,  when  the  Lord  has  been  gracious  to  His  people  and 
to  His  land!  (Psalm  lxv:l;  cxlvii:12).  The  scene  here  at 
the  dedication  of  the  temple  foreshadows  the  future  praise 
of  Israel  in  the  Kingdom  which  our  Lord  will  bring  and 
establish  when  He  comes  again. 

And  when  this  mighty  praise  ascended  to  Jehovah, when 
they  made  but  one  sound,  hea^^en  answered.  The  house 
was  filled  with  the  cloud.  The  visible  symbol  presence  of 
Jehovah  had  come,  as  it  came  at  the  consecration  of  the 
tabernacle  (Exod.  xl:34-3o).  "WTioso  offereth  praise  glori- 
fieth  me."  (Psalm  1:23).  "As  an  holy  priesthood  we  are 
to  offer  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 
Christ."  (1  Peter  ii:5).  "By  him  therefore  let  us  offer  praise 
to  God  continually,  that  is,  the  fruit  of  our  lips  giving  thanks 
to  His  name"  (Heb.  xiii:15).  And  if  Israel  had  but  one 
thought  and  made  but  one  sound,  how  much  more  should 
we,  His  heavenly  people,  enjoying  greater  riches  and  a 
greater  nearness  than  Israel  ever  had,  be  of  one  mind  in 
praising  His  name! 


426      TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 
Solomon's  Address  and  Dedicatory  Prayer. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

1.  Solomon's  Address  to  the  Congregation.     1-11. 

2.  Solomon's  Dedicatory  Prayer.     12-39. 

The  report  of  Solomon's  address  is  the  sam3  as  recorded 
in  1  Kings  viii:12-21.  The  opening  statement  of  this 
chapter  has  been  well  characterized  as  a  pregnant  expression 
of  the  King's  realization  of  the  mystery  of  the  Being  of 
Jehovah,  the  all-creative  God,  as  well  as  the  condescension 
displayed  in  His  self-limitation  to  dwell  amongst  men. 
(See  Exodus  xix:9;  xx:21;  Lev.  xvi:2;  Deut.  iv.ll;  v:22). 
The  prayer  is  nearly  the  same  as  in  Kings  (1  Kings  viii:22- 
50).  However,  1  Kings  viii:51-61  is  omitted  and  a  few 
additional  verses  are  added.  The  opening  words  of  his 
great  prayer  are  an  acknowledgment  of  the  greatness  of 
Jehovah  and  the  fulfillment  of  what  God  had  promised  to 
David,  that  is,  the  promise  as  it  relates  to  him  as  David's 
son  and  the  building  of  the  house.  He  asks  next  that 
his  prayers  and  the  prayers  of  God's  people  may  be  heard 
as  they  ascend  from  the  place  where  His  Name  is  honored. 
Sin  is  acknowledged  in  connection  with  this  request.  "And 
when  Thou  hearest,  forgive."  In  what  follows,  the  different 
troubles  are  mentioned  and  Jehovah  is  implored  to  hear 
and  to  forgive.  It  is  the  model  prayer  for  Israel.  Con- 
fession of  sin  and  prayer  for  forgiveness  is  linked  with  all 
petitions.  Sin  is  acknowledged  as  the  one  cause  of  all 
troubles  and  disaster.  Israel  was  thus  taught  in  the  prayer 
of  Solomon  to  cast  itself  with  supplication  and  repentance 
for  sin  upon  Jehovah,  and  to  find  that  the  Lord  heareth  and 
delivereth  His  people.  The  subsequent  history  of  Judah 
gives  numerous  instances  of  answered  prayer.  Note  the 
omissions  from  the  prayer  report  in  1  Kings  viii  and  the 
diflPerent  closing  of  the  prayer  in  the  account  in  Chronicles. 
It  is  explained  by  the  prophetic  character  of  Kings  and  the 
priestly  character  of  Chronicles.  Psalm  cxxxii:8-10  is 
touched  upon  i»  verses  41-42, 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      4^7 
The  Answer  by  Fire — the  Sacrifices  and  the  Feast. 

CHAPTER  Vn:l-10. 

1.  The  Answer  by  Fire.     1-3. 

2.  The  Sacrifices.     4-7. 

3.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles.     8-10. 

A  fuller  manifestation  of  Jehovah's  favor  and  presence 
followed  the  great  prayer  of  the  King.  First  the  cloud  had 
appeared  and  now  the  fire  came  down  from  heaven  and 
consumed  the  burnt  offering  and  the  sacrifices;  and  the 
glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  house.  This  is  complementary 
to  1  Kings  viii:63-64.  Nothing  is  mentioned  of  this  an- 
swer by  fire  upon  the  sacrifices  in  the  book  of  Kings.  And 
now  all  the  children  of  Israel  saw  the  fire  and  the  glory  of 
the  Lord;  and  they  bowed  themselves  and  worshipped, 
praising  the  Lord  and  saying,  as  the  Levites  had  said  before, 
"He  is  good,  for  His  mercy  endureth  forever."  So  all  Israel 
will  see  in  a  future  day  the  glory  of  the  Lord  and  the  coming 
Lord  in  glory  and  worship  Him  (Zech.  xii:10).  The 
house  was  dedicated*  by  the  King  and  all  the  people.  The 
feast  which  followed  was  the  feast  of  tabernacles.  Its 
prophetic  significance  is  mentioned  in  annotations  on  page 
266. 

4.    The  Second  Vision. 

CHAPTER  VII:  11-12. 

1.  All  Finished  by  Solomon.     11. 

2.  The  Divine  Answer  and  the  Warning.     12-22. 

A  second  time  the  Lord  appeared  unto  Solomon.  At 
this  time  He  did  not  say  again  "Ask  what  shall  I  give  thee," 
but  He  assured  him  that  Solomon's  prayer  had  been  heard 
and  He  had  chosen  the  dedicated  place  for  Himself.  He 
graciously  assures  the  King  that  if  He  has  chastised  His 
people  by  sending  drought,  locusts  or  pestilence  and  they 
humble  themselves,  and  seek  His  face,  turning  away  from 
their  wicked  ways,  that  He  will  forgive  and  heal  their  land. 

*The  Hebrew  word  used  for  dedicate  is  the  word  "channuka."  The 
Jews  keep  a  feast  called  by  that  name. 


428      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

There  can  be  no  recovery  apart  from  the  conditions  men- 
tioned in  these  verses.  His  people  who  have  failed  must 
first  humble  themselves,  pray,  seek  His  face,  and  turn  away 
from  their  evil  ways.  The  warning  given  in  verses  19-22 
has  passed  into  history  and  found  its  literal  fulfillment. 

5.    Solomon's  Prosperity  and  Activities. 

CHAPTER  Vni. 

1.  The  Fortifications  of  Cities.     1-6. 

2.  The  Subjection  of  the  Strangers.     7-10. 

3.  The  Removal  of  the  Daughter  of  Pharaoh.     11. 

4.  The  Perfected  Service.     12-16. 

5.  The  Expedition  to  Ophir. 

The  activities  of  the  King  included  the  fortification  of 
certain  cities  (See  1  Kings  ix).  First  the  cities  are  men- 
tioned which  Huram  restored  to  Solomon.  These  are  the 
cities  which  Solomon  had  previously  given  to  him  for 
security.  1  Kings  ix:10-14  explains  this  statement  which 
otherwise  would  be  obscure.  All  the  strangers,  the  Canaan- 
ites,  dwelling  in  the  land  were  put  into  sub.jection  and  had  to 
pay  tribute  to  Solomon.  They  were  the  servants.  "But 
of  the  children  of  Israel  did  Solomon  make  no  servants  for 
his  work;  but  they  were  men  of  war,  and  chief  of  his  captains 
and  captains  of  his  horsemen  and  chariots."  It  foreshadows 
the  age  in  which  all  will  be  put  in  subjection  under  Him  who 
will  be  King  to  rule  in  righteousness  (Isaiah  xxxii  :1 ;  Heb.  ii  :8). 
Then  His  own  people  will  serve  Him,  for  they  "shall  be 
willing  in  the  day  of  His  power"  (Psalm  cx:3).  The  only 
mention  made  of  the  daughter  of  Pharaoh  in  Chronicles  is 
in  this  chapter  (verse  11).  He  married  her  in  the  beginning 
of  the  reign.  Her  removal  to  the  house  Solomon  had  built 
for  her  now  took  place.  On  the  typical  meaning  of  Pharaoh's 
daughter  see  1  Kings  iii:l  (page  253).  The  worship  in  the 
house  was  then  carried  on  in  a  perfect  way.  At  the  ap- 
pointed times  all  was  done  and  all  David,  the  man  of  God, 
had  commanded  was  carried  out  (verse  14).  There  was  no 
departure  from  the  commandment  of  the  King,  so  the 
house  of  the  Lord  was  perfected.     It  foreshadows  a  perfect 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      429 

obedience  and  worship  which  the  earth  will  see  when  the 
true  King  has  come.  Then,  as  it  was  in  Solomon's  day,  the 
King's  commandment  will  be  the  absolute  rule  for  every- 
thing (verse  15). 

6.    The  Queen  of  Sheba.   Solomon's  Riches  and  Honors. 

Solomon's  Death. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

1.  The  Visit  of  the  Queen.     1-12. 

2.  The  Riches  of  Solomon.     13-16. 

3.  .  The  Ivory  Throne.     17-19. 

4.  Further  Riches  and  Honors  of  Solomon.     20-29. 

5.  The  Death  of  Solomon.     30-31. 

The  account  of  the  visit  of  the  Queen  of  Sheba  is  the 
same  as  it  appears  in  1  Kings  x  (annotations  pages  269-270). 
The  fame  of  Solomon  had  spread  far  and  wide,  and  the 
Queen  of  Sheba  comes  to  bring  her  tribute  to  admire  and 
praise  his  wisdom  and  to  give  him  presents  of  glorious 
things  and  of  great  value.  And  more  than  that.  "King 
Solomon  passed  all  the  Kings  of  the  earth  in  riches  and  wis- 
dom." A  type  of  the  coming  King  who  will  be  head  of  all. 
"And  all  the  Kings  of  the  earth  sought  the  presence  of  Solo- 
mon, to  hear  his  wisdom  that  God  had  put  in  his  heart. 
And  they  brought  every  man  his  present,  vessels  of  silver, 
and  vessels  of  gold,  and  raiment,  harness  and  spices,  horses 
and  mules,  a  rate  year  by  year"  (verses  23-24).  In  anno- 
tations on  1  Kings  x,  we  have  pointed  out  how  all  this  glory 
and  the  wealth  of  Solomon  and  Jerusalem  foreshadows  the 
fulfillment  of  many  prophecies  concerning  the  glorious 
reign  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Greater  splendor  and  glory 
will  rest  upon  Him  and  come  to  Jerusalem  than  in  Solomon's 
reign.  Many  beautiful  dsecriptions  of  that  coming  glory, 
foreshadowed  in  this  chapter,  we  find  in  different  parts  of 
the  prophetic  Word  (see  Isa.  lx:3-14,  lxvi:10-13;  Psalm 
Ixxii). 

Nothing  is  mentioned  in  Chronicles  of  Solomon's  great 
failure.  As  nothing  is  said  in  the  first  part  of  Chronicles 
on  David's  sin,  so  the  sin  and  failure  of  Solomon  is  passed 


430      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

over  in  this  part  of  the  Chronicles.  His  reign  is  described 
as  unmarred  by  failure,  a  reign  of  undimmed  glory.  Such 
will  be  the  reign  of  Him  who  is  greater  than  Solomon. 
Solomon's  failure,  however,  is  indicated  in  this  chapter. 
The  horses  out  of  Egypt  mentioned  in  verse  28,  and  the  fact 
that  he  multiplied  horses  and  sought  the  gold  of  Ophir, 
shows  that  he  became  lifted  up. 

"Solomon  enjoyed  the  sure  promises  of  God.  He  sins 
in  the  means  by  which  he  seeks  to  satisfy  his  own  lusts; 
and  although  the  result  was  the  accomplishment  of  the 
promise,  yet  he  bears  the  consequences  of  so  doing.  Out- 
wardly only  the  fulfillment  of  the  promise  was  seen.  In  fact 
there  was  something  else.  Without  sending  for  horses  from 
Egypt,  and  gold  from  Ophir,  Solomon  would  have  been 
rich  and  glorious,  for  God  had  promised  it.  By  doing  this 
he  enriched  himself,  but  he  departs  from  God  and  from  His 
word.  Having  given  himself  up  to  his  desires  after  riches 
and  glory,  he  had  multiplied  the  number  of  his  wives,  and 
in  his  old  age  they  turned  away  his  heart.  This  neglect  of 
the  word,  which  at  first  appeared  to  have  no  bad  effect  (for 
he  grew  rich,  as  though  it  had  been  but  the  fulfilment  of 
God's  promise),  soon  led  to  a  departure  more  serious  in  its 
nature  and  in  its  consequences,  to  influence  more  powerful, 
and  more  immediately  opposed  to  the  commands  of  God's 
word,  and  at  last  to  flagrant  disobedience  of  its  most  posi- 
tive and  essential  requirements.  The  slippery  path  of  sin 
is  always  trodden  with  accelerated  steps,  because  the  first 
sin  tends  to  weaken  in  the  soul  the  authority  and  power  of 
that  which  alone  can  prevent  our  committing  still  greater 
sins — that  is,  the  word  of  God,  as  well  as  the  consciousness 
of  His  presence,  which  imparts  to  the  word  all  its  practical 
power  over  us.* 

*Synopsis. 


TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      4S1 

II.     The   Rebellion  of  the  Ten  Tribes. 

CHAPTER   X. 

1.  Rehoboam  Made  King.     1. 

2.  Jeroboam's  Return  from  Egypt  and  his  Request.     2-5. 

3.  Rehoboam's  Answer.     6-15. 

4.  The  Revolt  and  Rehoboam's  Flight.     16-19. 

What  followed  Solomon's  fall  when  he  turned  away  from 
the  Lord,  who  so  graciously  had  appeared  unto  him  twice, 
is  unrecorded  in  Chronicles.  1  Kings  xi:9-43  contains  these 
events.  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat,  had  lifted  up  his 
hand  against  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi:27).  He  planned  secretly 
a  revolt  against  the  King,  and  when  he  went  out  of  Jerusa- 
lem, most  likely  to  carry  out  his  plans,  the  prophet  Ahijah 
met  him,  and  in  renting  his  own  garment  into  ten  pieces 
announced  that  God  would  take  the  kingdom  out  of  the 
hand  of  Solomon  and  give  to  Jeroboam  the  ten  tribes. 
Then  Solomon  sought  to  kill  Jeroboam  and  he  fled  into 
Egypt,  and  was  in  Egypt  until  Solomon  died.  It  is  here 
where  the  account  in  Chronicles  comes  in.  Rehoboam 
("Enlarger  of  the  People"),  the  only  son  of  Solomon  men- 
tioned in  the  Bible,  went  to  Shechem,  where  all  Israel  had 
come  together  to  make  him  King.  Jeroboam  had  returned 
from  Egypt  and  appeared  on  the  scene,  sent  by  the  people 
to  conduct  negotiations  in  their  behalf.  Jeroboam  demanded 
a  lightening  of  the  heavy  burden  of  forced  labor  and  taxa- 
tion which  Solomon  had  put  upon  them.  If  this  request 
would  be  granted  they  were  ready  to  serve  Jeroboam.  The 
King  asked  for  three  days  to  consider  the  demand.  He 
first  turned  to  the  aged  men  and  consulted  those  who  had 
been  closely  associated  with  his  father.  They  advised  him 
to  use  kindness  to  avert  the  threatening  rebellion.  "A  soft 
answer  turneth  away  wrath,  but  grievous  words  stir  up 
anger"  (Prov.  xv:l).  If  Rehoboam  had  heeded  this  in- 
spired saying  of  his  father,  he  would  have  followed  the  advice 
which  had  been  given.  But  instead  he  turned  to  the  young 
men,  "the  young  men*  that  had  grown  up  with  him."  They 
readily  gave  advice  how  the  peoples'  demand,  "Ease  some- 

*Hebrew:  Children. 


432       TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

what  the  yoke  that  thy  father  did  put  upon  us,"  should  be 
answered.  It  was  a  fooHsh  advice.  The  threat  to  increase 
their  burdens,  and  that  while  his  father  had  used  whips  he 
would  use  scorpions,*  was  to  overawe  the  people  and  bring 
them  into  submission.  It  seems  almost  impossible  that 
Rehoboam  should  follow  such  advice.  If  Eccles.ii:  18-19 
applies  to  this  son  of  Solomon,  the  father's  fears  were  well 
founded.  He  certainly  showed  that  he  was  not  a  wise  man, 
but  a  fool.  Yet  there  was  another  reason  why  Rehoboam 
listened  to  the  foolish  counsel.  "So  the  King  hearkened 
not  unto  the  people,  for  the  cause  was  of  God,  that  the  Lord 
might  perform  His  Word,  which  He  spake  by  Ahijah,  the 
Shilonite,  to  Jeroboam,  the  son  of  Nebat."  And  the  offended 
people  answered  the  King  with  the  same  spirit  and  declared 
their  independence.  In  contempt  they  said,  "And  now 
David  see  to  thine  own  house."  Then  foolishly  Rehoboam 
sent  one  of  the  officials  who  were  hated  on  account  of  their 
office,  Hadoram,  who  was  over  the  tribute.  The  people 
became  infuriated  and  stoned  him  to  death.  King  Reho- 
boam had  to  make  haste  to  escape  a  similar  fate.  The  re- 
volt had  come.  "And  Israel  rebelled  against  the  house  of 
David."  The  words  spoken  to  Solomon  (1  Kings  xi:ll-13) 
were  now  fuffiUed. 

III.    The  History  of  the  Kings  of  Judah. 
Events  Leading  up  to  the  Captivity. 

Chapters  xi-xxxvi:14. 
1.    Decline  and  Apostasy  under  Rehoboam,  Abijah  and 
Asa.    Chapters   xi-xvi. 

Rehoboam's  Reign. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

1.  The  Forbidden  War.     1-4. 

2.  The  National  Defence.     5-12. 

3.  Jeroboam's  Wickedness  and  Rehoboam's  Strength.  13-17. 

4.  Rehoboam's  Family.     18-23. 

The  provocation  to  go  to  war  with  the  tribes  which  had 
revolted  was  great.     Rehoboam  was  ready  to  start  the  civil 
*A  cruel  whip  to  which  pieces  of  sharp  metal  were  attached. 


TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      433 

war.  He  gathered  180,000  men  of  Judah  and  Benjamin  to 
fight  against  Israel  and  to  restore  the  tribes  to  his  kingdom. 
Shemaiah,  the  man  of  God,  the  prophet  in  Judah,  received 
a  message  from  the  Lord,  which  he  faithfully  delivered. 
"Ye  shall  not  go  up,  nor  fight  against  your  brethren;  return 
every  man  to  his  house,  for  this  thing  is  done  of  me."  It 
required  courage  to  deliver  such  a  message  in  the  midst 
of  the  great  preparations  for  war.  Rehoboam  and  the 
people  obeyed  and  did  not  go  to  war.  They  must  have 
realized  that  if  they  disobeyed  they  would  have  fought 
against  God.  And  the  Lord  also  blessed  the  King  and  his 
people  for  believing  the  Word  and  being  obedient.  He 
always  blesses  when  there  is  obedience.  He  built  and 
fortified  fifteen  cities.  "He  fortified  the  strongholds,  and 
put  captains  in  them  and  store  of  victuals  and  of  oil  and 
wine."  In  several  places  he  put  shields  and  spears.  Thus 
he  made  ready  for  a  possible  invasion  from  the  side  of 
Egypt,  for  Jeroboam,  his  rival,  had  been  there.  Rehoboam's 
fears  were  well  founded,  as  we  shall  find  in  the  next  chapter. 

Then  there  was  a  great  exodus  of  priests  and  Levites  from 
the  domain  of  Jeroboam.  As  we  learned  from  1  Kings 
xii  :25-33,  Jeroboam  established  a  wicked  worship,  setting  up 
two  golden  calves  at  Beth-el  and  Dan.  The  priests  he  made 
were  taken,  not  from  the  sons  of  Levi,  but  from  the  lowest  of 
the  people  (1  Kings  xii:31).  The  true  priest  and  Levites 
who  had  remained  with  him  were  cast  off  from  executing 
their  holy  and  God-given  office.  He  also  had  priests  "for 
the  devils."  The  Hebrew  word  translated  "devils"  means 
"hairy  ones"  and  "goats."  In  Egypt  the  sacred  goat  was 
worshipped  and  Jeroboam's  worship  was  patterned.  The 
priests  and  Levites  who  were  driven  away  by  Jeroboam 
strengthened  the  Kingdom  of  Judah.  They  had  a  whole- 
some influence  upon  the  otherwise  weak  son  of  Solomon. 
"They  made  Rehoboam,  the  son  of  Solomon,  strong." 
They  all  walked  in  the  way  of  David  and  Solomon  for  three 
years.  Most  likely  fear  had  much  to  do  with  it.  We  read 
nothing  of  turning  to  the  Lord  and  seeking  His  face. 

His  family  record  is  given.      Mahalath  is  mentioned  as 


434       THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

his  wife,  a  daughter  of  Jerimoth,  probably  the  son  of  one  of 
David's  concubines  (1  Chron.  iii:9).  Then  he  took  Maacah, 
a  grand-daughter  of  Absalom.  According  to  Josephus, 
Maacah 's  mother  was  Tamar,  the  daughter  of  Absalom 
(2  Sam.  xiv:27).  He  had  many  wives  and  concubines. 
The  polygamous  tendencies  of  his  father  and  grandfather 
were  thus  indulged  by  him,  and  in  all  probability  his  apostasy 
started  from  this  sin.  But  he  acted  wisely  and  dispersed 
all  his  children  throughout  the  whole  country.  Having 
twenty-eight  sons  and  many  more  daughters,  there  was 
great  possibilities  of  conspiracies,  which  he  avoided  by 
scattering  them  in  different  directions. 

Rehoboam's  Apostasy,  Punishment  and  Death. 
CHAPTER  Xn. 

1.  Rehoboam's  Apostasy.     1. 

2.  Punishment  through  Shishak.     2-12. 

3.  Death  of  Rehoboam.     13-16. 

The  Kingdom  had  been  established;  Rehoboam  had 
strengthened  himself  and  lived  in  the  indulgence  of  the 
flesh.  Then  followed  the  awful  plunge  into  apostasy.  "He 
forsook  the  law  of  the  Lord  and  all  Israel  with  him."  Idola- 
try in  the  high  places  and  under  every  green  tree  was  estab- 
lished and  fostered  by  him.  "And  there  were  also  Sodomites 
in  the  land,  and  they  did  according  to  all  the  abominations 
of  the  nations  which  the  Lord  cast  out  before  the  children 
of  Israel"    (I   Kings  xiv:22-24). 

Then  Shishak  came  from  Egypt  against  Jerusalem  with 
an  immense  army.  He  was  the  first  king  of  the  twenty- 
second,  or  Bubastic  dynasty.  In  his  army  were  the  Lubims 
(Libyans),  Sukkims  (desert  tribes)  and  the  Ethiopians. 
The  cities  which  Rehoboam  had  built  and  fortified  could 
not  keep  him  out,  for  the  Lord  had  brought  him  to  punish 
Jerusalem.  When  Jerusalem  was  threatened  and  the 
Egyptian  hordes  were  about  to  proceed  against  Jerusalem, 
Shemaiah,  the  Man  of  God,  appeared  once  more.  He 
brought  the  solemn  message  from  the  Lord,  "Ye  hav.^ 
forsaken  me,  and  therefore  have  I  left  you  in  the  hand  (,f 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      435 

Shishak."  That  for  which  the  Lord  always  looks  first  of 
all,  when  His  people  have  sinned  and  departed  from  Him, 
was  done  by  the  princes  and  the  King.  "They  humbled 
themselves."  And  when  the  Lord  saw  that  they  humbled 
themselves  and  were  returnuig  to  Him,  He  had  compassion 
on  them.  Some  deliverance  was  granted  and  the  wrath 
was  not  poured  out  upon  the  city.  And  He  is  still  the  same 
gracious  Lord,  always  ready  to  forgive  His  people,  when  they 
return  unto  Him.  Howe^^er,  the  pride  of  Rehoboam  had 
to  be  dealt  with  and,  therefore,  Shishak  was  permitted  to 
take  away  the  immense  riches  which  Solomon  had  stored 
up  in  the  treasures  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  and  in  the  king's 
house.  The  shields  of  gold  were  also  carried  away.  Sad 
is  the  record  of  this  son  of  Solomon:  "And  he  did  evil, 
because  he  prepared  not  his  heart  to  seek  the  Lord."  Had 
he  prepared  his  heart  to  seek  the  Lord,  he  would  not  have 
done  the  evil  which  he  did.  The  only  thing  which  can  keep 
from  evil  is  to  seek  the  Lord  and  walk  in  obedience  to  His 
Word.  Rehoboam's  reign,  with  the  exception  of  three 
years  in  which  he  walked  in  the  way  of  David  and  Solomon, 
was  a  reign  of  trouble.  Besides  Shishak's  invasion  "there 
were  wars  between  Rehoboam  and  Jeroboam  continually" 
(verse  15). 

The  Reign  of  Abijah. 

CHAPTER  Xin. 
1.     The  Beginning  of  his  Reign.     1-2. 
,       2.     War  with  Jeroboam.     3-19. 

3.  Death  of  Jeroboam.     20. 

4.  Abijah's  Family.     21-22. 

Abijah  is  called  in  Kings,  Abijam,  and  in  2  Chron.  xiii:21, 
Abijahu.  His  reign  was  not  of  a  long  duration;  he  out- 
lived his  father  Rehoboam  only  three  years.  His  mother 
was  Maachah  (2  chron.  xi:20).  She  is  called  here  Michaiah, 
probably  because  she  was  the  queen-mother.  There  is 
no  discrepancy  between  chapter  xi:20  and  the  second  verse 
of  this  chapter,  in  which  she  is  called  a  daughter  of  Uriel  of 
Gibeah.     Josephus  is  probably  correct  when  he  states  that 


436      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Uriel  was  the  husband  of  Tamar,  the  daughter  of  Absalom. 
In  chapter  xi:20,  she  is  called  a  daughter  of  Absalom,* 
or  rather  grand-daughter,  for  one  word  is  used  in  Hebrew 
for  daughter  and  grand-daughter. 

Of  Abijah's  evil  walk,  and  that  his  heart  was  not  perfect 
with  the  Lord,  the  Chronicles  has  nothing  to  say.  That  is 
found  in  Kings.  That  things  went  from  bad  to  \\orse 
under  Abijah's  brief  reign  may  be  learned  from  the  fact  that 
his  son  Asa  had  to  institute  a  reformation,  and  Maachah, 
the  mother  of  Abijah  and  grandmother  of  Asa,  had  to  be 
put  away,  because  she  had  put  up  an  Asherah,  a  vile  idol- 
image  in  a  grove  (1  Kings  xv:  13;  2  Chron.  xv:16).  Chronicles 
gives  an  account  of  Abijah's  war  with  Jeroboam.  The 
two  armies  of  Judah  and  Israel  faced  each  other;  Abijah 
had  400,000  men  and  Jeroboam  800,000.  There  is  no 
reason  to  doubt  the  accuracy  of  these  figures,  as  some 
critics  have  done.  Both  sides  were  confident  of  victory. 
Jeroboam  had  twice  as  many  men  as  Abijah,  and  they 
were  "mighty  men  of  valor."  He  trusted  in  his  superior 
number.  It  was  different  with  Abijah,  King  of  Judah. 
Before  the  battle  began  the  King  delivered  a  remarkable 
address  in  which  he  expressed  his  confidence  in  Jehovah. 
The  Lord  had  given  the  Kingdom  to  David  and  to  his  sons 
by  a  covenant  of  salt,  said  Abijah.  The  covenant  of  salt 
refers  to  a  very  ancient  custom.  When  a  guest  had  been 
entertained  in  a  tent  and  partaken  of  salt  with  his  host, 
tlie  obligation  of  the  latter  towards  his  guest  was  one  of 
inviolable  sanctity.  The  covenant  of  Jehovah  with  David 
was  like  a  covenant  of  salt,  that  is,  inviolable.  Abijah 
believed  in  that  covenant.  Then  he  mentioned  Jeroboam, 
whom  sarcastically  he  calls  "the  servant  of  Solomon,"  his 
revolt,  his  idolatry,  his  opposition  to  the  priesthood.  He 
closed  his  address  with  a  confident  statement.  "Behold, 
God  Himself  is  with  us  for  our  captain,  and  His  priests  with 
sounding  trumpets  to  cry  alarm  against  you."  Then  the 
warning:  "O  children  of  Israel,  fight  ye  not  against  the 
Lord  God  of  your  fathers;  for  ye  shall  not  prosper."     Abijah 

*Abislialom  in  1  Kings  xv:2  is   the  same  as  Absalom. 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      437 

won  the  battle.  When  they  were  encircled  by  the  enemy 
they  cried  to  Jehovah  in  their  hour  of  need,  and  He  was 
faithful  to  His  own  Word  (Numb.  x:9).  When  the  priests 
sounded  with  the  trumpets,  when  they  shouted,  no  doubt 
in  faith  and  anticipation  of  Jehovah's  interference,  then 
God  smote  Jeroboam  and  all  Israel  and  delivered  them  into 
their  hands.  They  had  prevailed  because  they  relied  upon 
the  Lord  God,  and  so  shall  we  prevail  if  we  trust  in  the  Lord. 
With  that  battle  Jeroboam's  strength  was  broken.  The 
wicked  King,  whose  awful  idolatry  was  the  ruin  of  Israel, 
never  recovered  his  strength.  The  Lord  struck  him  and 
he  died. 

The  Reign  of  Asa. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

1.  The  Death  of  Abijah  and  Asa  becomes  King.     1. 

2.  The  Good  Beginning.     2-8. 

3.  His  Victory  over  Zerah.     9-15. 

Asa*,  the  son  of  Abijah,  began  his  reign  well.  He  did 
what  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  The  strange  altars, 
the  high  places  and  the  images  were  taken  away  and  the 
groves  cut  down.  He  was  not  satisfied  with  this  work,  but  he 
also  commanded  Judah  to  seek  the  Lord.  The  land  was 
quiet.  The  Lord  blessed  him  and  the  land  for  the  faithful 
work  which  had  been  done.  ''The  land  had  rest,  and  he 
had  no  war  in  those  years,  because  the  Lord  had  given  him 
rest.  It  was  a  remarkable  work  for  one  so  young;  probably 
Asa  was  not  yet  twelve  years  old  when  he  became  King. 
Maachah,  his  grandmother,  most  likely  had  some  oversight 
as  "queen-mother."  t  Notice  the  great  prosperity  which  fol- 
lowed the  work  he  had  done.  "The  Kingdom  was  quiet 
before  him."  Cities  were  built  and  fortified.  They  readily 
acknowledged  that  it  was  all  of  God.  "Because  we  have 
sought  the  Lord  our  God,  we  have  sought  Him,  and  He 
hath  given  us  rest  on  all  sides."     So  they  built  and  prospered. 

*Asa  means  "healing,"  or  "who  will  heal?" 

fin  1  Kings  xv:9  she  is  called  the  mother  of  Asa;  the  same  is  the  case 
m  our  book  xv:16.  Mother  in  these  passages  has  the  meaning  of 
grandmother. 


438      THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

But  faith  had  to  be  tested.  A  powerful  army  under  the 
leadership  of  Zerah,  an  Ethiopian,  came  against  Judah. 
The  battle  was  to  take  place  in  the  open  field,  in  the  valley 
of  Zephathah.  Before  the  forces  ever  clashed  Asa  cried 
to  the  Lord.  His  prayer  is  most  beautiful  and  simple.  It 
still  breatheth  freshness  and  has  been  a  help  to  all  God's 
trusting  people  in  all  ages.  "Lord  it  is  nothing  with  thee 
to  help,  whether  with  many,  or  with  them  that  have  no  power; 
help  us,  O  Lord  our  God ;  for  we  rest  on  thee,  and  in  thy 
name  we  go  against  this  multitude.  O  Lord,  thou  art  our 
God,  let  not  man  prevail  against  thee."  What  confidence 
and  trust!  He  put  the  whole  matter  upon  the  Lord.  Their 
enemies  were  His  enemies.  In  His  name,  resting  on  Him, 
they  went  forth.  May  we  know  and  practice  the  same 
confidence.  Such  a  prayer  could  not  remain  unanswered. 
The  Lord  smote  the  Ethiopians  and  gave  to  His  people  a 
great  victory. 

The  Reign  of  Asa.    Warning  and  Reformation. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

1.  The  Warning  Message  of  Azariah.     1-7. 

2.  Asa's  Response  and  Reformation.     8-19. 

But  the  Lord  knew  the  danger  which  threatened  Asa. 
He  had  begun  well.  He  was  faithful  to  Jehovah,  and  he 
and  the  people  had  a  wonderful  demonstration  that  the  Lord 
hears  and  answers  prayer.  Would  he  continue  and  end  as 
well  as  he  had  begun?  The  Spirit  of  God  came  at  this 
important  time  upon  Azariah  ("whom  the  Lord  helps"). 
When  victorious  Asa  returned  the  prophet  met  him  and 
delivered  his  message.  It  was  a  needed  and  timely  message, 
for  the  danger  for  God's  people  is  always  the  greatest  after 
a  victory  is  won  and  outward  success  and  prosperity  is 
enjoyed.  "The  Lord  is  with  you,  while  ye  be  with  Him; 
and  if  ye  seek  Him,  He  will  l^e  found  of  you;  but  if  ye  for- 
sake Him,  He  will  forsake  you."  This  has,  of  course, 
nothing  to  do  with  the  question  of  salvation  and  the  posses- 
tion  of  eternal  life,  which  the  believer  hath  in  Christ.  To 
bear  a  real  testimony,  fruit  unto  God  and  have  the  victory 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES     439 

at  all  times,  a  close  walk  with  the  Lord  is  needed.  Apart 
from  this,  God's  people  are  helpless  and  must  needs  dis- 
honor their  Lord.  Verses  3-6  picture  the  results  of  depart- 
ure from  the  Lord,  such  as  were  among  Israel  during  the 
period  of  the  Judges.  "Be  ye  strong  therefore,  and  let  not 
your  hands  be  weak;  for  your  work  shall  be  rewarded." 

And  Asa  hearing  these  words,  believed  what  the  prophet 
had  said  and  then  acted  upon  them.  It  is  the  true  path  to 
blessing,  learning,  believing  and  obeying.  The  abominable 
idols  were  removed  and  the  altar  before  the  porch  of  the 
Lord,  which  had  fallen  into  disuse,  was  renewed  by  him. 
(2  Chron.  viiirH).  A  great  sacrificial  scene  followed.  In 
connection  with  it  they  entered  into  a  covenant  to  seek  the 
Lord.  The  religious  enthusiasm  ran  so  high  that  they 
determined  to  put  to  death  every  person  who  did  not  seek 
the  Lord.  And  when  they  sought  Him  with  their  whole 
desire  He  was  found  of  them  and  gave  them  rest.  These 
are  precious  and  encouraging  words.  He  is  the  Lord,  who 
changeth  not.  It  is  still  true  to-day  and  ever  will  be  true. 
He  will  be  found  by  those  who  seek  Him  with  their  whole 
desire. 

Asa*s  Relapse  and  Death. 

CHAPTER   XVI. 

1.  War  between  Asa  and  Baasha.     1-6. 

2.  Hanani's  Rebuke.     7-9. 

3.  Hanani  Imprisoned.     10 — 11. 

4.  Asa's  Illness  and  Death.     12-14. 

Much  has  been  made  by  critics  of  the  supposed  wrong 
date,  the  thirty  sixth  year  of  the  reign  of  Asa.  Compare 
1  Kings  xv:33  with  the  first  verse  of  this  chapter  to  see  the 
apparent  discrepancy.  If  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  Baasha 
occurred  shortly  after  the  events  recorded  in  the  precious 
chapter,  it  was  in  the  thirty-sixth  year  after  the  revolt  of 
the  ten  tribes.  This  presents  a  possible  solution.  Others 
think  it  Is  tlie  error  of  a  scribe.* 

*As  the  dates  in  2  Chron.  xv:19;  xvi:l  are  incompatible  with  that  of 
Baasha's  death  (1  Kings  xvi:8),  and  consequently,  of  course,  with  that 
of  Baasha's  war  against  Asa,  commentators  have  tried  to  obviate  the 
difficulty,  either  by  supposing  that  the  numeral  35  refers,  not  to  the 


440      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Asa  relapsed  and  failed  when  Baasha,  King  of  Israel, 
came  against  Judah  and  built  Ramah  (see  annotations, 
pages  279-280;  1  Kings  xv  and  xvi).  In  unbelief  Asa  made 
an  alliance  with  the  King  of  Syria.  He  feared  Baasha  very 
much.  In  Jeremiah  xli  :9,  we  read  of  a  pit  which  he  made 
for  fear  of  Baasha;  probably  to  hide  there.  "The  fear  of 
man  bringeth  a  snare."  How  this  reveals  the  weakness  of 
man  !  After  all  the  e\'idences  of  the  Lord's  mercy  and 
power  Asa  coiild  forsake  thus  the  Lord  and  enter  into  an 
unholy  alliance  with  a  heathen  king.  He  gained  the  ob- 
ject he  sought  and  Baasha  was  forced  to  abandon  his  plan. 
But  God  had  been  a  witness  of  it  all.  He  sent  through 
Hanani  ("graciously  given  by  the  Lord"  the  meaning  of 
his  name)  and  rebuked  the  king  for  what  he  had  done.  The 
Lord  reminds  him  of  the  far  greater  host  which  threatened 
him  (chapter  xiv  :9-15)  and  the  deliverance  He  had  wrought. 
Beautiful  are  the  final  words  of  Hanani.  "For  the  eyes  of 
the  Lord  run  to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth,  to 
show  Himself  strong  in  behalf  of  them  whose  heart  is  per- 
fect toward  Him."  The  Lord  looks  for  faith,  for  confi- 
dence. Our  hearts  are  perfect  toward  Him  when  we  trust 
Him  and  are  obedient  to  His  Word.  Then  all  His  power  is 
with  us  and  for  us. 

Wars  to  the  end  was  the  punishment  announced  upon 
Asa.  And  Asa  showed  his  true  state  of  soul,  when,  instead 
of  saying,  "I  have  sinned,"  he  began  to  rage;  when  instead 
of  beseeching  Hanani  to  pray  for  him,  he  put  him  in  prison. 
He  was  away  from  the  Lord  and  his  behavior  made  it  known. 
Stricken  by  disease,  no  doubt  to  humble  him  and  bring 
him  back  to  the  Lord,  he  sought  not  the  Lord,  but  the 
physicians.  These  were  in  all  probability  magicians,  who 
used  enchantments.  There  was  no  return  unto  the  Lord; 
no  repentance. 

date  of  Asa's  accession,  but  to  that  of  the  separation  of  the  kingdoms 
of  Judah  and  Israel,  or  else  by  emendating  the  numeral  in  the  Book  of 
Chronicles.  The  latter  is,  evidently,  the  only  satisfactory  solution. 
There  is  manifestly  here  a  copyist's  mistake,  and  the  numeral  which  we 
would  substitute  for  35  is  not  15  but  25 — and  this  for  reasons  too  long 
to  explain. — Bible  History. 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      441 

2.    Reformation  under  Jehoshaphat, 

Chapters  xvii-xx. 
Jehoshaphat's  Reformation  and  Increase. 

CHAPTER  XVIL 

1.  The  Lord  was  with  Jehoshaphat.     1-5. 

2.  The  Revival  under  his  Reign.     6-9. 

3.  His  Increase.      10-19. 

Jehoshaphat,  the  son  of  Asa,  began  his  reign  by  strength- 
ening himself  against  Israel.*  The  Lord  was  with  him, 
because  he  walked  in  the  first  ways  of  his  father  David, 
which  means  David's  faithful  walk  before  his  great  sin. 
The  Lord  greatly  blessed  him  by  establishing  his  kingdom 
and  in  giving  him  riches  and  honor  in  abundance.  The 
Lord  kept  all  His  promises.  When  Jehoshaphat  saw  the 
evidences  of  divine  blessing,  his  heart  was  lifted  up  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord.  This  does  not  mean  that  he  was  puffed 
up,  but  that  he  became  encouraged  to  go  on  in  the  good 
way  he  was  following.  The  high  places  and  groves  were 
removed  by  him.  In  1  Kings  xxii:43,  we  read  that  he  did 
not  take  away  the  high  places  and  that  the  people  offered 
incense  there.  The  work  was  not  completely  done.  While 
he  personally  wanted  to  see  it  accomplished  and  commanded 
that  it  be  done,  the  people  failed  in  fully  carrying  out  his 
wishes.  "For  as  yet  the  people  had  not  prepared  their 
hearts  unto  the  God  of  their  fathers"  (xx:33).  Another 
work  he  did,  was  the  sending  out  of  teachers  to  instruct 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  Their  names  are  interest- 
ing. Ben-hail,  "Son  of  Strength";  Abadiah,  "Servant 
of  the  Lord";  Zechariah,  "the  Lord  remembers";  Ne- 
thaneel,  "Gift  of  God" ;  Michariah,    "Who  is  like  the  Lord?" 

*He  strengthened  his  kingdom  against  Israel,  an  enemy  more  dan- 
gerous by  their  example  than  by  their  strength.  When  anything 
pretends  to  be  in  connection  with  God  and  to  acknowledge  Him,  there 
is  no  safety  except  in  judging  it  with  a  spiritual  judgment — which  can 
only  be  formed  through  a  just  sense  of  God's  honor — making  no 
terms  with  that  which  pretends  to  be  connected  with  Him,  and  treat- 
ing it  as  an  enemy.  This  is  what  Jehoshaphat  did  at  first;  and,  as  he 
did  not  walk  in  the  ways  of  Israel,  Jehovah  established  the  kingdom  in 
his  hand. — Synopsis. 


442      THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

He  also  sent  priests  and  Levites.  "And  they  taught  in 
Judah  and  had  the  book  of  the  Law  of  the  Lord  with  them 
and  went  about  throughout  all  the  cities  of  Judah  and 
taught  the  people."  It  was  a  revival  in  teaching  and  in 
the  study  of  the  Word.  No  true  revival  can  take  place 
unless  it  is  coiuiected  with  the  Word. 

And  the  results  soon  came.  The  fear  of  the  Lord  fell 
upon  the  surrounding  kingdoms.  They  feared  to  touch  the 
people  who  were  thus  blessed.  The  Philistines  brought 
presents  and  tribute  silver;  the  Arabians  immense  herds  of 
cattle.  It  was  all  a  fulfillment  of  Deut.  xi:22-25.  Judah 
had  a  phenomenal  increase.  Without  doubt  this  chapter 
presents  one  of  the  best  scenes  in  the  Kingdom  of  Judah. 

Jehoshaphat's  Sinful  Alliance  with  Ahab. 

CHAPTER  XVm. 

1.  The  Alliance  with  Ahab.     1-3. 

2.  Ahab's  False  "Prophets.     4-11. 

3.  Micaiah's  Prophecy.     12-27. 

4.  The  Fatal  Battle  at  Ramoth-Gilead.     28-34. 

The  same  record  also  appears  in  1  Kings  xii,  to  which 
the  reader  may  turn  for  further  annotations.  Jehosha- 
phat's prosperity  became  a  snare  to  him.  Riches  and  honor 
he  had  in  abundance.  No  doubt  lifted  up  in  his  heart  and 
self-secure,  saying  perhaps,  "I  am  increased  in  goods  and 
have  need  of  nothing,"  on  a  certain  day  he  joined  affinity 
with  Ahab.  Jehoshaphat's  son  Jehoram  married  Ahab's 
wicked  daughter  Athaliah  (xxi  :6) .  This  was  a  fatal  step  for 
Jehoshaphat  and  the  house  of  Judah.  It  brought  him  into 
alliance  with  Ahab,  the  wicked;  he  almost  lost  his  life  on 
account  of  it;  only  his  prayer  saved  him  (verse  31);  and 
Athaliah  introduced  the  vile  idolatries  of  Ahab  bito  Judah 
(xxii:3)  and  became  the  murderess  of  the  royal  seed  (xxii:10- 
12). 

The  historical  account  of  Jehoshaphat's  alliance  with 
Ahab,  the  false  prophets,  the  prophecy  of  Micaiah,  the  battle 
of  Ramoth-Gilead,  is  commented  upon  in  the  record  of  the 
First  book  of  Kings. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      443 

That  Jehoshaphat  knew  the  Lord  and  was  His  is  blessedly 
illustrated  in  verses  31-32.  In  the  hour  of  need,  the  king 
in  such  bad  company  turned  to  the  Lord  and  cried  to  Him. 
There  was  an  immediate  answer  and  the  King  of  Judah  was 
saved.  What  a  power  prayer  is  !  May  all  God's  people 
make  use  of  it.  As  we  say  on  page  294,  "Jehoshaphat  was 
miraculously  saved,  but  Ahab  was  miraculously  killed." 

Rebuke  and  Restoration. 
CHAPTER  XIX. 

1.  The  Rebuke  by  the  Prophet.     1-3. 

2.  Further  Revival  and  Restoration.     4-11. 

At  sun-down  Ahab,  the  King  of  Israel  died,  while  his  ally 
Jehoshaphat,  saved  through  the  mercy  of  God,  returned 
to  his  home  in  peace  in  Jerusalem.  Then  Jehu,  the  son  of 
Hanani,  met  him.  Asa,  the  father  of  Jehoshaphat,  had 
been  rebuked  by  Hanani,  and  had  put  him  in  prison  for  it. 
The  son  of  Hanani  rebukes  Jehoshaphat.  We  read  no 
answer  from  the  King,  but  his  actions  show  that  the  rebuke 
went  home  to  his  conscience.  He  must  have  repented  of 
the  unholy  alliance  with  the  enemy  of  the  Lord.  Jehu  said 
to  him,  "Shouldest  thou  help  the  ungodly,  and  love  them 
that  hate  the  Lord  ?  Therefore  is  wrath  upon  thee  from 
before  the  Lord."  This  principle  is  the  same  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment. God's  people  are  a  separated  people.  "Be  ye  not 
unequally  yoked  together  with  unbelievers,  for  what  fel- 
lowship hath  righteousness  with  unrighteousness  ?  and  what 
communion  hath  light  with  darkness  ?"  (2  Cor.  vi:14). 
And  the  Lord  acknowledged  the  good  Jehoshaphat  had 
done  and  his  attitude,  a  heart  prepared  to  seek  God. 

Graciously  had  Jehovah  restored  the  king  who  had  failed 
and  dishonored  Him.  He  had  returned  in  peace,  bowed 
before  the  divine  rebuke  aAd  dwelt  in  Jerusalem.  Then  he 
went  out  again  to  do  service  for  the  Lord.  He  became  at 
once  active  in  bearing  testimony  and  helf)ing  God's  people, 
bringing  them  back  to  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  He  caused 
judgment  and   righteousness  to  be  executed   in   the  land. 


444      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Notice  how  in  this  revival  the  Lord  is  before  Jehoshaphat; 
eight  times  in  verses  4-11  the  Lord  is  mentioned. 

Judah  Invaded.    Jehoshaphaf  s  Prayer  and  Deliverance. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

1.  The  Invasion.     1-2. 

2.  Jehoshaphat's  Great  Prayer.     3-13. 

3.  Jehovah's  Answer  through  Jahaziel.     14-17. 

4.  Prostrated  before  the  Lord.     18-19. 

5.  The  Great  Deliverance.     20-25. 

6.  In  the  Valley  of  Berachah.     26-30. 

7.  The  Record  of  Jehoshaphat.     31-34. 

8.  Alliance  with  Ahaziah.     35-37. 

An  invasion  of  Judah  by  Moab,  Ammon  and  others 
followed.  Then  Jehoshaphat  feared  and  set  himseK  to  seek 
the  Ixjrd  and  proclaimed  a  fast  throughout  Judah.  Though 
the  enemy  was  nearing  Jerusalem  and  the  danger  was  great, 
there  was  no  disorder  or  confusion.  They  all  looked  to 
Jehovah  and  that  gave  them  calmness.  In  troubles  and 
trials  God's  people  must  always  look  first  to  the  Lord  and 
seek  His  face.  A  great  company  gathered  together,  even 
from  the  cities  in  Judah,  to  seek  the  Lord.  It  was  one  of 
the  most  remarkable  prayer  meetings  reported  in  the  Bible. 
The  king  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  large  congregation. 
And  what  a  prayer  it  was  he  uttered  !  What  earnestness 
and  faith  breatheth  in  every  word  !  He  addressed  God  as 
in  heaven  and  as  the  ruler  over  all  the  kingdoms  of  the 
nations.  In  His  hand  there  is  power  and  might;  none  is 
able  to  withstand  Him.  It  is  a  good  way  in  approaching 
God  to  remember  what  a  wonderful  and  almighty  God 
and  Lord  He  is.  Then  Jehoshaphat  speaks  of  His  dealing 
with  His  people  Israel  and  speaks  of  Abraham — "thy  friend 
forever."  The  prayer  of  Solomon  in  dedicating  the  house 
is  mentioned  (verse  9).  Then  he  tells  the  Lord  of  the 
invasion,  and  the  object  of  Ammon  and  Moab  "to  cast  us  out 
of  thy  possession  which  thou  hast  given  us  to  inherit." 
Most  beautiful  is  the  ending  of  his  prayer.  "O,  our  God 
wilt  Thou  not  judge  them?"  They  were  His  enemies,  for 
they  came  against  His  land  and  His  pepole.     "For  we  have 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      445 

no  might  against  this  great  company  that  cometh  against 
us;  neither  know  we  what  to  do;  but  our  eyes  are  upon  Thee." 
Here  is  the  spirit  and  soul-attitude  which  pleases  God. 
Whenever  and  wherever  it  is  manifested  God's  answer 
and  gracious  help  is  not  far  away.  But  it  is  just  this  spirit 
of  dependence  and  expectation  from  the  Lord  which  is  so 
little  known  among  God's  people. 

In  the  midst  of  the  congregation  was  a  Levite  by  name 
of  Jahaziel  ("He  will  be  seen  of  God"),  of  the  sons  of  Asaph. 
Upon  him  came  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  and  through  him 
there  came  the  answer,  "Ye  shall  not  need  to  fight  in  this 
battle;  set  yourselves,  stand  ye  still,  and  see  the  salvation 
of  the  Lord  with  you,  O  Judah  and  Jerusalem;  fear  not, 
nor  be  dismayed;  to-morrow  go  out  against  them,  for  the 
Lord  will  be  with  you."  And  the  heavenly  answer  was 
believed.  The  king  took  the  lead  in  bowing  his  head  with 
his  face  to  the  ground.  The  people  did  likewise.  In  antici- 
pation of  the  coming  victory  the  Levites  praised  the  Lord 
with  a  loud  voice. 

The  next  morning  the  divine  direction  was  obeyed.  The 
king  addressed  the  people  to  have  faith  in  God.  Then  he 
appointed  singers  arrayed  in  their  official  garments*  to  go 
before  the  army  and  sing  as  if  it  were  a  triumphal  proces- 
sion: "Praise  the  Lord;  for  His  mercy  endureth  for- 
ever." We  read  nothing  of  swords  or  spears.  They 
needed  no  weapons.  Probably  they  left  them  at  home, 
for  the  Lord  had  said,  "Ye  shall  not  need  to  fight  in  this 
battle."  And  when  they  began  to  sing  and  praise,  trusting 
in  the  promise,  the  Lord  began  His  work  in  overthrowing 
and  destroying  their  enemies.  The  invading  armies  were 
annihilated  and  none  escaped. 

A  great  praise-service  in  the  valley  of  Berachah  ("Bless- 
ing") followed.  Jehoshaphat  in  the  forefront  of  them, 
with  the  people  returned  to  Jerusalem  with  joy.  They  came 
to  Jerusalem  with  psalteries  and  harps  and  trumpets  unto 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  And  the  kingdoms  feared  God 
when  they  heard  what  the  Lord  had  done. 

*The  expression,  "beauty  of  holiness"  is,  literally,  "holy  array." 


446      TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF   CHRONICLES 

The  prophetic  application  of  all  this  is  not  difficult  to  make. 
Jehoshaphat  and  the  people  with  him  are  typical  of  the 
remnant  of  God's  earthly  people,  that  God-fearing  remnant 
which  dwells  in  the  land  and  in  Jerusalem  during  the  great 
tribulation.  The  prayer  of  Jehoshaphat,  the  divine  answer 
and  the  great  deliverance,  foreshadows  the  cry  for  help  and 
deliverance  of  that  remnant,  while  the  overthrow  of  their 
enemies,  with  the  coming  of  the  Lord,  is  foreshadowed  in 
the  deliverance  of  Jehoshaphat  and  the  people.  The  praise 
will  be  great  in  Jerusalem,  when  the  Lord  acts  in  behalf 
of  His  believing  remnant,  at  the  close  of  the  times  of  the 
Gentiles.     Then  the   kingdoms  of  the  earth  will  fear  God. 

It  would  be  well  if  Jehoshaphat's  life  had  ended  with  this 
beautiful  scene.  But  it  does  not.  He  entered  another 
unholy  alliance,  for  commercial  reasons,  with  wicked  Aha- 
ziah,  King  of  Israel.  The  ships  to  go  to  Tarshish  never 
reached  their  destination;  they  were  broken.  "Again  had 
Jehoshaphat  to  learn  in  the  destruction  of  his  fleet  at  Ezion- 
Gaber  that  imdertakings,  however  well  planned  and  appar- 
ently unattended  by  outward  danger,  can  only  end  in 
disappointment  and  failure,  when  they  who  are  the  children 
of  God  combine  with  those  who  walk  in  the  ways  of  sin." 

And  how  many  Christians  have  made  the  same  experience  ! 
God  cannot  bless  the  believer  when  he  is  in  fellowship  with 
an  unbeliever. 

3.    Decline  and  Apostasy  under  Jehoram,  Ahaziah  and 

Athaliah. 

Chapters  xxi-xxii. 

1.  Jehoram's  Wicked  Reign.     1-7. 

2.  Revolt  of  Edom.     8-9. 

3.  Revolt  of  Libnah.     10-11. 

4.  The  Message  of  Elijah.     12-15. 

5.  Judah  Invaded.     16-17. 

6.  Jehoram's  Sickness  and  Death.     18-20. 

Jehoram  was  Jehoshaphat's  firstborn.  Jehoshaphat  had 
six  other  sons  to  whom  he  gave  great  riches,  but  the  kingdom 
was  given  to  Jehoram.     He  walked  in  wickedness.     "For 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      447 

he  had  the  daughter  of  Aliab  to  wife  and  he  wrought  that 
which  was  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  When  Jehoram 
was  in  power,  he  slew  all  his  brethren  with  the  sword  and 
also  princes  in  Israel.  The  daughter  of  the  murderer 
Ahab  may  have  instigated  the  horrible  crime.  Jehoshaphat 
had  joined  affinity  with  Ahab  (chapter  xviii:l),  and  married 
his  son  Jehoram  to  Athaliah.  "What  a  man  sows  that 
will  he  reap."  His  unlioly  alliance  began  to  bear  fruit. 
And  how  often  have  Christian  parents  seen  their  children 
depart  from  God  and  follow  altogether  the  wicked  ways  of 
the  world,  because  they  themselves  had  set  the  example. 
Then  the  enemies  of  Judah  came  and  different  revolts  took 
place. 

The  writing  which  came  to  Jehoram  from  the  prophet 
Elijah  is  interesting  and  presents  some  difficulties.  Elijah 
had  been  translated  a  number  of  years  before.  To  solve 
the  difficulty  some  say  that  the  name  Elijah  should  be 
Elisha,  who  was  then  li\'ing  and  miiiistsring  in  connection 
with  Samaria.  There  is  no  need  of  doing  this.  It  does 
not  say  that  Elijah  sent  that  writing,  but  it  says:  "There 
came  a  writing  from  Elijah  the  prophet."  Elijah  knew 
Jehoshaphat  and  he  knew  his  son  Jehoram,  who  was  for 
several  years  the  co-regent  of  his  father.  The  Lord  showed 
him  beforehand  the  evil  course  Jehoram  would  ta.ke,  and  how 
he  would  follow  the  v/icked  ways  of  Ahab,  Elijah  knew  so 
w^ell.  Then  he  received  the  message  exposing  the  wicked- 
ness of  Jehoram,  "like  to  the  whoredoms  of  Ahab,"  and 
announcing  the  judgment  upon  Jehoram.  This  message 
was  probably  intrusted  by  Elijah  to  Elisha,  and  when  the 
jDroper  moment  had  come  this  man  of  God  delivered  the 
v.'riting  to  Jehoram,  telling  him  at  the  same  time  that  it  was 
from   Elijah. 

Fearful  was  the  end  of  tliis  murderous  and  idolatrous 
King.  He  died  of  sore  diseases,  unrepenting,  and  thus  as  a 
lost  soul  passed  into  the  blackness  of  darkness  forever  (Jude 
13).  And  his  people  made  no  burning  for  him  (burning 
incense)  like  the  burning  of  his  fathers;  neither  was  he 
buried  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  Kings. 


448      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Ahaziah  and  Athaliah. 

CHAPTER  XXn. 

1.  Ahaziah  and  his  Evil  Reign.     1-4. 

2.  His  Alliance  with  Ahab's  Son.     5. 

3.  At  Jezreel.     6-7. 

4.  Jehu's  Judgment  and  Ahaziah's  End.     8-9. 

5.  Athaliah.     10-12 

When  the  Philistines  and  Arabians  invaded  Judah  they 
carried  away  the  treasures  of  Jehoram,  and  slew  his  sons. 
Only  Jehoahaz  the  youngest  son  was  left  (xxi:17).  He  is 
also  known  as  Ahaziah  and  Azariah.  These  names  in  Hebrew 
have  the  same  meaning  "upheld  by  Jehovah."  Poor, 
young  Ahaziah  still  reaps  the  harvest  of  the  unfortunate 
alliance  of  his  grandfather  Jehoshaphat.  The  leaven 
is  doing  its  dreadful  work.  His  mother  Athaliah,  grand- 
daughter of  the  wicked  Omri  and  daughter  of  Ahab,  was  his 
counsellor  to  do  wickedly.  He  therefore  did  evil  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord,  like  the  house  of  Ahab,  for  they  were  his 
counsellors,  after  the  death  of  his  father,  to  his  destruction. 
What  might  have  been  if  his  grandfather  Jehoshaphat  had 
not  made  affinity  with  Ahab  and  his  house  and  marrying  his 
son  Jehoram  to  Athaliah!  Ahaziah's  end,  after  he  went  with 
his  uncle  Jehoram,  the  son  of  Ahab,  and  the  circumstances 
connected  with  it  we  have  already  annotated  in  Second 
Kings.*  Athaliah's  awful  crime  in  slaying  the  seed  royal 
and  the  miraculous  preservation  of  Joash,  the  reader  will 
also  find  explained  in  2  Kings  xi:l-3. 

4.    Reformation  Under  Joash. 

Chapters  xxiii-xxiv. 

Joash  King;  Athaliah's  Execution. 

CHAPTER  XXm. 

1.  Joash  made  King.     1-11, 

2.  Athaliah  Slain.     12-15. 

3.  Jehoiada  and  the  Revival.     16-21. 

The  annotations  to  this  interesting  page  in  the  history  of 
Judah  have  already  been  made  in  connection  with  2  Kings 
*See  pages  328-329. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      449 

xi.  We  therefore  pass  over  the  preservation  of  the  young 
child  Joash  and  his  hiding  away  in  the  Lord's  house, 
on  this  account.  However  we  call  attention  to  the 
differences  in  the  two  accounts  in  2  Kings  xi  and  2  Chron. 
xxiii.  As  stated  before  the  Book  of  Chronicles  is  written 
from  the  priestly  and  Levitical  view  point;  this  explains 
the  greater  detail  about  Jehoiada,  the  priest,  given  in  Chron- 
icles. A  careful  study  and  comparison  of  the  two  chapters 
will  show  that  there  are  no  discrepancies. 

"The  differences,  and  even  more  the  similarity,  in  the 
narratives  of  the  event  in  the  Books  of  Kings  and  Chronicles 
have  suggested  what  to  some  appear  discrepancies  of  detail. 
It  is  well  to  know  that,  even  if  these  were  established,  they 
would  not  in  any  way  invalidate  the  narrative  itself,  since  in 
any  case  they  only  concern  some  of  its  minor  details,  not  its 
substance.     The  most  notable  difference  is  that  in  the  Book  of 
Kings  the  plot  and  its  execution  seem  entirely  in  the  hands  of 
the  military;  in  Chronicles,  exclusively  in  those  of  the  priests 
and  Levites.  But  in  Chronicles  also — and,  indeed,  there  alone 
— the  five  military  leaders  are  named;   while,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  narrative  in  the  Book  of  Kings  throughout  admits 
the  leadership  of  the  priest  Jehoiada.     And  even  a  super- 
ficial consideration  must  convince  that  both  the  priests  and 
the  military  must  have  been  engaged  in  the  undertaking, 
and  that  neither  party  could  have  dispensed  with  the  other. 
A  revolution  inaugurated  by  the  high-priest  in  favor  of  his 
nephew,  who  for  six  years  had  been  concealed  in  the  Temple, 
and  which  was  to  be  carried  out  within  the  precincts  of  the 
Sanctuary  itseK,  could  no  more  have  taken  place  without 
the  co-operation  of  the  priesthood  than  a  change  in  the 
occupancy  of  the  throne  could  have  been  brought  about  with- 
out the  support  of  the  military  power.     And  this  leaves 
untouched    the    substance    of    the    narrative    in    the   two 
accounts."* 

Athaliah  received  her  just  recompense.  The  youthful 
Joash  occupied  the  throne  of  David,  and  the  faithful  priest 
Jehoiada  was  the  instrument  who  brought  about  the  needed 

*Dr.  Edersheim. 


150      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

revival.  The  beginning  was  in  a  solemn  covenant.  It  was 
a  covenant  which  bound  the  young  ruler  and  the  people 
together  to  be  true  to  Jehovah,  as  it  is  demanded  of  the 
Lord's  people;  there  was  also  a  covenant  between  the 
King  and  the  people  (1  Kings  xi:17).  And  the  revival 
under  the  priestly  direction  began  by  the  destruction  of  the 
idols  and  false  worship  and  a  return  to  Jehovah  and  the 
true  worship  of  His  Name.  Every  true  revival  must 
needs  begin  the  same  way.  Tested  by  this  standard  most 
of  the  present  day  revivals  are  found  wanting.  "And  he 
set  the  porters  at  the  gates  of  tlie  house  of  the  I^ord,  that 
none  which  was  unclean  in  anything  should  enter  in." 
The  house  of  the  Lord  was  guarded  against  all  that  is  un- 
clean. How  different  from  the  corruption  which  is  tolerated 
in  Christendom,  in  that  which  is  "the  house,"  the  pro- 
fessing church. 

The  Temple  Repaired;  Apostasy  and  its  Results. 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

1.  Joash's  Reign.     1-3. 

2.  The  Failure  of  the  Priests,     4-7. 

3.  The  Temple  Repaired.     8-14. 

4.  Death  of  Jehoiada.     15-16. 
6.     The  Apostasy.     17-22. 

6.  The  Syrian  Invasion.     23-24. 

7.  The  Death  of  Joash.     25-27. 

Joash  was  seven  years  old  when  he  began  his  reign  and 
reigned  forty  years.  As  long  as  Jehoiada  the  priest  lived, 
he  did  what  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  The  account 
of  the  repairing  of  the  temple  needs  no  fm-ther  comment 
here.  Jehoiada,  the  faithful  priest,  who  had  so  much  to 
do  with  these  important  events  during  this  crisis,  died  130 
years  old.  Being  connected  by  marriage  with  the  royal 
house  and  in  appreciation  of  the  great  work  he  had  accom- 
plished "because  he  had  done  good  in  Israel,  both  toward 
God,  and  toward  His  house,"  they  buried  him  among  the 
kings.  After  his  death  it  became  manifest  that  the  revival 
which  bad  taken  place  had  its  mainstay  in  the  good  priest; 

*See  Annotations  on  2  Kings  xii. 


TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      451 

Joash's  convictions  and  faithfulness  to  Jehovah  were  but 
skin-deep.  A  reaction  set  in,  as  it  has  been  so  often  in  the 
history  of  the  church.  He  listened  to  the  evil  counsel  of 
the  princes  of  Judah,  and  then  they  left  the  house  of  the 
Lord  God  and  became  idolators.  The  result  was  wrath  from 
God  upon  Judah  and  Jerusalem  for  this  tresspass.  Such  is 
man  in  his  corrupt  nature  !  But  the  gracious  Lord  did  not 
give  them  up.  His  righteousness  demanded  judgment,  yet 
in  infinite  mercy  he  sent  prophets  to  bring  tliem  back.  These 
unnamed  prophets  testified  against  them,  but  they  would 
not  give  ear.  They  hardened  their  hearts  against  the  Lord 
and  His  prophets.  A  worse  deed  followed.  Jehoiada  had 
a  son  by  name  of  Zechariah;  he  was  the  cousin  of  the  King. 
Upon  him  came  the  Spirit  of  God  and  he  announced  the  fact 
that  because  they  had  forsaken  the  Lord,  He  had  also  for- 
saken them  (2  Chron.  xv:2).  Like  Stephen,  the  first  martyr 
of  the  church,  Zechariah  had  touched  the  sore  spot;  when 
they  heard  these  things,  they  were  cut  to  the  heart.  Then 
they  stoned  Zechariah  as  their  offspring  later  stoned  Stephen. 
It  was  worse  than  base  ingratitude  from  the  side  of  Joash 
that  he  gave  the  commandment  to  murder  the  son  of  Je- 
hoiada. The  King  remembered  not  the  kindness  which 
Jehoiada  his  father  "had  done  him,  but  slew  his  son."  But 
there  is  a  difference  between  the  last  words  of  this  martyr- 
prophet  and  the  last  words  of  the  first  martyr  of  the  church. 
Stephen  prayed:  "Lord  lay  not  this  sin  to  their  charge" 
(Acts  vii:60).  Zechariah  said:  "The  Lord  look  upon  it  and 
require  it."  Typically  he  represents  the  tribulation  mar- 
tyrs of  the  Jewish  remnant,  who  will  give  the  testimony 
concerning  righteousness  and  the  coming  King  at  the  end 
of  the  present  age,  and  whose  blood  will  cry  for  vengeance 
to  heaven  (Rev.  vi:9-ll).  There  can  be  no  doubt  our  Lord 
meant  this  Zechariah  when  He  uttered  the  words  in  Matthew 
xxiii:35.  It  is  true  He  speaks  of  him  as  the  son  of  Barachias 
("bles^d  of  Jehovah");  but  this  is  not  a  difficulty.  Bara- 
chias was  another  name  Jehoiada  bore  and  well  suited  to 
his  character.  Our  Lord  informs  us  of  the  place  where  he 
was  slain,   "between  the  temple  and  the  altar."     Joash, 


452      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

completely  forsaken  by  the  Lord,  was  defeated  by  the 
Syrians.  Great  diseases  came  upon  him  and  he  was  mur- 
dered by  his  own  servants.  Like  Jehoram  he  was  not  buried 
in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings. 

5.    Decline  and  Apostasy  under  Amaziah,  Uzziah,  Jotham 

and  Ahaz. 

Chapters  xxv-xxviii. 

The  Reign  of  Amaziah. 

CHAPTER   XXV, 

1.  The  Record  of  Amaziah's  Reign.     1-4. 

2.  The  War  against  Edom.     5-13. 

3.  His  Idolatry  and  the  Divine  Rebuke.     14-16. 

4.  The  War  between  Judah  and  Israel.     17-25. 

5.  The  Death  of  Amaziah.     26-28. 

Joash's  son  Amaziah  ("strength  of  the  Lord")  took  up 
the  government  in  Judah  when  he  was  twenty -five  years 
old.  His  mother's  name,  Jehoaddan,  means  "Jehovah  is 
pleased."  Perhaps  it  was  through  her  influence,  as  her 
name  indicates  godliness,  that  her  son  began  the  reign  well. 
He  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  But 
the  Lord,  who  looks  deeper  and  knows  the  heart  of  man, 
knew  that  it  was  "not  with  a  perfect  heart."  He  dealt  out 
justice  to  the  murderers  of  his  father,  and  also  adhered 
closely  to  the  law  of  God.  In  the  account  in  2  Kings  xv 
but  a  passing  statement  is  given  on  the  war  with  Edom. 
The  details  are  recorded  in  the  present  chapter.  He  gathered 
a  large  army  and  hired  100,000  mighty  men  of  the  kingdom 
of  Israel.  It  was  a  hasty  deed  and  showed  that  Amaziah 
was  not  acting  in  faith.  A  man  of  God  appeared  next  and 
warned  him  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  100,000  hire- 
lings, "for  the  Lord  is  not  with  Israel."  This  is  a  good 
test  still  in  all  undertakings.  Every  believer  should  ask 
before  he  enters  upon  anything:  Can  the  Lord  approve  of 
it  ?  Is  the  Lord  with  it  ?  But  Amaziah  had  already  paid 
the  hundred  talents  to  the  soldiers.  So  he  asked  about  the 
money.  And  the  man  of  God  gave  a  beautiful  answer. 
"The  Lord  is  able  to  give  thee  much  more  than  this."    When- 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      453 

ever  believers  face  pecuniary  losses  on  account  of  being 
true  to  the  Lord  and  to  His  Word,  they  should  remember 
that  the  Lord,  who  is  thus  honored,  is  able  to  make  up  for 
it  and  give  much  more.  How  many  have  found  out  that 
this  is  true  !  He  dismissed  the  hireliugs  and  Israel  was 
angry.  Cruel  was  Amaziah's  deed  done  to  the  Edomites. 
After  smiting  10,000  of  them  he  took  another  10,000  captive 
and  brought  them  unto  the  top  of  the  rock  and  cast  them 
down  so  that  they  were  broken  in  pieces.  It  was  a  horrible 
crime.  The  deed  was  committed  in  the  wild  regions  of 
Selah  or  Petra  (2  Kings  xiv:7).  Evidently  Amaziah  had 
become  greatly  impressed  with  the  magnificent  rock  temples 
which  he  saw  in  Mount  Seir.  In  their  weird  and  grand 
temples  the  Edomites  practised  their  abominable  idol- 
worship  with  human  sacrifices.  Some  of  these  "gods"  of 
the  children  of  Seir,  Amaziah  brought  back  from  his  expedi- 
tion and  set  them  up  to  be  his  gods.  A  prophet  rebuked 
him  with  a  statement  of  much  force.  And  the  king  an- 
swered with  a  sneer  and  a  threat,  showing  how  hopeless  was 
his  case.  Then  the  prophet  became  silent  after  he  made 
the  solemn  declaration:  "I  know  that  God  hath  determined 
to  destroy  thee,  because  thou  hast  done  this,  and  hast  not 
hearkened  to  my  counsel"  (verses  15-16). 

The  comment  on  the  war  between  Amaziah  and  the  King 
of  Israel  is  given  in  2  Kings  xiv,  page  336.  Amaziah  was 
slain  in  Lachish. 

The  Reign  of  Uzziah. 

CHAPTER   XXVI. 

1.  The  Beginning  of  his  Reign.     1-5. 

2.  Uzziah's  Success  and  Fortifications.     6-15. 

3.  Uzziah's  Sin  and  Leprosy.     16-21. 

4.  The  Death  of  Uzziah.     22-23. 

The  Son  of  Amaziah,  Uzziah,  in  his  sixteenth  year,  was 
made  king  by  the  people.  In  Second  Kings  xv  he  is  called 
Azariah.*     Isaiah  was  then  prophet  in  Judah  (Isaiah  i:l). 

*0n  page  337  in  the  annotations  on  2  Kings  xv:l-2  an  explanation 
is  jriven  on  this  double  name  of  Uzziah. 


454      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Isaiah's  name  is  mentioned  in  verse  22.  Hosea  (Hosea  i:l), 
Amos  (Amos  i:l)  and  Zechariah  (2  Chronicles  xxvi:5)  were 
also  prophets  during  his  reign.  The  latter  is  not,  of  course, 
the  Zechariah  whose  wonderful  visions  are  written  in  the 
book  which  bears  his  name.  Uzziah  built  Eloth  and  restored 
that  important  harbor  to  Judah  (2  Kings  xiv:22).  From 
Eloth  and  Ezion-Geber  Solomon's  ships  had  gone  to  Ophir 
(1  Kings  ix:26-28;  2  Chron.  viii:17-18).  Probably  during 
the  days  of  Joram  (also  called  Jehoram)  of  Judah,  when 
Edom  revolted,  Eloth  also  must  have  become  independent. 
Uzziah  did  that  which  was  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord. 
He  sought  God  in  the  days  of  Zechariah,  of  whom  we  know 
nothing  else  but  what  is  mentioned  in  verse  5.  The  Zecha- 
riah of  Isaiah  viii:2  cannot  be  identified  with  the  Zechariah 
here,  for  the  one  mentioned  by  Isaiah  lived  much  later. 
The  better  rendering  of  "who  had  understanding  in  the 
visions  of  God,"  is,  "who  was  his  (Uzziah's)  instructor  in 
the  fear  of  God."  Then  follows  the  statement  "as  long  as 
he  sought  the  Lord,  God  made  him  prosper."  And  this  is 
still  true  with  all  of  God's  people. 

He  waged  a  most  successful  warfare  against  the  ancient 
foe  of  Israel,  the  Philistines.  Previously,  under  the  reign 
of  Jehoram  (2  Chron.  xxi:16-17),  as  so  often  before,  God  had 
used  the  Philistines  to  chastise  His  people,  but  now  He  used 
Uzziah  to  punish  them  for  their  wickedness.  Then  the 
Ammonites  brought  gifts  and  Uzziah's  fame  spread  as  far 
as  Egypt.  A  great  restoration  work  was,  after  that,  carried 
on  by  him;  he  restored  and  fortified  the  northern  wall  of 
Jerusalem,  which  had  been  broken  down  under  Amaziah 
(2  Chron.  xxv  :23) .  Then  there  was  a  marked  re-organization 
of  the  army  of  Judah  and  the  defense  of  Jerusalem  was 
greatly  strengthened.  "And  his  name  spread  far  abroad; 
for  he  was  marvellously  helped,  till  he  was  strong."  Alas! 
for  the  next  little  word!  How  often  we  find  it  in  Scripture. 
"But — !"  "But  when  he  was  strong,  his  heart  was  lifted 
up  to  his  destruction,  for  he  transgressed  against  the  Lord 
his  God,  and  went  into  the  temple  of  the  Lord  to  burn  incense 
upon  the  altar  of  incense."    How  solemn  these  words  are! 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      455 

What  a  warning  they  contain  to  all  God's  people!  When  the 
heart  of  man  is  lifted  up,  when  pride  is  followed,  trans- 
gression is  not  far  behind.  "Pride  goeth  before  destruction, 
and  a  haughty  spirit  before  a  fall"  (Prov.  i:32).  How 
well  it  is  for  God's  children  to  be  much  on  their  faces  and 
humble  themselves  before  the  Lord.  To  be  little  in  one's 
own  eyes  and  make  nothing  of  self  is  true  greatness  and  the 
place  of  safety,  where  Satan  stands  defeated.  And  the 
danger  of  success  and  prosperity! 

Uzziah  invaded  the  priestly  office  which  did  not  belong 
to  him.  It  was  a  small  matter  to  put  some  incense  upon  the 
altar.  It  was  done  in  self-will  and  in  defiance  of  the  Lord's 
order  and  ordinance.  It  was  a  rejection  of  that  office  which 
foreshadowed  the  work  of  the  true  priest,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  And  to-day  in  Christendom  we  see  much  of  the 
same  spirit,  and  that  which  is  far  worse,  the  total  rejection 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  as  sin-bearer  and  the  great  high  priest. 
Uzziah  became  a  leper  and  died  a  leper.  He  was  buried  as 
an  outcast  in  the  field  and  not  in  the  sepulchres  of  the  kings. 
In  the  year  he  died  Isaiah  had  his  great  vision  (Is.  vi:l). 
Isaiah's  opening  chapters  give  a  good  description  of  the 
religious  and  moral  condition  of  Judah  at  the  close  of 
Uzziah's  reign. 

The  Reign  of  Jotham. 

CHAPTER    XXVII. 

1.  The  Reign  of  Jotham.     1-6. 

2.  The  Death  of  Jotham.     7-9. 

The  record  of  the  reign  of  Jotham  is  brief  in  both  2  Kings 
and  in  Chronicles.  He  did  also  what  was  right  in  the 
sight  of  the  Lord.  The  statement  "howbeit  he  entered  not 
into  the  temple  of  the  Lord"  means  that  he  did  not  act  as 
Uzziah,  his  father  did,  when  he  intruded  into  the  functions 
of  the  priesthood.  However,  in  spite  of  the  good  example 
of  the  king,  the  people  continued  in  their  departure  from 
Jehovah.  "And  the  people  did  yet  corruptly."  All  the 
evils  of  a  false  worship  continued  and  were  not  stopped. 
The  state  of  the  people  is  pictured  by  Isaiah  in  chapters 


456      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

i-v  and  also  in  the  book  of  the  prophet  Micah.  These 
portions  of  the  Word  of  God  are  needed  to  get  a  better 
understanding  of  the  conditions  which  prevailed  during  the 
reign  of  Jotham.  Jotham  was  a  godly  man  and  in  his 
reign  of  sixteen  years  did  much  good.  All  his  wars  were 
successful.  "He  became  mighty,  because  he  prepared  his 
ways  before  the  Lord  his  God."  And  this  statement  is 
the  key  of  all  his  success  and  prosperity.  He  lived  and 
walked  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  He  was  guided,  strength- 
ened and  kept  by  Him.  And  this  is  what  all  God's  people 
need.  It  is  still  the  way,  the  only  way  to  blessing  and 
success,  to  prepare  our  ways  before  the  Lord.  Jotham  is 
one  of  the  few  Bible-characters  of  whom  nothing  evil  is 
recorded.  Yet  the  people  over  which  he  ruled  continued  in 
corruption  and  apostasy  from  God. 

The  Reign  of  Ahaz. 
CHAPTER  XXVni. 

1.  The  Record  of  his  Reign.     1-4. 

2.  The  Punishment  of  Ahaz.     5-8. 

3.  The  Message  of  Oded  and  its  Results.     9-15 

4.  Further  Punishments  of  Ahaz.     16-25. 

5.  Death  of  Ahza.     26-27. 

On  Ahaz,  his  wicked  reign  and  apostasy,  as  well  as  the 
war  with  Syria  and  the  invasion  of  Judah  by  Israel,  see  our 
annotations  on  2  Kings  xvi.  It  was  at  that  time  that 
Isaiah  ministered  in  Judah  (Isa.  vii).  Pekah,  the  son  of 
Remaliah,  slew  in  one  day  120,000  men  "because  they  had 
forsaken  the  Lord  their  God."  It  was  a  terrible  punish- 
ment which  fell  upon  Ahaz.  Zichri,  a  mighty  man  of 
Ephraim,  slew  the  son  of  Ahaz,  Maaseiah,  also  the  governor 
and  Elkanah,  who  was  next  to  the  king.  A  still  larger 
number  of  Jew^s  were  taken  captive.  The  interesting  record 
of  the  prophet  Oded  is  only  given  here  in  Chronicles.  \Mio 
Oded  was  we  do  not  know.  He  was  a  true  and  courageous 
prophet  of  Jehovah  in  the  midst  of  idolatrous  Samaria 
nearing  so  rapidly  its  predicted  doom.  Only  a  true  prophet 
clothed  with  the  Spirit  of  power  could  utter  such  a  daring 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES     457 

message,  which  in  a  time  of  victory  and  enthusiasm  was  cal- 
culated to  humble  the  people.  And  he  made  the  demand, 
"deliver  the  captives  again,  which  ye  have  taken  captive  of 
your  brethren,  for  the  fierce  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you." 
It  was  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  and  they  knew  only  too  well 
that  every  word  spoken  was  true,  and  the  heads  of  Ephraim 
(the  northern  kingdom)  were  deeply  impressed  and  con- 
victed. They  said,  "Ye  shall  not  bring  the  captives  hither." 
They  acknowledged  that  Israel  had  transgressed.  "For 
our  trespass  is  great,  and  there  is  fierce  wrath  against  Israel." 
Then  follows  one  of  the  beautiful  scenes  in  Chronicles. 
This  dark  chapter  is  relieved  by  the  mercy  which  was  shown. 
"And  the  men  which  were  expressed  by  name  rose  up,  and 
took  the  captives,  and  with  the  spoil  clothed  all  that  were 
naked  among  them,  and  arrayed  them,  and  gave  them  to 
eat  and  to  drink,  and  anointed  them,  and  carried  all  the 
feeble  of  them  upon  asses  and  brought  them  to  Jericho,  the 
city  of  palm  trees,  to  their  brethren."  It  reminds  us  of 
two  passages  in  the  New  Testament:  Luke  x:30-37,  the 
parable  of  the  good  Samaritan,  and  Matthew  xxv:31-40. 
We  leave  the  application  which  can  be  made  with  the  reader. 
Ahaz  and  his  alliance  with  Assyria  as  well  as  Ahaz's  further 
idolatry  are  commented  upon  in  Second  Kings.* 

6.    Reformation  under  Hezekiah. 

Chapters  xxix-xxxii. 

Hezekiah  and  the  Beginning  of  the  Revival. 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

1.  The  Record  of  his  Reign.     1-2. 

2.  The  Purification  of  the  Temple.     3-19. 

3.  The  Restored  Worship.     20-30. 

4.  The  Great  Offerings.     31-36. 

Compare  chapters  xxix-xxxii  with  2  Kings  xviii-xx  and 
the  annotations  given  there.  The  reformation  which  took 
place  under  the  reign  of  the  godly  son  of  ungodly  Ahaz  was 
a  thorough  and  remarkable  one.  He  did  right  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  according  to  all  his  father  David  had  done. 

*See  page  340-342  in  this  volume. 


458      THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

In  the  records  of  most  of  the  former  kings  this  phrase  is 
missing.  It  shows  that  Hezekiah  followed  the  ways  of  the 
man  after  God's  own  heart.  His  father  had  shut  up  the 
doors  of  the  house  of  the  Lord  (xxviii:24).  The  first  thing 
Hezekiah  did  was  to  open  the  doors  and  to  repair  them. 
And  this  was  in  the  first  year  of  his  reign,  in  the  first  month. 
There  was  no  delay;  he  began  at  once.  He  fully  reahzed 
that,  in  order  to  have  the  Lord's  presence  and  blessing,  the 
work  must  begin  at  the  sanctuary.  It  has  been  well  said, 
that  piety  and  the  work  of  righteousness  were  manifested 
in  Jehoshaphat;  great  energy  and  faith  was  displayed  in 
Hezekiah;  and  we  shall  find  in  Josiah  profound  reverence 
for  the  Scriptures,  for  the  book  of  the  law.  And  such  is  the 
need  of  the  professing  church  in  the  days  of  decline  and  apos- 
tasy. A  revival  of  profound  reverence  for  the  Scriptures, 
and  a  whole  hearted  turning  to  the  law  and  the  testimony, 
the  Word  of  God,  is  specially  needed.  Hezekiah  gathered 
the  priests  and  the  Levites.  In  his  great  address  he  acknowl- 
edged the  sins  of  the  nation.  Confession,  as  it  always  must, 
stands  in  the  foreground.  "For  our  fathers  have  tres- 
passed, and  done  that  which  was  evil  in  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  our  God,  and  have  forsaken  Him,  and  have  taken 
away  their  faces  from  the  habitation  of  the  Lord,  and  turned 
their  backs."  For  this  reason  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  rested 
upon  them.  He  called  upon  them  to  sanctify  themselves 
and  to  carry  forth  the  filth  out  of  the  holy  place.  As  for 
himself,  it  was  in  his  heart  to  make  a  covenant  with  the 
Lord.  No  doubt  this  had  been  made  in  secret  in  the  pres- 
ence of  the  Lord.     Every  true  revival  begins  in  this  way. 

The  address  and  appeal  found  willing  hearts  among  the 
servants  of  God.  The  Levites  arose.  The  three  leading 
families  of  Gershon,  Kohath  and  Merari,  were  represented. 
Then  there  were  two  from  the  family  of  Elizaphan;  two  of 
the  descendants  of  Asaph;  two  of  Heman  and  two  of  Jedu- 
thun.  They  gathered  their  brethren  and  went  into  the 
inner  part  to  cleanse  it.  They  did  not  begin  on  the  out- 
side to  work  towards  the  inner  part.  All  true  work  must 
begin  in  the  inner  part. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      459 

The  true  worship  was  restored  and  great  offerings  were 
brought.  The  praises  they  sung  were  the  Psalms,  "the 
words  of  David  and  Asaph  the  singer."  Consult  2  Kings 
xviii  on  the  abolishment  of  the  idols  and  the  destruction  of 
the  brazen  serpent.  Chronicles  emphasizes  the  great  res- 
toration work  of  the  temple,  in  harmony  with  its  priestly 
character. 

The  Passover. 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

1.  Preparations   for   the   Great   PassoVer.     1-14. 

2.  The  Celebration  of  the  Passover.     15-22. 

3.  The  Concluding  Festive  Days.     23-27. 

The  Passover  is  next  celebrated.  It  was,  so  to  speak, 
the  birthday  of  the  nation,  and  typified  the  great  redemp- 
tion by  the  blood  of  the  true  Passover-Lamb.  It  had  not 
been  kept  for  a  long  time  and  a^  the  proper  yearly  time  for 
its  celebration  had  passed,  the  first  month,  they  concluded 
to  keep  it  in  the  second  month.  The  law  had  made  provi- 
sion for  that  and  therefore  what  they  did  was  according  to 
the  Word  (see  Num.  ix:6-13  and  the  annotations  given 
there).  And  the  king  recognized  the  unity  of  the  people 
of  God  and  their  need.  Therefore  he  sent  letters  to  all 
Israel  and  Judah,  also  to  Ephraim  and  Manasseh,  that  they 
should  come  to  the  house  of  the  Lord,  to  keep  the  passover 
unto  the  Lord  God  of  Israel.  The  posts  went  with  the  let- 
ters throughout  the  entire  land.  The  letter  in  itself  is 
beautiful  and  was  addressed  to  the  children  of  Israel,  not 
mentioning  the  sad  division  which  had  taken  place.  A  con- 
siderable part  of  the  house  of  Israel,  ths  ten  tribes,  had  al- 
ready been  carried  into  captivity.  The  letter  reached, 
therefore,  only  the  remnant  which  escaped  out  of  the  hand 
of  the  Kings  of  Assyria  (verse  6;  2  Kings  xv:19;  1  Chron. 
v:26).  It  was  the  Spirit  of  God  who  would  bring  all  the 
people  of  God  together  around  the  table  of  the  great  feast. 
He  always  unites  God's  people.  And  the  posts  passing 
along  even  unto  Zebulun  with  the  God-given  message  of 
the  king,  were  treatijd  by  some  of  the  remnant  with  mock- 


460      THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

ery.  But  others  humbled  themselves  and  came  to  Jerusa- 
lem. Without  such  humbling  a  coming  together  of  the 
people  of  God  is  not  possible. 

The  great  feast  then  was  kept  by  the  great  multitude 
after  they  had  taken  away  the  false  altars.  They  killed  the 
passover.  The  priests  sprinkled  the  blood,  which  they  had 
received  from  the  Levites.  Many  of  them  who  had  come 
were  not  cleansed;  Hezekiah  prayed  for  them.  "The  good 
Lord  pardon  every  one."  And  the  Lord  hearkened  and 
healed  the  people,  so  that  the  divine  threat  was  not  carried 
out  (Lev.  xv:31).  The  feast  of  unleavened  bread  was  also 
kept  for  the  appointed  seven  days  with  great  gladness;  yet 
throughout  the  days  of  gladness  and  remembering  Jehovah 
confession  was  made  to  the  Lord  (verse  22).  Everything 
shows  that  the  Spirit  of  God  was  in  the  great  revival.  Other 
festive  days  followed  with  more  gladness.  The  king  gave 
great  gifts  and  the  princes  did  likewise,  while  a  great  num- 
ber of  priests  gave  their  continued  service.  Not  since  the 
days  of  Solomon,  when  he  had  dedicated  the  house  and  reigned 
over  Israel,  had  Jerusalem  seen  anything  like  it.  The  whole 
scene  ended  by  the  priests  blessing  the  people  (Num.  vi:23- 
26).     Heaven  heard  and  rejoiced  with  His  people. 

Dispensationally  the  great  revival  foreshadows  what  will 
take  place  when  the  King  of  Israel  will  occupy  the  throne 
and  reign,  when  all  Israel  is  united  and  back  in  the  land 
(Ezek.  xxxvii),  when  His  people  will  worship  and  praise 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel. 

The  Results  of  the  Revival. 

CHAPTER  XXXL 

1.  The  Destruction  of  the  False  Worship.     1. 

2.  The  King's  Appointments.     2-21. 

All  was  done  by  Hezekiah  for  the  orderly  continuance 
of  the  service  in  the  house  of  the  Lord.  The  order  of  the 
courses  of  the  priests,  after  David's  arrangement,  which 
had  been  abandoned  during  the  preceding  apostasy,  was 
once  more  settled.     What  was  needed  for  the  public  sacrifices 


TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      461 

of  the  congregation  was  willingly  given,  as  well  as  other 
things,  by  the  king  and  the  people. 

"For  the  personal  support  of  the  ministering  priests  and 
Levites  nothing  more  was  required  than  the  re-enactment  of 
the  ancient  provision  of  firstfruits,  tithes,  and  firstlings  (Ex. 
xxiii:19;  Num.  xviii:  12,  21,  etc.;  Lev.  xxvii:30-33).  These, 
together  with  'the  tithe  of  dedicated  things'  (Lev.  xxvii:30; 
Deut.  xiv:28),  were  now  offered  in  such  quantity  as  not  only 
to  suflSce  for  the  wants  of  the  priesthood,  but  to  leave  a  large 
surplusage,  to  the  thankful  joy  and  surprise  of  Hezekiah  and 
the  princes.  In  answer  to  the  king's  inquiry  the  high-priest 
i.\zariah  explained  that  the  large  store  accumulated  was  due  to 
the  special  blessing  bestowed  by  the  Lord  on  a  willing  and 
obedient  people  (2  Chron.  xxxi:5-10).  The  collection  of  this 
store  began  in  the  third  month — that  of  Pentecost — when  the 
wheat  harvest  was  completed,  and  it  ended  in  the  seventh 
month — that  of  Tabernacles,  which  marked  the  close  of  the 
fruit  harvest  and  of  the  vintage.  And  these  contributions,  or 
dues,  came  not  only  from  Judah,  but  also  from  'the  children 
of  Israel'  (ver.  6) ;  that  is,  from  those  in  the  northern  king- 
dom who  had  joined  their  brethren  in  returning  to  the 
service  and  the  law  of  their  Lord. 

"For  the  storage  of  these  provisions,  Hezekiah  ordered 
that  certain  chambers  in  the  Temple  should  be  prepared, 
and  he  appointed  officials,  who  are  named  in  the  sacred 
text,  alike  for  the  supervision  and  the  administration  of 
these  stores  (verses  11-19).  Again  and  again  it  is  noted 
with  what  'faithfulness'  one  and  the  other  duty  were 
discharged  by  each  in  the  special  department  assigned 
to  him  (verses  12,  15,  18)." 

Such  were  the  results  of  the  revival  produced  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  A  united  people,  the  destruction  of  all 
false  worship,  the  restoration  of  Jehovah's  worship,  great 
willingness  in  giving  and  much  sacrifice,  obedience  to  the 
Lord  and  to  His  Word.  Such  must  be  the  results  of  every 
true  revival  among  God's  people.  Great  is  the  record  of 
the  good  King  Hezekiah:  "He  sought  his  God,  he  did  it 
with  all  his  heart,  he  prospered." 


462      TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

Sennacherib's   Invasion;    the   Deliverance;    the   Passing 
of  Hezekiah. 

CHAPTER  XXXIL 

1.  Sennacherib's  Invasion.     1-2. 

2.  The  King's  Counsel  and  Trust  in  God.     3-8. 

3.  Sennacherib's  Threatening  and  Arrogance.     9-16. 

4.  Sennacherib's  Defiance  of  God.     17-19. 

5.  Hezekiah's  and  Isaiah's  Prayer.     20. 

6.  The  Deliverance.     21-23. 

7.  Hezekiah's  Illness,  Pride  and  Departure.     24-33. 

As  this  part  of  Hezekiah's  history  is  also  found  in  2  Kings 
xviii-xx  and  we  have  given  already  the  necessary  anno- 
tations in  connection  with  these  chapters,  we  do  not  repeat 
them  here.  His  prayer  and  Isaiah's  ministry  are  reported 
in  Second  Kings  and  omitted  in  Chronicles.  So  are  the 
details  of  his  illness,  his  prayer,  Isaiah's  comforting  words, 
and  the  details  of  his  failure  when  he  exposed  his  wealth 
to  the  ambassadors.  The  account  of  the  defiance  of  Senna- 
cherib's servants  is  also  very  much  condensed  in  Chronicles. 
Both  2  Kings  xix-xx  and  2  Chronicles  xxxii  must  be  read 
together.  But  we  find  also  additions  here.  Notably  among 
these  are  the  beautiful  words  of  Hezekiah.  After  he  had 
done  all  in  his  power  in  defence  of  the  city,  cutting  off  the 
water,  building  walls,  raising  up  towers,  making  darts 
and  shields,  appointing  captains,  he  uttered  his  comforting 
message.  "Be  strong  and  courageous,  be  not  afraid  or 
dismayed  for  the  King  of  Assyria,  nor  for  all  the  multitude 
that  is  with  him,  for  there  be  more  with  us  than  with  him.* 
With  him  is  an  arm  of  flesh;  but  with  us  is  the  Lord  our  God 
to  help  us,  and  to  fight  our  battles."  No  wonder  the 
people  rested  themselves  upon  the  words  of  Hezekiah. 
They  are  good  and  helpful  words  to  rest  upon  in  faith  in  all 
our  warfare  down  here. 

*See  2  Kings  vi:16.  No  doubt  the  king  had  a  record  of  the  events 
of  Elisha's  ministry  and  words. 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      46S 
7.    Decline  and  Apostasy  under  Manasseh  and    Amon. 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

1.  Manasseh's  Wicked  Reign.     1-10. 

2.  Manasseh's  Imprisonment  and  Restoration.     11-13. 

3.  His  Reign  after  Restoration  and  His  Death.     14-20. 

4.  The  Reign  of  Amon.     21-25. 

Manasseh,  the  twelve  year  old  son  of  Hezekiah,  did  not 
follow  the  ways  of  his  father,  but  did  evil  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  He  had  no  godly  Jehoiada,  like  Joash,  to  stand  by 
him  and  guide  him.  He  was  surrounded,  no  doubt,  by 
counsellors,  but  they  were  evil  counsellors.  Instead  of 
following  the  example  of  his  father,  he  followed  that  of  his 
wicked  grandfather  Ahaz.  In  reading  the  record  of  his  evil 
doings  we  get  the  impression  that  he  hasted  in  undoing  all 
his  father  had  done.  The  corrupt  worship  on  the  heights 
was  restored  by  him,  and  he  added  at  the  same  time  the 
Phoenician  rites  of  Baal  and  Asherah,  the  Chaldean  wor- 
ship of  the  host  of  heaven  (the  sun  and  the  stars).  The 
altars  for  this  wicked  worship  were  placed  in  the  outer  and 
inner  courts  of  the  house  of  the  Lord.  More  than  that,  he 
set  a  carved  image  in  the  house  of  God.  This  was  an 
image  of  an  idol;  the  vilest,  unnameable  practices  were 
introduced  into  the  place  which  was  to  be  holy.  "And  he 
caused  his  children  to  pass  through  the  fire  in  the  valley  of 
Hinnom."  As  we  saw  in  Second  Kings,  his  grandfather 
Ahaz  was  the  first  one  to  introduce  this  horrible  Canaanitish 
custom  in  Judah.*  The  sins  of  the  Sodomites  were  openly 
practiced. 

"x\like  the  extent  and  the  shameless  immorality  of  the 
idolatry  now  prevalent,  may  be  inferred  from  the  account  of 
the  later  reformation  by  Josiah  (2  Kings  xxiii:4-8).  For, 
whatever  practices  may  have  been  introduced  by  previous 
kings,  the  location,  probably  in  the  outer  court  of  the 
Temple,  of  a  class  of  priests,  who,  in  their  unnaturalness  of 
vice,  combined  a  species  of  madness  with  deepest  moral 
degradation,  and  by  their  side,  and  in  fellowship  with  them, 

*See  page  340  and  foot-note  there. 


464      TEE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

that  of  priestesses  of  Astarte,  must  have  been  the  work  oi 
Manasseh."* 

Then  there  were  enchantments,  witchcraft  and  wizards, 
and  he  dealt  also  with  a  familiar  spirit.  This  was  demon- 
power  manifested  as  it  is  to-day  in  Spiritualism  and  similar 
cults.  So  wicked  was  his  work  that  he  made  Jerusalem  to 
err,  and  to  do  worse  than  the  heathen  whom  the  Lord  had 
destroyed  before  the  children  of  Israel  (verse  9).  "More- 
over Manasseh  shed  innocent  blood  very  much  till  he  filled 
Jerusalem  from  one  end  to  another"  (2  Kings  xxi:16).  "And 
the  Lord  spake  to  Manasseh,  and  to  his  people,  but  they 
hearkened  not"  (Verse  10).  God's  prophets  bore  faithful 
witness  against  these  awful  deeds.  Isaiah,  Jewish  tradition 
claims,  suffered  martyrdom  under  Manasseh's  reign.  But 
though  the  Lord  sent  His  messages,  they  did  not  hear. 
In  2  Kings  xxi:10-15,  we  have  preserved  the  message  which 
the  Lord  sent  by  His  servants  the  prophets.  But  Second 
Kings  has  nothing  to  say  of  the  conversion  and  restoration 
of  this  wicked  man,  one  of  the  greatest  miracles  of  grace  on 
record.  The  King  of  Assyria  came  and  bound  Manasseh 
in  fetters  and  carried  him  to  Babylon.  A  certain  class  of 
higher  critics,  a  number  of  years  ago,  used  to  sneer  at  this 
record,  and  denied  its  historicity  because  it  is  entirely 
missing  in  the  Book  of  Kings. 

"It  was  called  in  question  for  this  reason,  that  there 
was  not  ground  for  believing  that  the  Assyrians  exercised 
supremacy  in  Judah — far  less  that  there  had  been  a  hostile 
expedition  against  Manasseh;  and  because,  since  the 
residence  of  the  Assyrian  kings  was  in  Nineveh,  the  reported 
transportation  of  Manasseh  to  Babylon  (verse  11)  must  be 
unhistorical.  To  these  were  added,  as  secondary  objections, 
that  the  unlikely  account  of  a  king  transported  in  iron  bonds 
and  fetters  was  proved  to  be  untrustworthy  by  the  still 
more  incredible  notice  that  such  a  captive  had  been  again 
restored  to  his  kingdom." 

But  these  objections  have  been  completely  refuted  by 
an  Assyrian  monument.     On  this  monument  the  Assyrian 

*Dr.  Edersheim. 


TEE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      465 

King  is  pictured  leading  two  captives  with  hooks  and 
rings.  The  inscription  runs  as  follows:  "I  transported 
to  Assyria  men  and  women  .  .  .  innumerable."  Among 
other  names  given  is  the  name  "Minasi  sar  matir  J  audi" 
which  means  "Manasseh,  King  of  Judah."  Then  carried 
away,  no  doubt  much  disgrace  and  suffering  put  upon  him, 
his  conscience  awakened.  He  humbled  himself  and  prayed 
and  found  mercy.  What  a  manifestation  of  Divine  mercy! 
Jewish  tradition  often  refers  to  Manasseh's  conversion 
as  the  greatest  encouragement  to  repentant  sinners.  Such 
mercy  will  yet  be  shown  to  the  remnant  of  Israel,  when 
they  turn  unto  the  Lord  "whose  mercy  endureth  forever." 
And  the  evidences  of  the  genuineness  of  the  conversion  of 
Manasseh  are  not  lacking.  He  acted  faithfully  after  his 
return  and  repaired  the  altar  and  commanded  Judah  to 
serve  the  Lord  God. 

The  utter  corruption  of  human  nature  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  his  son  Amon.  With  the  awful  experience  of  his  father 
before  him,  and  no  doubt  exhorted  by  Manasseh  to  serve 
the  Lord  and  be  true  to  Him,  he  followed  deliberately  the 
bad  example  of  his  father's  idolatry.  He  trespassed  more 
and  more  and  did  not  repent  like  his  father  Manasseh, 
but  died  in  his  sins.  Under  his  reign  the  wickedness  reached 
a  higher  mark  than  under  any  previous  king. 

8.    Reformation  under  Josiah. 
Chapters  xxxiv-xxxv. 

The  Reign  of  Josiah  and  the  Reformation. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

1.  The  Record  of  his  Reign.     1-2. 

2.  The  Beginning  of  the  Reformation,     3-7. 

3.  The  House  of  the  Lord  Repaired.     8-13. 

4.  The  Law  of  Moses  Found  and  Read.     14-21. 

5.  Hulda,  the  Prophetess.     22-28. 

6.  The  Law  Read  and  the  Covenant.     29-33. 

The  contents  of  this  chapter  are  found  also  in  Second 
Kings,  chapters  xxii-xxiii  :30.    Inasmuch  as  this  has  been 


466      THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

covered  by  our  annotation,  we  do  not  need  to  repeat  it  here. 
However,  we  add  a  paragraph  from  the  "Synopsis  of  the 
Bible." 

"We  find  in  Josiah  a  tender  heart,  subject  to  the  word, 
and  a  conscience  that  respected  the  mind  and  will  of  God: 
only  at  last  he  had  too  much  confidence  in  the  effect  of  this 
to  secure  blessing  from  God,  without  the  possession  of  that 
faith  which  gives  intelligence  in  His  ways  to  understand  the 
position  of  God's  people.  God,  however,  makes  use  of  this 
confidence  to  take  Josiah  away  from  the  evil  He  was  preparing 
in  the  judgments  which  were  to  fall  upon  Judah,  the  know- 
ledge of  which  should  have  made  Josiah  walk  more  humbly. 
At  the  age  of  sixteen  he  began  by  the  grace  of  God  to  seek 
Jehovah;  and  at  twenty  he  had  acquired  the  moral  strength 
necessary  for  acting  with  energy  against  idolatry,  which  he 
destroyed  even  unto  Naphtali.  We  see  here  how  sovereign 
grace  came  in;  for  both  Hezekiah  and  Josiah  were  the  sons 
of  extremely  wicked  fathers. 

"Having  cleansed  the  land  from  idolatry,  Josiah  begins 
to  repair  the  temple;  and  there  the  book  of  the  law  was 
found.  The  king's  conscience,  and  his  heart  also,  are 
bowed  under  the  authority  of  the  word  of  his  God.  He 
seeks  for  the  prophetic  testimony  of  God  with  respect  to 
the  state  in  which  he  sees  Israel  to  be,  and  God  makes  known 
to  him  by  Huldah  the  judgment  about  to  fall  upon  Israel; 
but  tells  him  at  the  same  time  that  his  eyes  shall  not  see 
the  evil," 

The  Keeping  of  the  Passover  and  Josiah's  Death. 

CHAPTER   XXXV. 

1.  The  Passover  Kept.     1-19. 

2.  The  Death  of  Josiah.     20-27. 

In  the  eighteenth  year  of  his  reign,  Josiah,  like  his  great- 
grandfather Hezekiah,  kept  the  Passover.  No  doubt  the 
reading  of  the  Law  had  made  this  feast  once  more  an  urgent 
necessity.  Moreover  they  had  made  a  solemn  covenant 
*to  walk  after  the  Lord,  to  keep  His  commandments,  His 
testimonies  and  His  statutes,  and  to  perform  the  words  of 


THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      467 

the  covenant  written  in  the  book."  Therefore  in  the 
appointed  time,  on  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month,* 
they  kept  the  memorial  feast,  the  last  before  the  house  of 
Judah  was  carried  into  captivity.  And  all  was  done  by  the 
godly  king  "according  to  the  Word  of  the  Lord" — "as  it  is 
written  in  the  Book  of  Moses."  It  was  obedience  to  the 
Word.  And  such  an  obedience  is  needed  in  the  days  of 
decline  in  the  professing  church.  It  is  this  which  pleases 
God.  The  passover  kept  was  even  greater  than  that  of 
Hezekiah  (verse  18).  All  Judah  and  Israel  (those  who  were 
still  left)  kept  the  great  feast. 

The  death  of  this  excellent  man  and  King  of  Judah  has 
its  lessons.  The  King  of  Egypt,  who  was  Necho,  also 
called  Pharaoh-Necho,  came  up  to  fight  against  Charchemish 
by  Euphrates  (see  page  358).  Josiah  went  out  against  him. 
But  did  Josiah  ask  counsel  of  the  Lord?  Was  the  good 
man  guided  by  the  Lord  when  he  went  out  against  Necho, 
who  did  not  intend  to  attack  Judah?  The  evidence  is 
conclusive  that  Josiah  acted  of  himself  and  was  not  directed 
by  the  Lord.  The  Egyptian  king  rebuked  him.  Necho 
had  not  come  against  Judah.  God  had  commanded  him 
to  make  haste  and  fight  against  Assyria.  Josiah  should 
have  known  what  the  prophets  had  announced  about  Assyria 
and  its  overthrow.  Thus  Necho  sent  his  ambassadors  to 
give  a  warning.  Necho  was  on  a  mission  which  he  knew 
was  of  God.  Josiah  opposed  him.  "Forbear  thee  from 
meddling  with  God,  who  is  with  me,  that  He  destroy  thee 
not."  But  he  gave  no  heed.  The  king  who  had  cleansed 
Jerusalem  and  Judah,  who  had  repaired  the  temple,  obeyed 
the  word  and  kept  the  Passover,  neglected  to  ask  the  Lord 
in  this  matter  and  then  continued  in  the  wrong  course. 
Perhaps  pride  played  here  also  an  important  part.  It 
would  have  greatly  humbled  him  if  he  had  desisted  from 
his  uncalled  for  warfare.  How  all  this  has  been  repeated  and 
is  being  repeated  in  the  individual  experience  of  Christians 
needs  hardly  to  be  pointed  out.     Many  who  were  much  used 

*Hezekiah's  Passover  was  kept  in  the  second  month.  Chapter 
xxx:2-3. 


468      THE  SECOND   BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES 

like  Josiah,  stumbled  and  fell,  when  they  ceased  to  depend 
on  the  Lord  and  acted  in  self-will.  Like  Ahab  (2  Chron. 
xviii:29)  he  disguised  himself.  The  arrow  found  him  as  it 
was  with  Ahab.  He  was  pierced  in  the  valley  of  Megiddo; 
he  died  in  Jerusalem.  There  was  great  lamentation.  The 
lamentations  of  Jeremiah  are  not  the  lamentations  as  we 
possess  them  in  the  book  which  bears  that  name.  Jeremiah, 
however,  refers  to  him  (Jer.  xxii:10-13;  Lam.  iv:20).  In 
Zechariah  xii:10-14  the  lamentation  in  the  valley  of  Meg- 
gido  is  mentioned.  It  is  connected  there  prophetically 
with  another  lamentation  for  another  son  of  David,  who 
was  pierced.  And  He,  our  Lord,  was  pierced  and  woun'^d 
for  our  transgression.  When  He  comes  again  to  fill  the 
throne  of  His  father  David,  the  people  shall  mourn  for  Him, 
but  in  a  different  way  as  they  mourned  for  Josiah.  Josiah 
was  the  last  good  king  of  the  house  of  David  who  reigned. 
But  there  is  another  one  coming  who  shall  rule  in  righteous- 
ness (Is.  xxxii:!). 


9.    The  Final  Decline  and  Apostasy. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI  :1-14. 

1.  Jehoahaz's  Reign.     1-7. 

2.  Jehoiachin's  Brief  Reign.     8-10. 

3.  Zedekiah.     11-14. 

As  the  complete  record  of  these  three  final  rulers  is  given 
in  the  Second  Book  of  Kings,  the  annotations  were  made 
there.  See  pages  358-364  of  this  volume.  Nothing  needs 
to  be  added.  It  was  the  final  plunge  before  the  awful 
judgment  overtook  Jerusalem  and  Judah.  And  there 
will  be  a  final  plunge  into  apostasy  in  connection  with  the 
professing  church,  before  the  predicted  judgment  with 
the  coming  of  our  blessed  Lord  will  end  this  present  evil  age 
and  usher  in  His  glorious  kingdom. 


THE  SECOND  BOOK  OF  CHRONICLES      46b 


IV.  The  Captivity  and  the  Epilogue. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI  :15-23. 

1.  The  Captivity.     15-21. 

2.  The  EpUogue.     22-23. 

In  infinite  patience  the  Lord  still  waited  for  the  return  of 
His  people.  Judgment  is  His  strange  work,  but  He 
delighteth  in  mercy.  He  sent  them  messengers  v/lio 
exhorted  them  and  brought  the  messages  of  God,  because 
He  had  compassion.  But  they  mocked  the  messengers, 
despised  God's  gracious  offers  and  misused  His  prophets, 
till  there  was  no  remedy.  An  awful  statement!  Apostasy 
and  defiance  of  God  increased  to  such  an  extent,  till  there 
was  no  remedy.  The  threatening  clouds  of  judgment  broke 
at  last  and  the  people  were  carried  away  into  the  captivity. 
"To  fulfill  the  Word  of  the  Lord  by  the  mouth  of  Jeremiah, 
until  the  land  had  enjoyed  her  sabbaths,  for  as  long  as  she  lay 
desolate  she  kept  sabbath  to  fulfil  three-score  and  ten  years," 
And  this  age  too  is,  with  its  rejection  of  God's  best,  approach- 
ing a  day  when  there  will  be  no  remedy  and  the  judgment 
wiU  fall. 

The  epilogue  takes  us  after  the  seventy  year  captivity. 
Cyrus  had  been  named  by  Isaiah  almost  two  hundred  years 
before  he  was  born  (Is.  xliv:28).  God  accomplished  His 
purpose  through  this  Persian  king.  We  shall  follow  his 
history  in  Ezra  and  his  work  and  what  it  foreshadows  in 
Isaiah. 


Date  Due 

0   C'''  "37 

tl  3     '^ 

< 

Jl  18  31^ 

^   ■     ■ 

1 
i 

^ 

li'iPiiliiiiiii 


ij{l!l!l!li 


BS491.G126V.2 

The  annotated  Bible;  the  Holy  Scriptures 

mil'llll  i?i"il^°'°^'"'  Seminary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  00150  4630 


ii'T   ;i 


