i^ of Cblca^o 
libraries . 




The Gospel According to Mark 



By G. CAMPBELL MORGAN 



The Gospel According to Mark $2.60 

Searchlights from the Word $3.75 

The Acts of the Apostles $3.75 

The Teaching of Christ. $3.00 

The Crises of the Christ. Popular Edition . . $3.00 
Living Messages of the Books of the Bible. 

Now Complete in Two Volumes. Each . . . $2.00 

Vol. I, O. T. Genesis to Malachi. 

Vol. II, N. T. Matthew to Revelation. 
The Analyzed Bible. (Introductory) 

Introductory Volumes. Vols. I, II, III, 3 Vols., Each $1 . 76 
The Analyzed Bible. Each $1.75 

The Gospel According to John. 

The Book of Job. 

Romans. 

The Prophecy of Isaiah I. 

The Prophecy of Isaiah II. 

Genesis. 

The Gospel of Matthew. 
The Parables of the Kingdom. Expositions of 

Matt. XIII. $1.78 

The Spirit of God $1.60 

The*Ministry of the Word '$1.50 

A First Century Message to Twentieth Cen- 
tury Christians $1.25 

God's Perfect Will . $1.00 

Wherein Have We Robbed God? 75 

The Study and Teaching of the English Bible . .75 

The Ten Commandments 75 

The Hidden Years at Nazareth 40 

The Bible in Five Years 96 

DEVOTIONAL 

The True Estimate of Life and How to Ll7 . . $1.00 
" Behold, He Cometh! " ...... .75 

The Practice of Prayer ' 75 

The Simple Things of the Christian Life. . .75 

Life Problems . 75 

Disclpleship .75 

The Christ of To-Day. What? Whence? Whither? . .50 
Mountains and Valleys in the Ministry of Jesus . .40 
" All Things New." A Message to Now Converts. 

Paper 10 



THE GOSPEL 
ACCORDING TO MARK 



By 
G. CAMPBELL 1V|ORGAN, D. D 




NEW YORK CHICAGO 

Fleming H. Revell Company 

LONDON AND EDINBURGH 



Copyright, MCMXXVII, by 
'FLEMING H. REVELL, COMPANY 



J ) ' > " 



"' 1 . J 
, > l' 1 > ' 






New York: 158 Fifth Avenue 
Chicago: 851 Cass Street 
London: 21 Paternoster Square 
Edinburgh: *99 George Street 



Foreword 

fTTMIIS volume is a broad survey of the earliest of the 

I Gospel narratives from the viewpoint of pulpit 
exposition. It consists of thirty sermons, preached 
to my old congregation at Westminster Chapel, London, 
on consecutive Sunday mornings. In each case a text 
was selected, and made the center of an exposition of a 
longer paragraph. 

These sermons were stenographically reported, and are 
now issued in this form, with no revision beyond the 
simplest elimination of repetitions and asides A which, 
while giving force to the extempore utterance, would 
render the reading tiresome. 

The Gospel according to Mark has its own peculiar 
charm, much of which is created by the bluntness and 
brevity of the writing of a man, evidently untrained in 
literary methods; and also by its chronological continuity, 
There is a^freshness and a vigour about it, which grips 
and holds the reader. 

In reading it we are able swiftly, but with keen and 
alert interest, to move with Jesus of Nazareth through 
the wonderful crowded years of His more public min" 
istry. 

In the very spirit of the Book, moving rapidly, but 
with captured heart, these sermons were prepared, and 
preached, and I now send them forth in this form, pray- 
ing that they may help some hurrying men and women 
in these rushing days to go in the company of Jesus, 
Who ever moved with haste, but always with poise and 
peace, along, the highway. 

G.C.M. 

Glendale, California. 

[31 



Contents 

I. " THE BEGINNING OF THE GOSPEL " - 7 

Mark i: 1-3 

II. "JESUS CAME" 17 

Mark 1:4-13 

III. " JESUS CAME INTO GALILEE " 28 

Mark i: 14-35 

IV. " To THIS END CAME I FORTH " - - 39 

Mark i: 35 2: 12 

V. " AND THE PHARISEES WENT OUT " - 50 

Mark 2: 13 3: 6 

VI. H HE APPOINTED TWELVE " - - 64 

Mark 3: 7-1 $a 

VII. " AND HE COMETH INTO A HOUSE " - 75 

Mark 3: iQb-35 

VIII. " HE TAUGHT THEM MANY THINGS " 87 

Mark 4: 1-34 

IX. "WHO THEN Is THIS?" - 99 

Mark 4:35-41 

X. "A MAN WITH AN UNCLEAN SPIRIT" - no 

Mark 5: 1-20 

XI. " JAIRUS AND A WOMAN " - - - 121 

Mark 5:. 2 1-43 

XII. "HE COULD THERE Do No MIGHTY 

WORK"" - - - - - 131 
Mark 6: 1-6 

XIII. " COME YE YOURSELVES APART " - - 144 

Mark 6: 7-56 

XIV. "YE LEAVE THE COMMANDMENT OF 

GOD'* ----- 155 
Mark 7; 1-23 

m 



XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 
XXVIII. 
XXIX. 
XXX. 



CONTENTS 

" HE HATH DONE ALL THINGS WELL " 167 
Mark 7: 24 8:26 

" TILL THEY SEE THE KINGDOM " - 179 
Mark 8: 27 p: 13 

" O FAITHLESS GENERATION " - - 193 
Mark 9: 14-29 

" BE AT PEACE ONE WITH ANOTHER " - 206 
Mark 9:30-50 

"To SUCH BELONGETH THE KINGDOM " 217 
Mark 10: 1-16 

" WHY CALLEST THOU ME GOOD ? " - 229 
Mark 10: 17-31 

" His LIFE A RANSOM FOR MANY " - 240 
Mark 10:32-52 

" HE FOUND NOTHING BUT LEAVES " - 251 
Mark n: 1-25 

" THIS POOR WIDOW CAST IN MORE " - 261 
Mark 11:27 12 

"WATCH" 273 

-Mark 13 

" A LARGE UPPER ROOM, FURNISHED " 283 
Mark 14: 1-26 

" I WILL Go BEFORE You INTO GALI- 
LEE" - - - - - - 293 

Mark 14:27-52 

" AND THEY LED JESUS AWAY " - - 304 
Mark 14:53-72 

" HIMSELF HE CANNOT SAVE " - - 315 
Mark 15: 1-32 

" A STONE AGAINST THE DOOR " - - 327 
Mark 15-33-47 

" THE STONE is ROLLED BACK " - - 338 
Mark 16 



[6] 



The Gospel According to Mark 



" The Beginning of the Gospel" MARK i : i. 

Mark 1:1-3. 

THE Gospel according to Mark is the briefest of the 
four. In all likelihood it was the earliest written. It 
was written probably before the death of Paul, but not 
later than the destruction of Jerusalem. Irenaeus defi- 
nitely said that it was written after the deaths of Paul 
and Peter, but more recent investigation would place it 
earlier, .that is before 63 A. D. 

Patristic testimony agrees that it was influenced by 
Peter, that indeed it is the record of the facts concern- 
ing Jesus as they were told by Peter in his preaching, 
and recorded by his friend, Mark. This view is strength- 
ened by modern scholarship. 

Mark gives us practically no material other than that 
which is recorded by Matthew. The difference between 
the Gospels is that of method, rather than that of matter. 
The method of Mark is characterized, by directness and 
brevity (almost amounting to bluntness), accompanied 
by certain circumstantial touches which give us a most 
vivid sense of the Lord, in many details of look, gesture, 
and habits of speech. 

The history of the writer of this Gospel as it may be 
traced in the New Testament,, is a most interesting one. 
His Jewish name was John, Mark being his Latin sur- 
name. His mother, as Luke informs us in the book of 
Acts (12: 12) was a woman of wealth, living in Jeru- 
salem, evidently a personal friend of Peter, and hostess 
of the Christian disciples in the early days after Pente- 

[7] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

cost. By a reference, in the first letter of Peter, we may 
surmise that Mark was spiritually a son of Peter (5 : 13), 
that he was brought to a knowledge of the Lord Christ 
savingly under the ministry of the 'great apostle. He 
was also a cousin of Barnabas. The first appearance of 
Mark in New Testament history is found in the story of 
the journey of Paul and Barnabas from Jerusalem to. 
Antioch, upon which journey he accompanied them. He 
then went with them on the first missionary journey, sud- 
denly leaving them at Perga. Why he left them, we do 
not know. It is an interesting fact that almost all ex- 
positors assume that he was afraid of the campaign, and 
went home, but there is no shadow of evidence that fear 
was the reason for his return. Certainly later on, dis- 
cussion and separation occurred between Paul and Barna- 
bas upon this very subject, for when starting upon an- 
other journey, Barnabas desired to take Mark with him, 
and Paul objected, because Mark had "gone back." 
That may be the reason why it is supposed that Mark 
turned back from fear. But, though Paul refused to 
take him, Barnabas desired to do so; and it is quite as 
possible that Barnabas was right, as Paul. So we may 
give Mark the benefit of the doubt. It is certain that 
he went with Barnabas to Cyprus, and subsequently was 
with Paul in Rome, a "fellow labourer/' and a comfort. 
From a reference in Peter's first letter we gather that he 
accompanied that apostle to Babylon ; and the last glimpse 
of him is that in Paul's last letter to Timothy, wherein 
he charged him to bring Mark with him again to Rome. 
The general concensus of opinion leads to the con- 
clusion that the narrative was written by Mark in Rome, 
and was intended primarily for Gentiles. It is interest- 
ing to remember that there are no references to the Jew- 
ish law in this Gospel; that there are only two quotations 
from the ancient Scriptures, one of which is in this brief 
introduction; and that he constantly explains peculiarly 
Jewish terms and customs, which it would not be at all 

[8] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK , 

[Mark i : 1-3] 

necessary to do to Jewish people. That however is a 
purely incidental matter, and in no way affects the pre- 
sentation of the Lord which the narrative makes. 

Bernard in his Bampton Lectures in 1864, entitled 
* The Progress of Doctrine in the New Testament," than 
which a more valuable series of Lectures was never de- 
livered upon that great subject, said of this Gospel some- 
thing which so perfectly describes it, that I will quote 
the paragraph : 

"It is the Gospel of action, rapid, vigorous, vivid. 
Entering at once on the Lord's official and public career, 
it bears us on from one mighty deed to another with a 
peculiar swiftness of movement, and yet with the life of 
picturesque detail. Power over the visible and invisible 
worlds, especially as shown in the casting out of devils, 
is the prominent characteristic of the picture. St. Peter's 
saying to Cornelius has been well noticed as a fit motto 
for this Gospel. ' God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with 
the Holy Ghost and with power, who went about doing 
good and healing all those who were oppressed of the 
devil/ " 

Thus while Matthew presents us with the picture of 
the Messiah as King in 'all the royalty of His Person, 
the dignity of His office, and the grace of His mission; 
Mark gives us the picture of the Messiah as Servant, 
divested of all official dignity, save that of consecration 
to His work. 

Our first meditation is concerned with the brief para- 
graph contained in the first three verses of chapter one. 

With regard to the study of this Gospel I propose a 
perfectly free method; that is, I shall break through the 
trammels of chapters, verses, paragraphs, and punctua- 
tions as found in our versions. 

This paragraph is the key to the whole Gospel, and 
therefore we must pause with it. It is complete within 
itself. The narrative proper of Mark begins with the 

[91 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

fourth verse, with the words, " John came." The story 
begins with the appearing of John. I should say after 
careful reading, that probably the last thing Mark wrote 
was the opening paragraph. After he had finished his 
story, that vivid^ wonderful story in which we become 
almost breathless sometimes as we follow our Lord on 
the swiftness of the path of His earthly mission, Mark 
went back to write a title or preface, and in this preface 
we find the key of all that is to follow: 

" The beginning of the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son 
of God, even as it is written in Isaiah the prophet. 
Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face 
Who shall prepare Thy way. 
The voice of one crying in the wilderness, 
Make ye ready the way of the Lord, 
Make His paths straight." 

Mark first declared that he had written a "beginning of 
the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God as it is written 
in Isaiah the prophet." He then immediately wrote an 
exclamatory quotation, not from Isaiah z but from the 
last of the Hebrew prophets, Malachi. 

" Behold, I send My messenger before Thy face who 
shall prepare Thy way." Having done so, he quoted 
from the prophecy of Isaiah at the point in the prophecy 
where the Gospel began: "The voice of one crying in 
the wilderness, Make ye ready the way of the Lord, 
Make His paths straight." 

Let us turn back to Malachi, m order to see the setting 
of the exclamatory quotation: "Behold, I send My mes- 
senger, and he shall prepare the way before Me." In the 
prophecy the words run on thus: "And the Lord, 'Whom 
ye seek, will suddenly come to His temple; and the mes- 
senger of the covenant, whom ye desire^ behold, he com- 
eth, saith Jehovah of Hosts." In this prophetic word 
reference was made to two messengers, the Messenger 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

of the covenant, and the messenger who precedes the 
Messenger of the covenant. Mark only quotes the words 
concerning the messenger who was to foretell the coming 
of the Messenger of the covenant. 

He then went back to his starting point: "the Gospel 
of Jesus Christ the Son of God, even as it is written in 
Isaiah," and quoted from the prologue of the second part 
of Isaiah: 

" The voice of one that crieth. Prepare ye in the 
wilderness the way of Jehovah, make level in the desert 
a highway for our God. . . . O thou that tellest the 
Gospel, good tidings to Zion . . . O thou that tellest 
good tidings to Jerusalem" (40:3 and 9). 

To read Isaiah from the fortieth chapter to the end 
of the prophecy is to discover the Servant of God; it is 
an unveiling of the suffering Servant of God; while yet 
the same Servant of God is seen ultimately in triumph, a 
triumph won out of travail. This book then gives an 
account of the beginning of that Gospel, which according 
to Mark, was written in Isaiah. 

We have said that Peter was in all probability the 
source from whom Mark derived his information. In 
his first letter (1:24, 25), he quoted from Isaiah, and 
from the same passage: 

" All flesh is as grass, 

And all the glory thereof as the flower of grass. 
The grass withereth, and the flower falleth: 
But the word of the Lord abideth forever." 

He then went on to say, "And this is the word of the 
Gospel which was preached unto you." 

Here then, we are admitted to the spirit of this Gospel 
of Mark. It is the Beginning, the starting point of the 
Gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, as it is written 

EH] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

in the prophet Isaiah. The paragraph is an inclusive in- 
troduction to all that is to follow. The word " Begin- 
ning " refers, not to the paragraph, not to the ministry 
of John, not to the ministry of Jesus. It refers to the 
Gospel. In this book we have the story of the beginning 
of the whole Gospel. Here Mark has written the story 
of how the Gospel which Isaiah predicted became his- 
toric. Light is flung upon this matter, by the way in 
which Luke commenced his second treatise. " The for- 
mer treatise I made, O Theophilus, concerning all that 
Jesus began both to do and to teach." That former trea- 
tise was also the story of a beginning; so that the Gospel 
according to Luke is also the account of the beginning 
of the Gospel. 

The reference to Isaiah admits us to the spirit of all 
that is to f olloWf and so constitutes the key to its spiritual 
interpretation. What Isaiah predicted, Jesus fulfilled. 
Isaiah foresaw that the way of comfort was the way of 
the coming of Jehovah in His suffering and victorious 
Servant, to deal with sin and bring in righteousness. 
Here then is the story of how that Gospel became a fact 
in human history. 

It is sufficient therefore now for us to notice, as the 
completion of this initial study; first, the supreme sub- 
ject referred to; and secondly, the special theme of the 
book. 

The supreme subject is " the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 
the Son of God." What does the word " Gospel " mean? 
In many senses there can be no better translation of the 
Greek word than that of which we constantly make use, 
the Evangel. What is an evangel? Dr. Maclear says 
that in classical Greek the word first meant a reward 
given to the bearers of good news ; that it subsequently 
came to mean the sacrifice offered in thankfulness for 
good news; until finally it was used of the good news 
itself. 

This last is the invariable New Testament sense. The 

[' 12 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

Gospel is in itself a message of salvation, a message of 
comfort, a message of hope, a message of joy; a message 
that should always thrill to the tireless music of a psalm, 
a message that has nothing to do with denunciation. The 
Gospel is not preached when sin is denounced. The 
Gospel is good news to sinning men z a message of salva- 
tion from sin. 

The word does not occur very often in the Gospel 
itself, but the occurrences illuminate the theme. After 
this opening paragraph it is almost immediately found 
twice. Mark tells us that when Jesus began His preach- 
ing in Galilee, He began to preach " the Gospel of God," 
the good news from God. Mark alone tells us that when 
Jesus began to preach, He not only said, " Repent, for the 
Kingdom of heaven is at hand"; but that He also said, 
"and believe in the Gospel." The word is not found 
again until after Peter's confession at Caesarea Philippi, 
when Mark alone tells us that Jesus called His disciples 
to deny themselves and take up the Cross for His sake, 
and for the sake of the Gospel. Soon after, in those 
shadowed days while He was instructing these men, ap- 
proaching the Cross, He used that same phrase a second 
time, " for My sake and the Gospel's" There is one 
beautiful incidental use of .it, when the disciples, misun- 
derstanding the prodigality of the love of the womai* 
who anointed Jesus with ointment, He said, " Whereso- 
eVer the Gospel shall be preached . . . that also 
which this woman hath done shall be spoken of for a 
memorial of her." Only once more it occurs, in the 
final chapter, as He appointed His disciples, to "go 
. . . and preach the Gospel to all the cosmos." There 
is always music in the word, hope in it, comfort in it, 
gladness in it; it is a veritable song to cheer the heart, 
and renew the courage; the Gospel, good news. 

In this opening word, " the Gospel of Jesus Christ, the 
Son of God," everything is gathered up. By these words 
we are at once reminded, as we commence to study this 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark i : 1-3] 

book that the centre and circumference of the Gospel 
is Christ Himself; for whatever may be the harmonies 
of the varied notes of the infinite music, they are all 
homed and centred in Him. Not carelessly does this 
writer name Him at the commencement by the Old 
Testament word, Jesus. That is the name that places 
Him upon the level of my comprehension; for in the 
Man Who bore the name we find the point of contact 
between ourselves, and the One Whom He supremely 
came to reveal. Take Him away from me, and remind 
me merely of the administrative power of God in His 
universe, and I am lost, for I cannot grasp the un- 
fathomable truth. Take Him away from me, and speak 
to my soul of God in all the wonder and mystery of His 
being, and He is utterly incomprehensible to me. A 
gospel that is a Gospel of God, but is not spelt out into 
my language and rendered observable by my finite na- 
ture, becomes no Gospel to me. Mark commences where 
God began to fulfil the prophecy of His servants. The 
charm of this Gospel is that through it we shall be fol- 
lowing Jesus, walking with Him, watching His gestures, 
listening to the very habits of His speech. 

In the title " Christ," Mark suggests the way by which 
God administers that salvation, the proclamation of which 
is good news. Christ is the Messiah, the anointed One. 
The name Jesus brings us into the presence of the Gali- 
lean peasant. But Messiah, the anointed One, brings us 
into the presence of One upon Whom the holy chrism 
rests, the chrism of the Holy Spirit; enduing Him for 
service; and empowering Him for dying, for it was 
through the eternal Spirit that He offered Himself. 

The ultimate phrase of the great description, " Son of 
God," suggests the infinitude of His power, reminding us 
that whereas men lay the hand of flesh imaginatively 
upon the hand of His flesh, they will yet be conscious of 
the thrilling power of essential Deity when His hand 
closes upon theirs ; reminding us that men may look into 

[ 14 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 1-3] 

human eyes, capable of human tears, the gleams of hu- 
man laughter, and the tragedy of human sorrow; and yet 
see shining through them the light of essential Deity. 
Jesus, the anointed One, Son of God. It is the Gospel 
of One,, sent, anointed of the Spirit, of the very nature 
of the Father. What He says is the Gospel. What He 
does is the Gospel. 

Recently I came across some striking words from the 
pen of Mazzini : 

" He came. The soul the most full of love, the most 
sacredly virtuous, the most deeply inspired by God and 
the future, that men have yet seen on earth Jesus. He 
bent over the corpse of the dead world, and whispered 
a word of faith. Over . the clay that had lost all of 
man, but the movement and the form', He uttered words 
until then unknown: Love, Sacrifice, a heavenly origin. 
And the dead arose, a new life circulated through the 
clay, which philosophy had tried in vain to reanimate. 
From that corpse arose the Christian world, the world of 
liberty and equality. From that clay aro.se the true Man, 
the image of God, the precursor of humanity." 

The Gospel is the good news of Jesus, the Anointed, Son 
of God. Alas that men sqmetimes proclaim it, as though 
there were no music in it! It is the music of all music; 
the inspiration of all music that is worthy the name: 
The Gospel ! 

That emphasizes the special theme of the book. We 
shall not look for, neither shall we find, the philos- 
ophy of the Gospel. We shall not discover here the ex- 
planation of the Divine operation by which the Gospel 
became possible. The full content of the Gospel, and its 
final application, are not here, save by implication. This 
is the beginning. Isaiah predicted the Gospel, and there 
was no prophecy of the ancient time with which these 
Hebrews were more familiar than his. Paul proclaimed 
it, and probably Mark knew that. It is almost certain 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
IMark i : 1-3] 

that this book was written in Rome. Then think of 
this fact that Paul sent to Rome a letter z constituting the 
philosophy and explanation of the Gospel. Therein he 
wrote, "I am not ashamed of the Gospel; for it is the 
power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth 
... for therein is revealed a righteousness of God 
from faith unto faith." He then went on to explain the 
Gospel; and the probability is that Mark had read that 
letter before he wrote this Gospel. He came to Rome, 
was there with Paul; and Paul's letter was there before 
Paul ever reached Rome. So that when Mark had writ- 
ten out Peter's story, he prefaced it with a statement of 
how the Gospel began, which Isaiah predicted, of which 
Peter told the story, and which Paul explained in his 
book. This is how the prediction was fulfilled in history, 
how the Gospel came to be. 

Our purpose in studying this Gospel is to watch the 
Servant of Jehovah, Jesus Christ the Son of God; to 
watch Him, rather than the people about Him; to ob- 
serve Him as He is revealed here in the workings of His 
mind, and His attitude toward those who came into con- 
tact with Him. 

Matthew wrote of the King, and of His method for 
establishing the Kingdom. Luke wrote of the perfect 
Man, and the universality of His Saviourhood. John 
wrote of the hidden mystery of His Being. Or again 
Matthew wrote of the Christ, Luke of Jesus, John of 
the Son of God. Mark here portrays that One Who is 
at once Jesus and Messiah and Son of God, as the 
Servant of God creating the Gospel. As we consider 
Him we shall know the Gospel. 



II 

" Jesus came." MAIK 1:9. 

Mark 1:4-13. 

THESE are the central words of this first paragraph of 
the Gospel of Mark. The subject of the book, as we have 
seen, is that of how " the Gospel of Jesus Christ the Son 
of God " began. The story is developed along the lines 
suggested by that opening description of the Servant of 
Jehovah. He is referred to as Jesus consistently, through 
all the first stages to the confession of Peter at Csesarea 
Philippi, and never as Christ. At Cassarea Philippi He 
was confessed to be the Christ by -Peter, and subsequently 
that title recurs five times. Jesus used it of Himself 
(9:41); He used it of the predicted Messiah when 
speaking of His relationship to David (12: 35) ; He used 
it when warning His disciples against the coming of 
false Christs (13 : 21) ; the high priest used it when chal- 
lenging Him as to who He was ( 14 : 61 ) ; and finally the 
high priests used it when they mocked Him in the hour 
of His dying (15 : 32). 

The designation, Son of God, was twice made use of 
before Caesarea Philippi, on each occasion by an evil 
spirit. Apart from these instances it is never found 
until the high priest challenged Him in the words, "Art 
Thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" and He re- 
plied, "I am." It is found finally in the story of the 
crucifixion, when the centurion after the death of Jesus 
said, " Truly this man was the Son of God." 

We shall best apprehend the early part of the story 
as we look at Him as He is presented by the name Jesus, 
divesting ourselves of many of those attitudes of mind 
which are necessary as we know Him fully as the Christ, 
and as the Son of God. In order that we may come to a 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark i : 4-13] 

more perfect apprehension of the meaning of that title, 
of that sacred and mystic designation, we shall attempt 
to see Him first as these men saw Him, as Jesus of 
Nazareth. 

In this paragraph we have the story of the beginning 
of the Beginning of the Gospel. In a few sentences, full 
of life and colour, Mark gives an account of the min- 
istry of John the Baptist, the forerunner of the Messiah, 
whose coming had been foretold by Malachi, and whose 
mission had been described by Isaiah. Then, with brevity 
and haste, but most graphically, he records the stages 
through which Jesus of Nazareth, the Servant of Jehovah 
passed to the actual service to which He was appointed. 

In a phrase, " From Nazareth of Galilee," he refers 
to the past; and then records the facts of His baptism, 
His anointing, and His temptation. This is how " the 
beginning of the Gospel" began. Jesus came from 
Nazareth to baptism, anointing, and temptation. These 
facts had a bearing on His service,, and therefore are 
recorded. Let us consider them in that order, and in 
that relation. 

Jesus came " from Nazareth of Galilee," where He 
had been the Self-emptied One for a generation, one of 
the people; undistinguishable from other men by the 
eyes of those who looked upon Him; undiscovered as to 
any deep secret of personality, or any profound anointing 
for service. He had borne one of the most common- 
place names of the day, Jesus, which is the Greek form 
of Joshua. The probability is that there were many 
named Joshua in Nazareth and Jerusalem, and through- 
out that district. Nobody distinguished Him from others 
by the name; no halo was round His brow; there was 
nothing strange about Him ; He was one of the crowd, a 
man among men. 

He came from Nazareth, of which place so devout and 
sincere and simple a soul as Nathaniel said, " Can any 
good thing come out of Nazareth?" He came from 



ffHE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK! 

[Mark 1:4-13! 

Galilee, referred to always with contempt by the Ju- 
dseans, " Galilee o the Gentiles ! " 

Nazareth to Jesus had been the place of growth from 
boyhood to manhood; the place where He had grown in 
wisdom as well as in stature; the place where He had 
grown in grace with God and with men. Nazareth had 
been to Him moreover the place of ordinary human ex- 
periences, where He had faced ordinary human responsi- 
bilities in fellowship with God; a fellowship strange and 
mystic, different from that experienced by other men, 
but a fellowship which was the birthright of all men. 
There in Nazareth He had wrought through the working 
days; and on the recurring Sabbaths, "as His custom 
was " He had mingled with the worshippers, reading the 
law, and hearing it expounded, being brought up in the 
atmosphere of the conscious nearness of Jehovah, the * 
God of His fathers. There, He had passed through busy 
days, a carpenter, learning the use of tools until He mas- 
tered them, making yokes and ploughs, and building 
houses. He was an ordinary workman, bearing ordinary 
human responsibilities, and entering into ordinary human 
experiences. 

But Nazareth had been more than all this to Him,. 
It had been the place of quietness, the place of seclusion, 
the place of meditation. In the statement that He grew 
in grace with men is revealed the fact that He was un- 
disturbed by hostilities and criticisms. There in the 
quietness of the years, from boyhood's age of twelve to 
manhood's age of thirty, He had the opportunity of the 
thinking that comes to every man who has the high privi- 
lege of spending early years in a quiet country town, out 
of the way of the rush of cities. 

From all this "Jesus came"; and He came "in those 
days," when in Judaea there were strange, religious 
awakenings under the ministry of John; when that proud, 
self-centred countryside around Jerusalem was moved 
to its heart as it had not been for long, by that wonderful 

I 19 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1:4-13] 

ministry; when men were pouring out, to listen to the 
strange ascetic preacher who lashed them with whips, 
and ploughed up their conscience, and called them to re- 
pentance; and when they, repenting, went out from 
Judaea and Jerusalem to his baptism, confessing their 
sins. In that hour of spiritual and religious revival the 
young Carpenter turned His back upon Nazareth and 
came. So the day of the Gospel dawned. 

He came to baptism, anointing 5 , and temptation. In 
our study of this Gospel we may deal with these stories 
with the brevity that characterizes the narrative itself. 

He came to baptism. In order to understand the mean- 
ing of His coming to baptism, the ordinary facts con- 
cerning the ministry of John must be remembered. John 
had been preaching repentance unto remission of sins, 
not repentance for remission of sins. There could be no 
remission of sins apart from the ministry of Jesus. It 
was repentance unto remission of sins. John had exer- 
cised a ministry that produced repentance, in order to 
prepare for a ministry that should issue in remission. 
That is the reason why Mark is more particular than 
Matthew at this point to record one aspect of the burden 
of the preaching of John. He himself declared, " There 
cometh after me He that is mightier than I, the latchet 
of Whose shoes I am not worthy to stoop down and un- 
loose." Then he defined his own declaration. "I bap- 
tized you with water" which is the symbol of wash- 
ing, and. accompanies repentance "but He shall baptize 
you with the Holy Spirit" which is not a symbol, but 
a strength, renewing and regenerating the life, through 
which remission of sins shall come, and the beginning of 
a new life with new possibilities. John's ministry was 
to produce repentance unto remission ; and to declare the 
coming of the One Who should accomplish all that was 
made necessary by repentance. To that ministry Jesus 

now came. 
He "was baptized." Here we are face to face with 

[20] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:4-13] 

a most amazing fact. If John's baptism was for repent- 
ance, and was the outward sign of repenting souls, how 
are we to understand this baptizing / of Jesus ? Matthew 
tells us that when John saw Him coming, he looked at 
Him and said, " I have need to be baptized of Thee, and 
comest Thou to me ? " It is of supreme importance that 
we understand that when John said that, he did not know 
Who Jesus was, he did not know that He was the Mes- 
siah. John himself distinctly declared that he did not 
know the Messiah until he saw the Holy Spirit descend- 
ing upon Him. John looked into those eyes ; John, than 
whom a greater never had been born of women as Jesus 
said, who in many respects was the greatest of the long 
line of Hebrew prophets; John, the man of clear moral 
perception, who had been looking fearlessly, as prophets 
ever do, into the eyes of the crowds that gathered about 
him ; John looked into the eyes of this One Who came 
to be baptized, and said: No, this is a baptism of re- 
pentance ! I am here to baptize men repenting of sins ! 
I need to be baptized of Thee! Comest Thou to me? 
This was a prophetic recognition and declaration of the 
sinlessness of Jesus. 

Then why was He baptized? He was baptized as a 
repenting soul. His also, was a baptism of repentance. 
His also was a baptism of the confession of sins. In 
that hour He repented, He confessed sins. But the re- 
pentance was not for Himself, the sins were not His 
own. In that hour He identified Himself with the multi- 
tudes who had been thronging out to baptism, identified 
Himself with them in the consciousness of sin, in re- 
pentance for it, in confession of it. In that hour of 
baptism we see the most solemn and wonderful sight of 
the Servant of God, Who had come from the silence and 
seclusion of Nazareth, taking upon Himself the burden 
of human sin, counting it as if it were His own sin, 
doing that to which an apostolic writer ultimately re- 
ferred by declaring, " He was made sin." 

[21 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1 : 4-13] 

So " Jesus came," in the hour of widespread concern 
and change of mind, to identify Himself with sinners 
that they might be identified with Him, thus, as Matthew 
tells us that He Himself said, " to fulfil all righteousness." 
Righteousness is never fulfilled by repentance. Repent- 
ance will lead toward it, repentance is the condition for 
it ; but repentance alone can never produce righteousness. 
He repented, and confessed sins, as symbolizing the fact 
that He, the Sinless, was identifying Himself with the 
sinful, in order that, in an infinite mystery, for ever 
beyond our understanding, in that identification, through 
infinite love and compassion, righteousness should be- 
come possible to the sinners whose sins He bore, and 
whose sorrows He endured. Thus He came to a baptism 
that indicated the method of His service as that of an 
identifying of Himself with sinning men ; of being num- 
bered with the transgressors, that He might bear the sins 
of many, as Isaiah had said, when speaking of this Serv- 
ant of God. 

What immediately followed? "Straightway coming 
up out of the water, He saw the heavens rent asunder, 
and the Spirit as. a dove descending upon Him: and a 
voice came out of the heavens,, Thou art My beloved Son, 
in Thee I am well pleased." The word "straightway" 
marks the immediateness of heaven's response to all that 
was suggested by His baptism. Luke alone declares that 
when thus the heavens were opened, and the Spirit de- 
scended, Jesus was praying. He descended to the waters 
of baptism, was immersed beneath them, emerged from 
them, came to the banks, and prayed. Then, " straight- 
way," in that hour, He was endued for that service to 
which He had now dedicated Himself. His baptism was 
His act of dedication, the coming of the Spirit was God's 
act of consecration. Not that here and now Jesus of 
Nazareth received the Spirit of God for the first time. 
His whole being was attended by the operation of the 
Spirit. His very human life was due to the mystic and 

[ 22 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:4-13] 

mighty operation of the Spirit, and all the years in 
Nazareth were years in which He had been filled with 
the Spirit. Yet this was something new, something sepa- 
rate, something remarkably beautiful for Him and for 
us, to the end of time. An enduement of the Spirit was 
given to Him as the Servant of God in a new sense, in 
a new significance, and with new powers. 

This is the only occasion in the whole Bible where the 
Spirit is referred to as taking this particular form of 
manifestation. He came as a dove ; and so as the symbol 
of the infinite gentleness and harmlessness of Jesus of 
Nazareth. There came an hour when in the teaching of 
Jesus He said to His disciples that they were to be " wise 
as serpents, and harmless as doves." Here the harm- 
lessness of Jesus was suggested, and that quality of 
harmlessness as necessary, if the work to which He had 
dedicated Himself was to be accomplished. 

.Yet to Him, a Hebrew after the flesh, this symbolic 
form had more in it than the suggestiveness of harm- 
lessness. It was in itself a suggestion of sacrifice on 
the lowest level; on the lowest level that is, not as to 
intrinsic value, but as to the capacity of a worshipper. 
The poorest, who could bring nothing else, were per- 
mitted to' bring a dove as their offering for sin. Now, in 
an infinite beauty harmonizing with the Self-emptying of 
the Son of God, the Spirit of God took this form of the 
dove, the symbol of harmlessness and of sacrifice brought 
to the level of the poorest. In that hour of anointing 
there came to Him enablement for the service to which 
He had formally dedicated Himself, thus fulfilling the 
word of Isaiah, " Behold My Servant, whom I uphold ; 
My Chosen, in whom My soul delighteth ; I have put My 
Spirit upon Him; He wiLL bring forth justice to the Gen- 
tiles. He will not cry, nor lift up His voice, nor cause it 
to be heard in the street." 

There came to Him also the Father's ratification, the 
voice that sounded in His own soul, whether others heard 

[23] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1 : 4-13] 

it or not we have no means of knowing. To translate it 
literally, this is what the voice said : " Thou art the Son 
of Me; the Beloved. In Thee I. am well pleased." By 
the symbol of His baptism He had manifested His dedi- 
cation to all the mystery of His suffering and death. 
Then, said the Voice, " Thou art the Son of Me, My Be- 
loved." There came a day later on in His ministry, when 
He said, " Therefore doth the Father love Me, because I 
lay down My life." In that hour of dedication, He had 
testimony borne to Him by His Father, of the Divine 
approval of that act of dedication by which He pres- 
ently would fulfil righteousness in men through and be- 
yond repentance, by giving them remission z regeneration, 
and renewal. 

Again, the Voice said, "In Thee I am well pleased." 
The words, " My Chosen, in whom My soul delighteth " 
had been written by Isaiah long before ; and Mark de- 
clared, This is the story of the beginning of the Gospel of 
which Isaiah wrote ; this is how it came to be. 

Here then we see Him, setting His face toward His 
mission, receiving the enduement enabling Him to fulfil 
it, and the ratification within His soul of the fact that 
He was cooperating with God. So He came, not only to 
identification with sinners, but to all the resources of 
God, in order that He might accomplish His mission. 

Finally He came to temptation. Here again, with that 
illuminative suggestiveness that characterizes Mark, he 
used words that arrest us: "And straightway the Spirit 
driveth Him forth into the wilderness." Both Matthew 
and Luke indicate the fact that He went into the wilder- 
ness under the guidance of the Spirit, but Mark has 
used a strange word. " The Spirit driveth Him forth " ; 
quite literally, " the Spirit casteth Him forth." It is the 
very word afterward employed of the casting out of de- 
mons by Christ. 

We shall come nearer to the spiritual value if we see 
the physical fact, and get nearer to the profound intention 

[ 24 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:4-13] 

of the writer as we look at the humanness of the story. 
As we read that "the Spirit driveth Him forth," casteth 
Him out, there comes before the vision a graphic picture 
of Jesus of Nazareth hastening, hurrying to the wilder- 
ness. No leisured, meditative walk this, but swift, im- 
petuous movement;, as of one driven irresistibly forth, so 
that there could be no halting. The resolve of His soul 
was revealed in His baptism. The resources at His dis- 
posal for the fulfilling of His resolve had been revealed 
in His anointing. Now He hastened to face the foe; not 
with a spirit buoyant perchance, but with a spirit filled 
with foreboding, for this was real temptation, actual 
temptation. The Spirit after His anointing drove Him 
to face the forces that ruin and blight and blast and spoil 
humanity. 

Mark here records that which is most remarkable; not 
that He was in the wilderness for forty days and after- 
ward was tempted, but that He was " forty days tempted 
of Satan." We have here no account of the specific 
temptations, but we are not wronging the Gospel story if 
We assume that the temptations of the forty days were 
along the lines revealed by Matthew and Luke as they 
record the story of the final temptations, for in those 
stories we have an exhaustive picture of every avenue 
along which evil can approach Mansoul. Temptation to- 
day seems very varied, but it may always be classified 
under one of these headings. 

When He began to preach He said, " The Kingdom of 
God is at hand: repent ye, and believe in the Gospel." 
The Kingdom of God is at hand. In that declaration 
was revealed the master passion of His Service. Why 
did He descend to the waters of baptism? To fulfil 
righteousness. Righteousness is the establishment of Di- 
vine Kingship, the setting up of the Kingdom of God. 
In order to do that it was necessary that He should deal 
with existing conditions of location, necessity, and fail- 
ure. It must be a Kingdom of bread, dealing with man's 

[25 ] 



"THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark i : 4-13] 

material necessities ; but it must go infinitely beneath that, 
it must be a Kingdom of fellowship with God, dealing 
with man's spiritual nature. It must also be a Kingdom 
of beauty and of glory, which, in its ultimate establish- 
ment, shall realize all the highest things of beauty in the 
Being of God. 

Jesus had come to establish that Kingdom, and for 
forty days He was tempted; tempted by His hunger to 
wonder whether God cared; tempted in the presence of 
the tremendous work that had opened out before Him, 
as to how far He might venture outside the Divine direc- 
tion, how far He might proceed upon His own initiative ; 
tempted as to whether the Kingdoms of the world, with 
all their glory and beauty, might not be gained apart 
from the method symbolized by His baptism. 

The one inspiration of such service as that to which 
He had dedicated Himself, must be threefold; the in- 
spiration of love, of faith, and of hope. For forty days 
He was tempted to doubt the love, to traffic with the 
faith, to question the hope; and at the end of forty days 
these things became most devilish, most concrete, and 
most terrific. It was real temptation! I know the old 
controversy of the theologians and the scholars as to the 
peccability of Christ. But unless He was tempted, then 
He was not tempted ; unless He felt the lure of the sug- 
gestions made, there was no temptation ! This lasted for 
forty days ; it was continuous, insistent ! 

How did it all end? The statement of Mark is won- 
derfully graphic. He does not say anything about the 
victories as does Matthew or Luke; but simply says, 
"And He was with the wild beasts; and the angels min- 
istered unto Him." Many expositors say that the sen- 
tence, " He was with the wild beasts " is intended to sug- 
gest the terribleness of the situation. I do not so read 
it. The Greek preposition marks the closest association 
and unity. " He was with the wild beasts " ; but they 
were not wild with Him ! He was God's archetypal Man, 

[26] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:4-13] 

realizing the first Divine intention of a perfect and benef- 
icent mastery over the lower creation. The beasts that 
were wild with other men gathered about Him in the 
wilderness and knew their Master, not as God, but as 
man in the perfection and sinlessness of His nature. 
" He was with the wild beasts." I never go to the Zoolog- 
ical Gardens without wishing I could play with the lions! 
In the Kingdom that is to be, the lion shall lie down 
with the lamb, and a little child shall lead them. Then all 
their ferocity will have vanished. " He was with the 
wild beasts." Morally victorious, He was Master of the 
creation beneath Him, and angels ran upon His errands, 
for such is the real suggestiveness of the word. Thus He 
is seen as God's Man, perfect in spite of temptation ! 

So "Jesus came from Nazareth," where for thirty 
years He had lived the self-emptied life ; where for thirty 
years He had been without the prerogatives of sover- 
eignty which were His in the inherent mystery of His 
being; where for thirty years He had been subject to 
parents and to human conditions. He came to men, and 
found them sinning, and joining them, repented with 
them and was baptized. He came to God, and had the 
answer of the anointing of His. Spirit, and the ratifica- 
tion of His high purpose. He came to Satan, and en- 
tered into conflict with him, and mastered him. 

How can I better end than by quoting again the words 
of Isaiah? "Behold My Servant, whom I uphold; My 
Chosen, in whom My soul delighteth; I have put My 
Spirit upon Him." So spake Jehovah of Him centuries 
before He came. Thus spake Jehovah of Him in the 
hour of His coming. "Thou art the Son of Me, My 
Beloved; in Thee I am well pleased." 



Ill 

" Jesus came into Galilee." MARK i : 14. 

Mark 1:14-35. 

LIKE Matthew and Luke, Mark commenced the record 
of the ministry of Jesus, at the point where He left 
Judaea John being imprisoned and in Galilee began a 
more public and positive propaganda. 

Between the thirteenth and fourteenth verses in the 
first chapter of this Gospel we must allow for the passing 
of a year, during which our Lord wrought His first 
signs, and uttered His first teaching, travelling between 
Judaea and Galilee. The signs were wrought in Galilee 
and in Jerusalem, but the teaching was chiefly given in 
Judaea during that period. This year Dr. Stalker has 
fittingly described as " the year of obscurity." The rec- 
ord of it is found only in John. 

The first two verses of this paragraph (14, 15) con- 
stitute an introduction to the whole period from the ar- 
rival in Galilee to the hour of the confession of Peter at 
Caesarea Philippi; an introduction to that period of the 
ministry which Mark records in the first eight chapters 
of the Gospel; a period in which our Lord probably 
never went to Jerusalem, but remained itinerating in 
Galilee, making Capernaum the base of His operations. 
The rest of the paragraph (verses 16-35) gives some 
incidents of the first days of His public ministry. 

Let us then survey the paragraph, and observe the 
Lord at His work. 

The first matter which arrests attention is the time at 
which Jesus, left Judaea for Galilee. It was the hour in 
which John was "delivered up." The great herald of 
Jesus had fulfilled his ministry In a certain sense a year 

[28] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 14-35] 

before this time, in pointing to Jesus as the coming One, 
the latchet of Whose shoes he did not count himself 
worthy to stoop down and unloose. But he had evidently 
continued his ; work of proclaiming the nearness of the 
Kingdom, and of calling upon men to repent. There 
came an hour when he was arrested by Herod. His voice 
therefore was silenced; his public ministry was entirely 
at an end. At that hour, Jesus moved from Judaea into 
Galilee, into the district of Herod; not escaping from 
danger, but moving into the danger zone; not withdraw- 
ing Himself from peril because John was arrested, but 
going into the very region over which the man who had 
arrested John was reigning. Men may silence the voice 
of a prophet; but they cannot hinder the Word of God. 
The next matter of importance is the declaration that 
He went into Galilee "preaching the Gospel of God." 
Observe the change in the Revised Version ; not " the 
Gospel of the Kingdom of God/' but "the Gospel of 
God." This is what we describe as the genitive of the 
author ; " the Gospel of God," the Gospel that came from 
God, the glad tidings which God had sent to men. That 
was His message in Galilee. That indeed was the burden 
of His message throughout the whole of His life; not 
accusation, nor denunciation, but a proclamation of good 
news. " Think not that I will accuse you," He said upon 
one occasion. "There is one that accuseth you, even 
Moses." " God sent not the Son into the world to judge 
the world," He said upon another occasion, " but that the 
world should be saved through Him." He came preach- 
ing the 'good news. It is perfectly true that there were 
times when He accused men; but follow the method of 
our Lord, and observe that almost invariably when it 
was necessary for Him to accuse, He did so by such! 
parabolic teaching, as compelled those who heard to ac- 
cuse themselves in His presence, to find against them- 
selves a verdict, and to pronounce a sentence. His mis- 
sion was not that of accusation, nor of denunciation. His 

[29] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1 : 14-35] 

mission was that of the proclamation of the good news 
of God. 

Then Mark proceeded to give the content of the Gospel, 
and the terms of Christ's appeal. " The time is fulfilled, 
and the Kingdom of God is at hand." That, in brief, is 
the whole content of the Gospel of God which Jesus came 
to proclaim. The time is fulfilled; the preparation is 
complete; the last thing that must necessarily be done 
before the Gospel can be preached is done. The King- 
dom is at hand, brought to men, made nigh, made pos- 
sible. 

Upon the basis of that Gospel He made His constant 
appeal, which was twofold. First, " Repent ye," literally, 
think again, change your mind! Deal with the inspira- 
tional centres of life, by changing the conceptions. Think 
over again. There is no suggestion of sorrow in this . 
word. I admit that no man will repent in the way sug- 
gested by this word without feeling sorrow sooner or 
later. There is another word for repentance that does 
include sorrow, but that was not the word Jesus used 
here. It was not the word used by John. This word was 
one that called men to think again, to change their con- 
ceptions, out of which all conduct proceeds, which con- 
duct issues in character. Repent ! Think again ! 

Repentance was the message necessary to the estab- 
lishment of the Kingdom; but there was more in the 
Gospel, and the final appeal was not to "repent," but to 
"believe in the Gospel.'* Not to "believe the Gospel." 
There are many people who believe the Gospel, but they 
do not believe in it. It was an appeal not only to accept 
it as an intellectually accurate statement; but to rest in it, 
to repose in it. It was a call to let the heart find ease 
in it. 

That was the key-note of His preaching throughout ; 
good news ; the Kingdom of God is at hand ; it is made 
available to men; and the appeal consequent upon good 
news was ever, repent, think back toward that Kingdom, 

[30] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 14-35] 

readjust life by setting it in true relationship with that 
Kingdom; and then rest in this. Gospel, that what men 
thus choose to become, is made possible to them. 

That introductory passage strikes the key-note of all 
the music that is to follow in the teaching of Jesus; it 
focusses all the glory of the light that is to flash upon 
the pathway, and flame through every activity of this 
anointed Servant of God, in the days of His flesh. 

Before surveying the incidents that are recorded in the 
following paragraph, it is well to remember that an inci- 
dent here occurred on the way to Capernaum which only 
Luke records. Jesus went to Nazareth, and into the syna- 
gogue with which He had been familiar from boyhood. 
There, taking up the roll of the prophet Isaiah, He read 
those remarkable Messianic words, " The Spirit of the 
Lord is upon Me, because He anointed Me." In the syna- 
gogue of His boyhood, among the people most familiar 
with Him in the flesh, He spoke words of such grace 
that they were filled with wonder; and yet they attempted 
to murder Him. Leading Him to the brow of the hill, 
they endeavoured to cast Him down headlong. He moved 
away from them in mystic, strange, startling power, and 
escaped. 

On His way into the city of Capernaum, passing by 
the seashore, the place of the boats of the fisher-folk, 
He called four men to Himself; Simon and Andrew, 
James and John. They knew Him; they had met Him 
at least a year before, and for some weeks, if not months, 
had travelled with Him; until at Samaria He had dis- 
missed, them to their own folk, and had gone back alone 
to Jerusalem. Now He called them, and said this sig- 
nificant thing to them: "Come ye after Me, and I will 
make you to become fishers of men." Thus He came to 
Capernaum. 

Then Mark recorded, m his own characteristic style, 
the story of the first Sabbath at Capernaum (i : 21-35). 
It is an account of what Jesus did in the morning, in the 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 1 : 14-35] 

afternoon, and in the evening. In the morning He was 
in the synagogue; in the afternoon He was at home; in 
the evening He was in the streets outside His home. 

In the morning He went to the synagogue. One can 
imagine that synagogue service in Capernaum, with its 
liturgy, its reading of the Benedictions^, its chantings of 
hallelujahs ; the reading of the portion of the Thorah or 
Law appointed for the day; and then the reading of the 
portion of the prophets appointed for the day. Finally 
Jesus taught. There is no record of what He said, but we 
have heard the key-note. He was preaching the Gospel. 
Speaking of the Kingdom of God, He told them that it 
was nigh, at hand; and appealed to them to believe in 
that Gospel. That service was suddenly disturbed by a 
man possessed of an unclean spirit crying out : " What 
is there to us and to Thee?" "Art Thou come to de- 
stroy us?" "I know Thee who Thou art, the Holy 
One of God." Jesus turned, and said to him, quite lit- 
erally, " Be muzzled, and come out of him " ; and at once 
the evil spirit came out. The crowds were amazed, and 
said, " What is this ? a new teaching ! " His teaching 
was thus emphasized by His power. So passed the 
morning, in teaching and healing. 

The afternoon was passed at Simon's house, whither 
He went with Simon and Andrew, James and John. Im- 
mediately on arrival they told Him of Simon's wife's 
mother who was in the grip of a fever. Jesus, went to 
her, and raised her up, and the fever left her. Those 
who have had a sick one in the home can imagine that 
afternoon, when tte woman who had been in the grip of 
a burning fever and all had been troubled about her, 
was once again busy about the liouse, ministering to 
them ! 

The fame of that morning of teaching and healing 
spread throughout the city, and the multitudes gathered, 
carrying sick people, round about that door, and bring- 
ing demon-possessed men and women to be healed. 

'-. . w.*~:*fc-.. 'A, *- _. ' " - ''" '** 

[32] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:14-35] 

Jesus went out, and healed many, casting out demons. 
The day being ended, He went to rest. 

Early in the morning, while it was yet dark, Jesus 
rose from rest^ with great quietness, not to disturb the 
other sleepers; and leaving the house and Capernaum, 
climbed one of the wild desert heights outside the city 
for prayer. 

These are the incidents. Let us now look at Jesus, 
carefully observing Him at His work. Four view-points 
are suggested. First, taking into account that early in- 
cident at Nazareth to which Mark makes no reference, 
we see Him facing His work. Journeying on from 
Nazareth, we watch His arrival in Capernaum, and ob- 
serve the calling of His first comrades. Then we see 
Him in contact with men. We next see Him in conflict 
with demons. Finally; we see Him, in the early hours of 
the following morning, in communion with God. When 
Jesus commenced His ministry, He came to men and 
identified Himself with them in the baptism of repent- 
ance; came to God, and received the attestation of the 
Father, following baptism; came to the under-world of 
evil in temptation, and mastered it. So now He is seen 
coming again to men as the Servant of God, coming 
again into the realm where demons held despotic sway 
over human souls and lives, coming again into quiet, 
close fellowship with God. 

We first observe Him facing His work, when entering 
into Capernaum He called the disciples to Him. Naza- 
reth had rejected Him. He had come to His own place, 
and His fellow townsmen would have none of Him. 
Now work was opening out before Him, and He called 
four men. The Servant of God, conscious of His re- 
jection at Nazareth, suffering on account thereof, desired 
the fellowship of men in the enterprises of God. To 
Simon and Andrew, to James and John, He said, " Come 
ye after Me, and I will make you to become fishers of 
men," He was the Son of man, the Saviour of men. 

[ 33 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark i : 14-35] 

The master passion of His heart was that of the estab- 
lishment of the Kingdom of God, and nothing interfered 
with that except men. But in order to the establishment 
of the Kingdom of God, man must not be destroyed. 
He said of His presence in the world, " I am not come to 
destroy, but to save." He needed help. 

These were the men He called. Simon, a man im- 
pulsive and wayward, lacking the principle which masters 
passion, and makes it strong. Andrew, His first Judaean 
disciple, James and John, brothers, but so different; the 
one a poet, a dreamer, attractive; and the other quiet, re- 
tiring, unknown. To these He said, " Come ye after Me, 
and I will make you to become fishers of men." 

"Fishers of men." He employed this figure because 
they were all fishermen. To some men He would never 
say that. He did not say it to all the early disciples. 
There were others who were farm labourers. Therefore 
He also said, " The fields are white to harvest." " Thrust 
in the sickle and reap." He changed His figure accord- 
ing to the men to whom He wished to appeal. The prin- 
ciple underlying His call was that He called men to con- 
secrate to His enterprises the capacity they had. Jesus 
is thus seen asking for comradeship; indicating the 
fact that when men are willing, He is able to fit them 
for the very comradeship in service to which He calls 
them. 

On the Sabbath day, with its wonderful scenes* we ob- 
serve Jesus dealing with men ; teaching and healing. In 
these days of public ministry He went into synagogues for 
teaching, as in the earlier years of private life He had 
gone habitually for worship. The synagogue was the 
place of the gathering together of those of the Hebrew 
religion, the Jews who were true to the monotheistic idea, 
and desired to worship God. The synagogue unified the 
scattered peoples everywhere, if in no other way, by the 
very liturgy they employed. Jews in Capernaum, in 
Nazareth, and in all the cities, who could not reach the 

[34l 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:14-35] 

Temple, gathered at the same hour on the Sabbath day, 
using the same forms of worship. 

A study of synagogue worship is a very interesting and 
profitable one. In passing we may observe that they 
who thus worshipped were forbidden to turn to the east. 
These synagogues usually faced the west, not only be- 
cause, according to Ezekiel's prophecy, there was a dan- 
ger of idolatry in turning to the east, but also symbolic- 
ally they were thus taught not to look in worship toward 
the place from whence religion came, but toward the 
place to which religion was intended to reach. It was 
the missionary attitude. Jesus went into these syna- 
gogues, and conformed to their habit and worship, as He 
had done through youth and young manhood in Nazareth. 
But now He went to teach. Opportunity to do so was 
undoubtedly offered Him everywhere, in accordance with 
the custom of the time, for all Rabbis travelling were 
welcome to teach in the synagogues. He employed the 
opportunities which the synagogue and its assembled peo- 
ple offered, to preach the Gospel. 

That which specially arrests our attention was the effect 
produced. Here at Capernaum, after the first Sabbath 
teaching, they were astonished, because He taught them 
with authority, and not as the scribes. The contrast is a 
very striking one in that it is unexpected. It is made 
here, and again later on. It is the contrast between 
Christ's teaching, and the teaching to which the people 
had been accustomed. He taught them as having au- 
thority, and not as their scribes. Now the scribes were 
the authoritative teachers. Their position was that of 
authority to teach the law and interpret it; to explain the 
Kingdom, to emphasize and insist upon the fact of the 
rule and reign of God, and to show how that rule was 
applied. The contrast was not between what they said, 
and what He said. It was a contrast between the effects 
produced by what they said, and by what He said. I do 
not agree with Edersheim when he suggests that the au- 

[35] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
IMark 1 : 14-35] 

thority of Jesus was that of manner. Not that His 
manner lacked dignity. I believe that physically Jesus 
was the most beautiful Man Who ever walked this earth. 
Marred with sorrow was His face undoubtedly, but far 
more perfect in form and feature than the highest dream 
of Greek sculptor ever led men to imagine man could be. 
His authority was not in His manner, nor in the thing 
He said ; for He said nothing that had not been said be- 
fore He came. Everything that He said may be found 
in germ in the Old Testament Scriptures. 

Then wherein lay this authority? In the thing He said, 
as He said it, for He carried to the souls of men convic- 
tion that it was true. Stripped of all the things that hid, 
and all exposition that destroyed; the truth gripped men. 
It was not the authority of the law, it was not the au- 
thority of a manner, it was the authority of naked, eternal 
truth, uttered through an absolutely perfect Man. That 
is the authority of Jesus until this hour, and nothing is 
more marked than the continuity of that authority. Take 
some passage from His teaching, out of the Manifesto, 
or some casual word He spoke, and listen to it, and then 
ask this question, Is that true ? The only criticism ever 
offered of the teaching of Jesus worth any consideration, 
is that He gave men counsels of perfection, that Hisi 
teachings were impracticable. There is no question as to 
their accuracy, or their truth. The hearts of men al- 
ways respond to the truth. His was, and is, the authority 
of eternal, naked truth, from which there can t>e no 
escape. Some of the things He said search and scorch 
us. We want to escape, but we know that He is right. 
This is one of the supreme proofs of the finality of Jesus. 
His authority is authority to the end of time. Only it 
must be remembered that the authority diminishes, if 
these records be lost. The authority of Christ is not the 
authority of what we think of Christ, for to-morrow we 
may think differently of Him. It is always the authority 
of the actual words so marvellously preserved for us; 

[36] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:14-35] 

and never wholly apart from them is Christ authoritative 
to-day. 

As we watch Him on that first Sabbath day, this au- 
thority arrests us; it is the authority of essential truth, 
coming out of eternity, and appealing to essential human- 
ity; however humanity may have become blunted and 
dwarfed, it hears and knows the voice, and recognizes 
the authority. '.--.. 

Then beyond the. teaching, there was healing. This 
healing ministry was twofold; mental healing in His 
dispossession of those who were mastered by evil spirits; 
and bodily healing in His renewal of all bodily powers. 
These miracles of Jesus were not violations of natural 
order, but restorations to natural order. That man de- 
mon-possessed, was unnatural. Then said Jesus to the 
demon, "Be muzzled, and come out." That woman in 
a burning fever, was unnatural ; " He touched her, and 
the fever left her/' He did not violate order; but re- 
stored it. 

Thus the Servant of God is seen moving out upon the 
pathway of service; first teaching men, for this is su- 
preme, and touches the spirit life ; and then healing mind 
and body, restoring natural conditions, in order to the 
fulfilment of life. 

The last thing in this paragraph is full of beauty. To 
take the Greek words as they come: "And very early, 
while yet night, having risen up, He went out, and de- 
parted into a desert place, and there was praying." That 
reveals the deliberate purposefulness of Jesus. The word 
" praying " here connotes far more than asking. It sug- 
gests the going forward in desire to God, not for God's 
gifts only, but for God. It is the word for true worship, 
the word that describes the soul moving out toward 
God, desiring Him, and all He has to give. 

It is impossible to read that statement and observe our 
Lord in the early hours of the morning, leaving behind 
Him the four men He had chosen as comrades, and the 

[373 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark i : 14-35] 

people He had healed in the city, to go into the desert 
place, without asking the nature of His communion with 
God. This Gospel has been introduced by the declara- 
tion that it is " The beginning of the Gospel " according 
to Isaiah. In the second part of the great prophecy of 
Isaiah, there is one paragraph which lights up this early 
morning hour, and Jesus at prayer. It is taken from the 
description of the Servant of God (50:4-7). "The 
Lord Jehovah hath given Me the tongue of them that are 
taught, that I may know how to sustain with words him 
that is weary: He wakeneth morning by morning, He 
wakeneth Mine ear to hear as they that are taught. The 
Lord Jehovah hath opened Mine ear, and I was not re- 
bellious, neither turned away backward. I gave My back 
to the smiters, and My cheeks to them that plucked off 
the hair: I hid not My face from shame and spitting. 
For the Lord Jehovah will help Me ; therefore have I not 
been confounded: therefore have I set My face like a 
flint, and I know that I shall not be put to shame." That 
passage suggests the nature of that early morning hour 
of communion. Let us ponder it carefully. 



[38] 



IV 

" To this end came I forth" MARK i : 38. 

Mark 1:35-2: 12. 

THIS paragraph commences with the story of how the 
quietness of the morning watch of Jesus was broken in 
upon by the arrival of Simon and the rest of His disci- 
ples. The declaration made by the evangelist is really 
very striking; it means that they pursued Him, they 
hunted Him down. The word marks the anxiety and the 
eagerness of their search, and the almost terror that pos- 
sessed them, when wakening in the morning, they found 
that Jesus was not in the house at Capernaum. Having 
found Him they said to Him, "All are seeking Thee," a 
declaration revealing the effect produced in Capernaum 
by that wonderful Sabbath with its teaching, its healing 
of the demoniac, its healing of Peter's wife's mother, 
and that most wonderful eventide when they brought to 
Him all that were sick, and possessed with demons, and 
with apparent ease He healed the sicknesses, and cast the 
demons out. 

In this paragraph we have an account of our Lord's 
answer to the statement of His disciples, and the things 
that immediately followed. He was interrupted in His 
fellowship, but not disturbed by the interruption. Quietly 
He said to them, when they told Him that all in Caper- 
naum were waiting for Him, " Let us go elsewhere into 
the next towns, . . . for to this end came I forth." A 
great lesson lies within that fact, its ultimate value being 
that converse with God prepares us for converse with 
men, and that a true fellowship with God is never selfish ; 
it is willing to be interrupted when men need help. In 
their eagerness, their intense anxiety lest somehow He 
had departed, they hunted Him down, pursued Him until 

f39l 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:352:12] 

they found Him, and then with eagerness they said to 
Him, "All are seeking Thee." He, with open ear was 
listening to God, and holding communion with Him in 
the secret place. With no perturbation of spirit, with no 
rebuke for these men, looking at them with great love 
and tenderness He said, Let us go elsewhere into the 
next towns, that I may preach there also ; for to this end 
came I forth. The word " towns " is a singularly arrest- 
ing one, occurring nowhere else in the New Testament, 
translated, "to the next village towns"; and perhaps 
more happily, " to the next country towns." The refer- 
ence was to the smaller towns that were not walled 
around completely, the little centres of population unified 
by the presence of a synagogue. He told them that He 
must go to the other country towns. He had come to 
Capernaum, for Capernaum sat in the shadows of dark- 
ness and death; and He had opened His ministry there 
in the midst of night, but Capernaum must not detain 
Him. The other country towns needed His help ; not the 
metropolis alone, but those other towns and cities scat- 
tered through Galilee; and not the towns only, but the 
unwalled villages. To this end came He forth. 

The Sabbath in Capernaum had prepared the way for 
this wider ministry, for after the happenings in the syna- 
gogue, " the report of Him went out straightway every- 
where into all the region of Galilee round about." Mark 
records the fact of that first itinerary of our Lord in the 
briefest words: " He went into their synagogues through- 
out all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons." No 
details are given. Then he gives two illustrative inci- 
dents, that of the cleansing of the leper; that of the for- 
giving of the sins, and the healing of the palsied man. 
These two incidents at the end of a general declaration, 
illuminate all that ministry. 

The cleansing of the leper took place at the foot of 
the mountain after the giving of the Manifesto. Mark 
was not dealing with the King and the Lawgiver, but 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark i : 35 a : 12] 

with the great Servant of God Who is Priest and 
Saviour; and so he did not record the Manifesto. Be- 
tween the hour of His disturbance in worship, and the 
healing of the leper, there had been journey ings. The 
gap may be filled by turning to Matthew, and discovering 
from how far and wide an area the people had gathered 
to Him, flocked after Him. They had come from Judaea 
and Decapolis and from beyond Jordan. The crowds 
were flocking after Him everywhere; and there came a 
moment when, seeing the multitudes, He went into the 
mountain with His disciples, and sat and taught them, 
and gave them the Manifesto. Immediately; following, 
as Matthew records, this leper came to Him. The other 
incident occurred when, after a period of absence from 
Capernaum,; made necessary by the disobedience of the 
cleansed leper who published Him, Jesus went back into 
the city, and there in the house the palsied man was 
brought to Him, and He forgave and healed him. 

Again endeavouring to observe the Lord Himself 
rather than the people about Him, or the incidents them- 
selves, let us consider the text we have chosen, as reveal- 
ing the inspiration of His ministry; and in the light of 
the context, as revealing the nature and power thereof. 
With all the lights and shadows of these two incidents 
playing about the Person of the Lord, let us listen to Him 
as He said, " To this end came I forth." Let us attempt 
to discover the inspiration of Christ's service as it is 
marked in the words, " Came I forth " ; and secondly, the 
nature and power of His service as it is revealed in the 
incidents, and appears in the phrase, " To this end came 
I forth." 

The first meaning of the words of Jesus must detain 
us. There are two possible interpretations of His decla- 
ration, " Came I forth." He either meant, I came forth 
from Capernaum, or, I came forth from God. The dec- 
laration was either purely local and geographical ; or it 
was essential and eternal. The first interpretation, al- 

1 4i 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO'MARK 
[Mark i : 352 : 12] 

though given by many expositors, seems to me impossi-v 
ble and almost grotesque. I am in agreement with Mori- 
son when he says that " Such an interpretation . . . 
involves a sudden, arbitrary, and almost unpleasant de- 
scent to bathos." Besides, it is not true to the simple 
story. Jesus did not leave Capernaum to preach, but 
to pray. He did not go out in the early morning hour to 
seek the crowds, but to be away from them. He had not 
gone out in the early morning hour to reach cities, but to 
escape a city. He had gone out to have communion with 
God. 

The second interpretation, which I resolutely adopt, is 
that upon this occasion in the simplest words, as the 
Servant of God He revealed the fact that He recognized 
that His ministry here in the world was dependent upon 
the fact that He had come out from God. He had been 
in the place of communion with God, His ear had been 
wakened by God to listen to the secrets which God had 
to speak to Him as His Self-emptied Servant, and now 
He said, To this end came I forth. 

That interpretation is in harmony with His claims on 
other occasions, as chronicled specially by John, and with 
the revelation of the Servant of God in this Gospel. 
Whereas our Lord is presented by Mark stripped of His 
dignities, devoid of the purple, girded as a slave, for 
evermore under the compulsion of His service; yet con- 
stantly there are gleams of glory flaming forth and re- 
minding us that the Servant of God is also the Son of 
God. The key-note of the Gospel struck by the evan- 
gelist in that opening word, " The beginning of the Gos- 
pel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God," finds its continuity 
in the harmonies as they run ; for all the things of lowli- 
ness are combined with things of might ; in the stories we 
see Him as the Self-emptied One, and yet as the One in 
Whom all the fulness of Deity dwells corporeally; the 
Kenosis of the Philippian letter, and the Pleroma of the 
Colossian letter are merged in this one Gospel. 

[42] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:352:12] 

We have already seen some of these gleams in the Di- 
vine attestation at His baptism; in the awful and agonized 
cry of the evil spirit in the synagogue, "I know Thee 
who Thou art, the Holy One of God " ; in the wonderful 
power by which the demon was subdued; and in the 
power which had wrought so marvellously on that Sab- 
bath evening. In all these there was a power and a dig- 
nity and a glory, which did not belong to man alone. 
Now in the chill dawn of the early morning, to those 
perturbed disciples He said in effect: I am not going 
back to Capernaum, though all men seek Me; because 
there are others waiting for Me. I must go and preach 
to them, because for that purpose came I forth. Whether 
they understood Him perfectly or not, the dignity of the 
assertion shows that He related His journeyings, His 
teaching, and the things He did by the way, to the eternal 
Purpose, to the Divine programme, to the Divine mis- 
sion. " To this end came I forth." 

John chronicles how that once in the midst of His 
critics He said, " I came forth and am come from God " ; 
and again in the seclusion of the upper room He said to 
His disciples, covering the whole fact of His mission, " I 
came out from the Father, and am come into the world ; 
again, I leave the world, and go unto the Father." In 
the light of these statements upon other occasions, we 
understand the text, " To this end came I forth." The 
Self-emptied One had come forth from God. God had 
not left Him, and He had not left God in certain senses, 
for there came a day when He said, " I am not alone, but 
I and the Father that sent Me." That was not the lan- 
guage of His Deity, but of His humanity. As a Man, 
God never left Him through all the years. He had all 
the privileges of fellowship with God during His human 
life as a Man that we have, and none other. He lived 
the life of relationship to God that every man may live. 
He had come forth from God, He had emptied Himself, 
He had left behind Him all the riches and glories and 

[431 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 352 : 12] 

the mysteries of His essential and eternal relationship to 
God. Yet carefully observe Him; and this, illustrates 
the whole profound and tremendous theme; again and 
again He exercised the powers of Deity, which are the 
powers of sovereign supremacy, but never on His own 
behalf, it was always on behalf of others. He had come 
forth from God. Therein we discover the strength of 
His purpose. The strength of His service lay in the com- 
plete abandonment of the Servant to the One Who com- 
manded. He moved everywhere, not with the dignity 
of Deity, but with the dignity of the authority under 
which He served. He was in the world for a purpose. 
Jesus was never afraid of loneliness, never afraid of the 
desert places. He knew full well that naught could harm 
Him until His mission was accomplished, and His work 
was done. " Mine hour is not yet come," He said to 
His enemies. That was not the language of God. God 
has no " hours." His is the eternal " Now." It was 
the language of the Servant Who knew God, and Who 
moved forward with a great sense of the authority of 
His mission, knowing that He was in the world for a 
purpose. Very early in the morning He rose up, leaving 
the other sleepers undisturbed, and went out to prayer 
in the desert place. He prayed as a Man facing the task 
before Him, knowing that presently He must give His 
cheek to those that would pluck off the hair, and His 
back to the smiter. God communed with Him of the 
coming passion; and in resolute agreement, He set His 
face toward the goal. " To that end came I forth." In 
that sentence is the key-note of His confidence, the secret 
of His strength, the unveiling of the power that made 
Him the prevailing Servant of God. 

The immediate application follows. He said He was 
going to preach, to herald the Gospel ; to proclaim it, 
which includes talking and working. He was going to 
herald the Gospel both by word and work in the nearest 
towns, Bethsaida, Chorazin, Dalmanutha, Magdala. He 

[ 44 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark i : 352 : 12] 

was going to a ministry of power and blessing, statistically 
a failure, spiritually a triumph. 

We turn therefore to consider the nature and power 
of His service as it was revealed in the journey through 
Galilee, and especially in the two incidents. 

The end to which He referred was that of heralding 
or proclaiming, and that of casting out. This is a most 
suggestive statement, covering the story of that ministry : 
" He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, 
preaching and casting out demons." Mark shows what 
the Servant of God, when passing out of the place of 
communion with God, did in the presence of men, and in 
the presence of the underworld of evil. In fellowship 
with God in prayer He was interrupted but not disturbed. 
Then He went through all the towns and villages, 
"preaching and casting out demons." His relation to 
men is suggested by the word "preaching/* His relation 
to the underworld of evil is suggested by the phrase, 
" casting out demons." He was proclaiming the Gospel 
of God, and there were two notes therein; first, the 
Kingdom of God is a fact; secondly, it is nigh. Its 
nearness through Himself constituted the special note of 
good news that He came to proclaim to men. He went 
everywhere proclaiming this Kingdom and Gospel. 

He illustrated both Kingdom and Gospel as He cast 
out demons. None of the other evangelists draws our 
attention so constantly to this power of Christ over the 
underworld of evil as does Mark. The first incident to 
which Mark drew attention, was that wrought in the 
synagogue when He cast the demon out. Doubtless He 
also healed the sick, for Matthew specifically declares 
that He did. But the thing that impressed Mark, as he 
looked at the Servant of God, was first of all His re- 
lationship to God in prayer; then as He went out to His 
work, His relationship to men, as He proclaimed the 
Kingdom and the Gospel of God ; and finally His power 
over the underworld of evil, as He cast out demons. 

[45]"" 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1:352: 12] 

To come to the incidents, and to watch the Lord: we 
observe Him first with the leper. He acted in two 
realms, those of health and holiness, showing their inter- 
relationship. First He cleansed the leper; then He sent 
him to the priest with a definite and specific command 
that he should take with him the sacrifice or offerings 
which Moses commanded. In the second incident, that of 
the palsied man, the same two realms are manifested; 
first holiness, " Thy sins are forgiven " ; secondly health, 
" Take tip thy bed and walk." 

Surveying the incidents in their entirety, and observ- 
ing, not so much the man, nor the crowds about the 
Lord,, but the Lord Himself at His work as the Servant 
of God, we are brought on both occasions into the pres- 
ence of health and holiness, and their inter-relationship 
is marked. 

In the first case He healed a leper; and then sent him 
to the priest for the fulfilment of those ceremonial offer- 
ings, which had to do with holiness. In the second case 
He forgave sins, and restored holiness to a soul ; and then 
gave him health in the presence of criticism, thereby 
showing the inter-relationship between health of soul and 
health of body. It is Mark alone who tells us that when 
the leper came to meet Him at the foot of the mountain, 
after He had uttered the great Manifesto, He was moved 
with compassion. In our familiarity with some of the 
New Testament phrases, we are in danger of losing the 
sense of their value. " He was moved with compassion." 
Let us try and see what He saw, when He looked at that 
leper, in order that we may the better understand His 
compassion. Observe the stage of leprosy that he had 
reached ; that strange, awful stage of cleanness, due to 
hopeless corruption. The law of the leper is found in 
Leviticus (13 and 14) ; and to that law our Lord referred. 
All the instructions given to the priest were for dis- 
tinguishing between false and true leprosy, and afterwards 
for dealing with a man in whose case the awful fact of 

[46] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 352 : 12] 

leprosy was established He must be segregated in cer- 
tain stages of the disease; but when at last the disease 
had become all whiteness, when the man was entirely a 
leper, then he was clean, so far as contagion was con- 
cerned, and need ho longer be segregated. He might then 
mix again amongst men, for while the death sentence 
was on him, the period of contagion was over. This man 
was in that condition. Later on in our Lord's ministry 
ten lepers approached, but they did not come near Him. 
They stood at a distance and cried out. They were un- 
clean lepers, in the early stages, of the disease when they 
must be segregated. This man was in the midst of a 
crowd, who undoubtedly loathed him, but who were in 
no danger from him. He came close to Christ, with all 
the whiteness of the ultimate corruption upon him; no 
hope for him^ in himself; no value in him to society. 
Jesus was moved with compassion, and the nature of His 
compassion was manifested in what followed. There is 
a very genuine compassion that recoils and shudders and 
passes on its way. It is compassion, but it is not the 
compassion of Christ, it is not the compassion of God! 
" He was moved with compassion " ; but there was no 
contempt for the man; there was no recoil from him. 
There was a forward step, and the hand was laid upon 
him, on the whiteness of his complete corruption! Jesus 
was not breaking law ; for the period of contagion was 
passed. Or even if He were so doing, He was breaking 
jt because He was superior to law, in that within Him 
purity was not negative merely, but positive. There had 
come from that mass of corruption a plaintive, pitiful 
cry, "Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean." 
Immediately He advanced and touched him, and said, " I 
will/' do not question My willingness; "I will; be 
thou made clean." His leprosy was instantly cleansed; 
not healed. The New Testament never speaks of the 
healing" of leprosy, always of cleansing, which is a pro- 
founder word. 

[ 47 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 1 : 352 : 12] 

He was then sent to the priest, sent back to the repre- 
sentative of that economy which was the Kingdom of 
God in foreshadowing, in order to obey the law of the 
leper. The moral and spiritual suggestiveness of that 
can only be discovered as the law of the leper is consid- 
ered, in which in the ancient economy, if a man was 
cleansed of leprosy, there followed ceremonial functions 
that marked the necessity for sacrifice and cleansing from 
moral taint. Jesus said, " Go shew thyself to the priest " ; 
thus linking the man's cleansing or health, with his 
spiritual cleansing or holiness.. Thus without argument 
or statement of philosophy, Christ revealed in a flash the 
fact that in all His ministry He recognized the union 
between material suffering and limitation, and spiritual 
disability and corruption. 

Exactly the same things are found in the second of the 
pictures. The Revisers say, " They uncovered the roof." 
Such a rendering is entirely misleading. The force of 
the word is that they broke up the roof of the house, 
tearing up the fabric, in order to lower the man down on 
his pallet into the presence of Jesus. 

Again most carefully observe what He did. He looked 
into the man's eyes, and said, " Son, thy sins are for- 
given." This was a word of absolution, a word of God. 
The Scribes were quite right when they said: "Who 
can forgive sins but One, even God? " They were wrong 
when they said: "Why doth this Man thus speak? He 
blasphemeth." They did not know Him. He claimed 
that the authority which was that of God alone, was 
vested in Him as the Son of Man. At that point the title 
" Son of Man " emerges in this Gospel. That title linked 
Him to other men, yet marked His relationship to God 
as the Self-emptied One Who laid aside the powers and 
attributes of Divine Sonship, and limited Himself within 
humanity as a perfect vehicle for the doing of the work 
of God. When they questioned Him, He proceeded to 
that which was the material result of holiness; the res- 
US ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

^, : j [Mark i : 352 : 12] 

toration to health of the bodily powers. That was the 
demonstration of the fact of holiness, and so also that 
the authority to forgive sins was logically vested in, and 
made possible through, the Son of man. " To this end 
came I forth/' 

In all this is seen the value of the Kenosis, or Self- 
emptying of the Son of God as the condition for the re- 
deeming activity of the fulness or Pleroma of Deity that 
operated through Him. He came forth emptying Him- 
self, and now became the instrument through which 
power was proclaimed, and operatedi on behalf of the 
Kingdom and the Gospel. 

So far as we are permitted to speak or think of Him 
as the Pattern of our service for there are limitations in 
any such consideration we may summarize the value of 
this paragraph by saying that it reveals the relation be- 
tween prayer and power. He was praying in the early 
morning, and all the consequent influence followed upon 
that prayer. Prayer is listening for God, hearing what 
God has to say, consenting to what God does say, asking 
of God power to obey. To neglect these things is to be 
powerless when we meet the lepers, and the palsied men 
of the world. God, through the self-emptied, always 
pours out His fulness for the blessing of others; and 
prayer is the exercise finally of self-emptying that pre- 
pares the soul, that makes us channels through which 
the power of God may proceed to the accomplishment 
,of His purposes in the world. 



"And the Pharisees went out, and straightway with 
the Herodians took counsel against Him, how they might 
destroy Him." MARK 3 : 6. 

Mark 2: 13-3: 6. 

THIS is a singularly sad text. It is the record of the 
climax of a hostile movement manifest throughout the 
paragraph of our reading. 

In our consideration of the early morning communion 
of Jesus with His Father after the first Sabbath in Caper- 
naum, we turned to the prophecy of Isaiah, and saw the 
picture there presented of the Servant of God, wakened 
by His Lord to hear the secrets of His will. In that pic- 
ture we saw also, the Servant of God resolutely giving 
His back to the smiters, and His cheek to them that 
plucked off the hair, going forward with courage to face 
all opposition in order to accomplish the will of His God. 
The suggestiveness of that picture of Isaiah is illustrated 
in the paragraph. Jesus, passing down from the place of 
solitude, went throughout all Galilee, followed by great 
multitudes of people. Mark briefly records that fact ; 
and gives two illustrative incidents, those of the leper 
and the palsied man. 

That ministry was exercised in the face of constant 
opposition. This was first manifested in the reasoning of 
the scribes when He pronounced the sins of the palsied 
forgiven. Now, following the chronological sequence, 
Mark records four incidents specially revealing the 
growth and the nature of that opposition. 

Each of these incidents has values beyond those now 
to occupy our attention. Each conveys messages of truth 
concerning the Lord Himself in His dealings with men. 

[SO] " 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

We propose now to observe that opposition which found 
its climax, as the text declares, when " the Pharisees went 
out, and straightway with the Herodians took counsel 
against Him, how they might destroy Him." 

Let us then observe this opposition, in order that we 
may consider the attitude of Jesus in the presence thereof. 

The opposition is at once clearly revealed in the four 
words of criticism which were uttered. Observe how 
these words advance to the climax of the text. 

" He eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners " 
(2:16). 

' "Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the 
Pharisees fast, but Thy disciples fast not? " (2: 18). 

" Why do they on the Sabbath day that which is not 
lawful?" (2:24). 

" They watched Him . . . that they might accuse 
Him" (3:2). 

The first criticism was spoken, not to the Lord, but to 
His disciples concerning Him. The next two words were 
spoken, not concerning the Lord, but to the Lord con- 
cerning His disciples, and were undoubtedly intended to 
reflect upon Him for the influence He had been exerting 
upon them. In the last sentence there is no record of 
any word spoken ; but a graphic fact is presented. Again 
they were in the synagogue, a week later, as Luke de- 
clares, and these men were silently and malevolently 
watching Him to see whether He would heal, that they 
might accuse Him. 

With regard to the first of these criticisms, the occa- 
sion was that of the call of Levi, and the feast that fol- 
lowed. Jesus, passing along saw Levi (or Matthew) sit- 
ting at the receipt of custom, and said to him, " Follow 
me." Immediately he followed Him. Whether on the 
same day, or later, cannot be stated with any certainty, 
but the fact is recorded definitely that Matthew gathered 
together a number of people of his own order, and made 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 2 : 13 3 : 6] 

a feast that they might have the opportunity of meeting 
with Jesus. Our Lord is seen accepting that hospitality 
of Matthew, and Himself becoming a veritable Host in 
the midst of these men, the gathered publicans and sin- 
ners, old friends of Matthew, a class held in supreme con- 
tempt by the religious men of the time. The Pharisees 
charged Him with entering upon a fellowship with sin- 
ning men, which was defiling. 

While recognizing the fact of the traditions by which 
these Pharisees were bound, it must also be recognized 
that theirs was a very sincere difficulty in this regard, and 
in all probability their philosophy was perfectly sound, 
had they applied it to any other than Jesus. This was 
one of those occasions when our Lord made Himself, 
without patronage and without any appearance of con- 
tempt for the men among whom He sat, the common 
Friend of publicans and sinners. From the criticism of 
the Pharisees upon this occasion, and also upon other 
occasions, we have a picture which is still a startling one. 
Jesus is seen sitting at the feast with these men, without 
taking up toward them anything of the attitude of su- 
periority, patronage, or contempt. They charged Him 
with cultivating a friendship with sinning men which, as 
it seemed to them, must be defiling. 

In the second of the scenes, the occasion was the ob- 
servance of some fast. The tenses warrant the declara- 
tion that it was not a general question merely, but that 
at the time some fast was being observed, which the dis- 
ciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees ob- 
served, but which the disciples of Jesus did not observe. 
The enemies of Christ came to Him thus again still 
strangely perplexed, and asked Him a general question, 
which nevertheless had a particular and immediate appli- 
cation. They charged Him and those associated with 
Him, with an absence of seriousness and solemnity. 
There were evidences on the part of His disciples of joy- 
fulness and happiness. They were neglecting to fast, and 

E 5* ] ' 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

were rather given to feasting. That was the second 
criticism. 

The third incident was in the cornfields. His disciples 
began, not to pluck merely, but as they moved forward 
other evangelists tell us that they rubbed the ears of corn 
in their hands, and ate. That was the occasion for the 
third criticism. They charged our Lord with permitting 
His disciples to do secular things on a sacred day. 

In the last picture the occasion was again a Sabbath day 
in the synagogue. In that synagogue was a man with a 
withered hand. Here occurs one of those incidental things, 
which are so full of beauty in these narratives. Seek- 
ing to find an accusation against Him, His enemies never- 
theless all unconsciously paid Him a supreme compliment. 
They associated Him immediately, not with the chief 
seat in the synagogue, but with the most needy man in 
the crowd. They expected He would do something for 
that man with the withered hand. They hated Him, but 
they were quick to know Him, and they watched Him 
that they might have their opportunity to accuse Him: 

There was a new element of rooted objection to Him- 
self now entering into their criticism. This opposition 
expressed itself in the most startling way, startling be- 
cause the Pharisees took counsel with the Herodians. 
Here were two political parties in the State, always bit- 
terly opposed to each other, now brought together. The 
Herodians believed in the government of Rome, in order 
that Herod's jurisdiction might be maintained. The 
Pharisees were against the yoke of Rome. Many and 
bitter were the disputes and quarrels between them. 
But the Pharisees went out and took counsel with the 
Herodians; they sank their political differences in their 
mutual hostility to Jesus; and they took counsel how they 
might destroy Him. 

Now let us watch the Lord, and observe His attitude 
toward all this opposition; how He opposed Himself, 
His mission, and the meaning of His ministry, against 

[53] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

every successive form of criticism ; until when these men 
went out to take counsel against Him, He withdrew, and 
left them. A fourfold charge had been made against 
Him; first, that of a moral carelessness, in that He sat 
to eat with publicans and sinners ; secondly, that of lack 
of seriousness, in that He encouraged His disciples to 
violate a tradition by not observing a fast; thirdly, failure 
to differentiate as between the sacred and the secular, in 
that He allowed His disciples to do a thing, not in itself 
wrong, but purely secular, upon a sacred day, in plucking 
the ears of corn; and finally, by their very silence, and 
the malevolence of their intention, these men declared 
their conviction of His utter worthlessness, and that He 
merited destruction. 

First with regard to the charge of moral carelessness, 
our Lord admitted at once, by the figure of speech that 
He used, the moral maladies of the men among whom 
He sat that day as Guest, or among whom He sat as 
Host. That is seen in the answer He gave: " They that 
are whole have no need of a physician, but they that are 
sick." He thus immediately revealed Himself as con- 
scious of the spiritual and moral disease of the men 
among whom He sat. His sense of evil was not less 
acute than that of His enemies. This was His answer. 
He knew these men, their nefarious tricks, and their gross 
life. There is no doubt that there was a good deal of 
ground for the opposition of the Pharisees to these men. 
They were debased men. Jesus admitted their moral 
maladies, and then quietly, and without any argument, 
assumed for Himself the authority and the ability of the 
physician. 

Thus He denied the charge of moral carelessness by 
declaring that He cared so much, that He was there to 
cure these men of their spiritual sicknesses. He revealed 
the fact that the reason why He sat familiarly at the 
board and condescended to the level of these men, assum- 
ing no attitude of superiority, patronage, or of contempt, 

I 54 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

was that He was against the very things to which the 
Pharisees objected, but that He was there as the Phari- 
sees never could be, ,with the healing power of the phy- 
sician. He declared in effect^ when they criticized Him 
for moral carelessness, that there had been committed 
to Him the cure of souls, and that in order to cure them, 
it was necessary to come into contact with them. 

Observe our Lord's method in dealing with the second 
of these criticisms. .. I have named this the charge of lack 
of seriousness. Surely this is what these men meant. 
The observance of the fast was always the time of 
solemnity, and fasts had been multiplied far beyond those 
commanded in the Law ; occasions when men wore sack- 
cloth, put ashes upon their heads, did not anoint their 
faces, and appeared in the garments of mourning, in 
sorrowful and solemn silence. They were doubtless ob- 
serving such a fast on this particular occasion. But the 
disciples of Jesus were not wrapped in sackcloth, nor had 
they scattered ashes upon their heads. They were not 
abstaining from food, but were filled with gladness and 
joy. When they asked the question why His disciples 
did not fast, these men were thus charging Him with 
failure to realize the seriousness and solemnity of life. 

In reply to this criticism, He at once adopted the figure 
of the wedding, spoke of Himself as the Bridegroom, 
and declared that these men could never be sad while 
the Bridegroom remained with them. The adoption of 
the figure was in itself a vindication of the right of His 
disciples to be joyful. In those Eastern lands during a 
period of seven days, all the friends of the bridegroom 
were full of joy and merriment and laughter and songs 
and gladness. When these men questioned the disciples' 
attitude toward fasting, suggesting thereby that they had 
no sense of the seriousness and solemnity of life, He did 
not deny it. He admitted it, and said, "As long as they 
have the Bridegroom with them, they cannot fast." Then 
in an aside, He recognized the fact that there were days 

[55] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

coming to these men when the Bridegroom should be 
taken away; lifted away, snatched away, for such is 
the word, a very significant word, having in it an element 
of tragedy, a suggestion of violence. The choice of the 
word was in itself a recognition of the purpose which 
was already in the hearts of the men who were watching 
Him. There was a reference to what He knew would 
be the ultimate of their hostility, His taking away, His 
lifting up, and that by violent and evil men. Looking at 
these men who were criticizing Him, and knowing where- 
unto their hostility would grow, He said : These men will 
have their day of fasting presently when the Bridegroom 
is taken away from them. This declaration was an 
aside, and not the declaration of a final truth, for spiritu- 
ally we have no place in that sadness, for the Bridegroom 
is not taken away from us. He abides with us. There- 
fore our whole attitude toward life should be that, not 
of men who fast, but of men who sit at the eternal 
feast. 

Our Lord immediately proceeded to illustrate this by 
the figures of the cloth and the wine skins. New cloth 
cannot be put into old. It will tear it. New wine can- 
not be put into old skins. It will burst them. In that 
word our Lord claimed that He had come to initiate an 
entirely new order of religious life and experience, which 
would make necessary new methods of expression; in- 
stead of the fast, the feast; instead of the sackcloth, the 
purple; instead of the perpetual and solemn melancholy, 
a perennial and glad joyfulness. Thus, recognizing and 
understanding the meaning of their criticism of the men 
who were about Him, for the 'gladness of their lives, 
and their refusal to fast, recognizing also that days of 
sorrow were coming to them, He indicated in a prophetic 
and illuminative figure the fact that presently there would 
be for men the joy of gladness and song, and the neces- 
sity for sackcloth would forever pass away; the sack- 
cjpth in that day would be transfigured, metamorphosed 

[36] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

into the purple of royalty; all the underlying reason 
for the fast being destroyed, the eternal feast would 
begin. 

The third charge against Him was that of failure to 
distinguish between sacred and secular. " Why do thy 
disciples on the Sabbath day that which is not lawful?" 
The plucking of the ears of corn was not wrong in itself. 
The rubbing of them, and the eating of the corn, was not 
sinful. The wrong as these men saw it, was that the 
disciples failed, under the influence of Jesus, to distin- 
guish between that sacred day and that secular act; and 
failed to realize the fact that the sacred must ever be 
kept separate from the secular ; that the secular, however 
proper it may be, must be left when the sacred precincts 
are entered. That was their criticism. I believe that 
view still holds captive a great many to-day who think 
they understand Jesus Christ, and His teaching. 

Let us therefore carefully see how He answered themi. 
Incidentally, by the illustrations He used, He recognized 
the reason of His disciples' action. They were hungry, 
they had need of food. " David, when he ... was 
hungry, . . . entered into the house of God . . . 
and ate the shewbread . . . and gave also to them that 
were with him." In that illustration there was first of 
all a careful understanding and recognition of the fact 
that the reason why His disciples had plucked these ears 
of corn, and rubbed them and eaten them on the Sabbath 
day, was that of the perfectly natural hunger of the men. 
Only as we see this aspect of this story do we reach the 
real teaching of Christ on this occasion. 

Then, by the two illustrations which He gave, which 
flashed their light upon His disciples' action, and ex- 
plained that action, He revealed the falseness of the di- 
visions these men were making. Man is sacred in all his 
being; sacred not merely in his spiritual nature; but 
sacred as certainly in his moral and mental capacities; 
and sacred also in his physical life. A call for food is a 

[571 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 2: 133:6] 

healthy call, and a healthy call is a holy call; for health 
and holiness are identical terms. In our perpetual use of 
them we have divided between material and spiritual, 
but we of the Anglo-Saxon tongue have derived them 
both from the old word Halig, which means whole, com- 
plete. A cry for food is a sign of health, therefore it is 
holy. Anything that the physical demands is essentially 
holy. The wrong of life begins when men answer a 
perfectly healthy call^ in ways forbidden. A cry for food 
is holy, it is sacred ! Were it not so, in the economy of 
God He would provide that men never become hungry 
on the Sabbath day. The fact that hunger crosses the 
threshold on the Sabbath day demonstrates its sacredness, 
and no man can escape from that. Our Lord recognized 
the sacredness of man ; and then particularly, condensed 
into brief words the whole law of the Sabbath day. The 
Sabbath is indeed sacred, but wherein lies its sanctity? 
It is sacred because it is made for man. Man was not 
made for it. It was made for man, to minister to his 
needs. Therein lies the sanctity of the Sabbath day. 
The ultimate and final sanction of Sabbath observance is 
that of its service to humanity. It is indeed sacred. It 
was made for man; it retains its sanctity as it serves 
man. 

So the Son of man, Who came not to be ministered 
unto but to minister, is Lord of the Sabbath ; and the 
Sabbath must serve Him as He serves humanity, and 
consequently must be compelled to the service of hu- 
manity. The hunger of the disciples on the Sabbath day 
was healthy, was holy, and therefore the Sabbath must 
not be allowed to interfere with the supply of the need. 

Of course all intelligent beings will discriminate be- 
tween the doing of that which is the answer to a need, and 
the doing of that which is the answer to a desire which 
is not created by essential need. We must distinguish 
for evermore between that which is right and that which 
is wrong on the Sabbath day, whether it be the seventh 

[58 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

day of the week, or the first day set apart for worship 
.and rest. 

Our Lord however answered the charge of failure to 
distinguish between the sacred and the secular, by en- 
larging the area of the sacred, and bringing into it man 
with all his essential needs ; for the sanctity of man is the 
final secret of the sanctity of the Sabbath. Therefore 
whatever is necessary for holiness and health, is sacred 
as is the hour of worship, and must be observed. 

Finally we look at that synagogue scene, at the an- 
tagonism which no longer finds expression in words, but 
which was all the more dangerous because it had become 
silent; the antagonism which sought an opportunity for 
attack, watching Him, knowing that the man with the 
withered hand was in the synagogue, to see if He would 
heal, that they might find an occasion of accusation (a 
legal term), in order to His arrest, and that they might 
encompass His destruction. How did our Lord deal with 
this? 

Let it be observed first of all that He gave them the 
opportunity they sought, and healed the man. Then no- 
tice that He compelled them to face actual and startling 
contrasts of motive, startling even until this hour if 
quietly considered. Observe then, with real care, the 
alternatives He suggested to these men. He said to 
them, " Is it lawful on the Sabbath day to do good, or to 
do harm? to save a life, or to kill? " The startling nature 
of the enquiry is only revealed when we begin to ask 
ourselves the question. We might be inclined to say, 
But are we forced to that alternative? Is there not a 
middle position we could occupy? We do not want to 
do good to that man because it is the Sabbath, but sin- 
cerely we do not want to harm him. We have no desire 
to kill that man, but we do not feel that to-day we ought 
to stretch out the hand to save him. Is there not a mid- 
dle position? 

Christ in effect said, There is no middle position in the 

[ 59 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

face of human disability and need. We do good to the 
man when he is in need, or we do him harm; we help to 
save him, or we help to kill him, 

It is a stern, hard, and yet necessary standard. Is it 
not still a startling one? There lies the man upon the 
highway that runs from Jerusalem to Jericho, bruised by 
the robbers. Take up a negative position ; look at him, 
and pass by on the other side. The man who does so 
perpetuates his pain, and is guilty of the continuity of his 
suffering. In the presence of human pain, in the presence 
of limitation like this,, there is this one alternative. In 
effect Jesus said, Which shall I do? You are watching 
to accuse Me. Shall I do that man good, or shall I harm 
him by leaving him for another twenty-four hours in that 
limitation, when I have the power to help him? Shall I 
save him or kill him ? Which shall I do ? His action did not 
depend upon their decision. He did him good, He saved 
him. By so doing He separated between Himself and 
them. He did good to that man, He saved him. They, 
even though it was the Sabbath day, were trying to do 
Him harm, and to kill Him. Even though it was the 
Sabbath, presently they crossed the synagogue threshold, 
and entered into unholy coalition in order to destroy 
Him. The alternatives of Heaven admit of no compro- 
mises. 

Thus our Lord opposed to their criticism, the real 
meaning of His mission from beginning to end. He had 
come for the cure of spiritual malady. He had come to 
create the reason for abiding and abounding joyfulness. 
He had come to enlarge the area of the sacred, and to 
reveal to men that man is sacred, and that the sanctions 
of all ordinances are to be found in their ministry to the 
well-being of humanity. He had come to men$ to save 
them; not to harm and kill them. 

Such a meditation as this opens the door for much in- 
vestigation by way of application. Are these criticisms 
ever made of us, that were made of the Lord? The 

[ 60 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mane 2 : 133 : 6] 

question needs safeguarding by another. If they are 
made, are they made for the same reason? 

Are we ever charged with moral carelessness because 
we are consorting with sinners ? I am constrained to say 
that I believe at this very hour one of the secrets of ar- 
rest, and one of the reasons for the condition of things 
in the Christian Church that is troubling us in many 
ways, is the aloofness of the Christian Church from sin- 
ning men and women. We still build our sanctuaries, 
and set up our standards, and institute our arrangements, 
and say to the sinning ones : If you will come to us, we 
will help you! The way of the Lord is to go and sit 
where they sit, without patronage and without contempt. 
We may run great risks if we begin to do it. If we will 
dare to do it some one will say that we are consorting with 
sinning men, and that we are in moral and spiritual peril. 
I am afraid, however, that the Church is not often criti- 
cized on these lines. 

Are we ever criticized to-day for lack of seriousness 
because we are joyful in the Lord? Ah yes, we may be 
criticized for lack of seriousness because we are joyful 
in other ways, and I am not sure that such a criticism is 
not well deserved. There is a sense in which I fear that 
we do lack seriousness. These men were not glad because 
they were sharing in the frivolity of an age. They were 
glad because they were with Jesus. That was the glad- 
ness which made men criticize them for lack of serious- 
ness. Are we ever so criticized to-day? How little we 
really seem to know of the joy of the Lord. I asked 
Dan Crawford what impressed him most forcibly when 
he got back to London after twenty-three years in the 
long grass of Central Africa. He said, " The fact that 
London had lost its smile. I stood on the bridges, and 
walked along the thoroughfares, and looked at the hurry- 
ing peoples, and they all looked so sad." Is not that also 
true of the Church? Would not the fairer criticism of 
those who name His name to-day be not lack of serious- 

(61 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

ness born of joyfulness in the Lord, but lack of joyful- 
ness in the Lord, expressing itself in depressing serious- 
ness in the things of life? 

Once again, are we ever criticized for our failure to 
distinguish between the sacred and the secular, because 
we are sanctifying the secular? We are criticized for 
neglecting the Sabbath, and rightly so perchance. I can- 
not tell. I cannot judge. You tell me of men who spend 
their Sabbath, and week-ends, motoring and playing golf. 
I say frankly, I have nothing to do with legislating for 
these men. I can pity them honestly and kindly and with- 
out patronage. I can pray for them. But unless there 
is the expulsive power of a new affection, I do not wonder 
that they do it. 

My trouble is not with these men outside the Chris- 
tian Church. My trouble is with men inside the Chris- 
tian Church. Is there a sanctification of the secular 
that makes other men criticize us, or are we secularizing 
the sacred ? Along these lines of investigation I think we 
may profitably press forward alone; and that for the cor- 
rection and inspiration of our own lives. 

Or once more, are men of the world ever saying that 
we are worthless because we rebuke their worthlessness ? 
That is the story of the Son of God. The very character 
of Christ, the very attitude of Christ, the known purpose 
of Christ toward that man with the withered hand, made 
these men hate Him. They called Him worthless be- 
cause they themselves were worthless. Are we ever 
criticized for worthlessness for these reasons? 

A real fellowship with Christ must bring us into a 
partnership with Him in expression and experience. If 
by diligence we add to faith all the things implicated 
therein, we shall go with Him where He goes, do with 
Him what He does, for our emotional nature will be 
mastered by His compassions. That will inevitably mean 
that we are misunderstood as He was, hated as He was, 
and persecuted as He was. But it will also mean that 

[62] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 2 : 133 : 6] 

through us needy humanity will be served and saved, as 
it was through Him. 

The supreme value of our meditation is that of its 
revelation of the glory of Christ, the Servant of God; 
and in proportion as we desire to serve as we should, we 
must come into line, in fellowship with Him: 

" O Who like Thee, so calm, so bright, 

Thou Son of man, Thou Light of light ! 
O Who like Thee did ever go 
So patient through a world of woe ! 

" O Who like Thee so humbly bore 

The scorn, the scoffs of men before ; 
So meek, forgiving, Godlike, high, 
So glorious in humility. 

" O in this light be mine to go, 

Illuming all my way of woe; 
And give me ever on the road 
To trace Thy footsteps, O my God." 



I 63 1 



VI 

" He appointed twelve." MARK 3 : 14, 

Mark3:7-19a. 

THE opposition to the Servant of God was by no means 
universal, nor indeed at the time was it general. Our 
Lord attracted men irresistibly, and among them He ex- 
ercised a ministry of mighty and prevailing power. 
When the coalition of Pharisees and Herodians took 
counsel to destroy Him, He withdrew to the sea f and 
here again Mark summarizes the story of very much 
service in a few sentences. The multitudes grew in 
number, and gathered from all quarters. Not only did 
the Galilean crowds go after Him. There were also 
those who had travelled north from Judaea, and among 
them were some from Jerusalem itself. They came 
moreover from Idumsea, that is from Edom; from the 
region beyond Jordan, that is the region usually described 
as Persea; and from Tyre and Sidon. From all these 
places they came, the fame of Jesus having travelled far 
and wide; they came to hear His words, observe His 
works, and share in the benefits which He was so lavishly 
conferring upon men. Those with plagues pressed upon 
Him, in order that they might touch Him, and receive 
His healing ; wherever He went, unclean spirits recogniz- 
ing His presence, confessed Him Son of God, only to be 
silenced and cast out from their possession of men. In 
order to escape a while from the pressure of these crowds, 
He secured a little boat from which, in all probability, 
He taught the people, and in which He may have sailed 
away to some other place. That, I think, is the inference 
of the story. 

At this juncture He selected His apostles. Going up 

[ 64 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 7-193] 

into a mountain He called twelve from among His dis- 
ciples. This was action in advance, preparatory to a 
wider ministry, before the hour of His arrest and passion. 
Hostility had manifested itself to Him in Judaea, and 
He had left that region when John was imprisoned, and 
had begun His ministry in Galilee. Hostility manifested^ 
itself to Him in Nazareth, as He passed on His way to 
Capernaum. In Capernaum itself it had already been 
manifested when the scribes and Pharisees criticized Him 
for forgiving sins,, and it had grown until now the Phari- 
sees and Herodians were taking counsel to destroy Him. 
He knew that the hour would come when they would be 
successful, for that was by the determinate counsel and 
foreknowledge of God ; and ere that hour arrived He 
would increase the scope of His own ministry. This He 
did by calling into yet closer cooperation with Himself a 
certain number of men in order that they might exercise 
an immediate ministry, and thus be prepared for that 
larger ministry which should follow His exodus, and the 
coming of the Holy Spirit. 

The story then of this paragraph is full of value in 
this matter of His appointment of some within the circle 
of discipleship, to special relationship with Himself, and 
to special service in fellowship with Himself. Already 
all His disciples were witnesses to Him. Those who had 
yielded their allegiance were those who spread His fame 
far and wide as they told the story of what He had done 
for them. It was His intention, as we know full well, 
that to the end of time all His disciples should be wit- 
nesses for Him. Nevertheless, it was necessary, within 
the circle of those earliest disciples, to call some into 
special relationship, and into special fellowship in service. 
Let us observe three things ; first, His election of the 
twelve, " He calleth unto Him whom He Himself would: 
and they went unto Him " ; secondly, His appointment of 
those whom He elected, " He appointed them that they 
might be with Him, and that He might send them forth 

I 65 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : 7-ipa] 

to preach, and to have authority to cast out demons"; 
and finally, His distinctions within the circle of the 
twelve ; three He surnamed, and the rest He did not. 

First then as to this matter of our Lord's election of 
the twelve. I have most resolutely chosen the word 
" election " for it brings us face to face with the central 
fact, a fact which is of supreme importance. The words 
of Mark read thus, " He goeth up into the mountain, and 
calleth unto Him whom He Himself would, and they 
went unto Him." Now if we put that statement into the 
order of its procedure, we must begin at the centre first, 
" Whom He Himself would " ; secondly, " He calleth unto 
Him," that is those already chosen; and finally, "they 
went unto Him," that is those chosen and called. 

" Whom He Himself would " ; that is, those whom He 
preferred. The word suggests an active option resulting 
from a subjective impulse. There is another word in 
our New Testament which might be translated in the 
same way, but which does not at all mean the same thing. 
There is a verb which we translate " to will " which sug- 
gests passive acquiescence, the decision of the mind 
which is the result of objective considerations, the thought 
being that of disposition toward a certain action as the 
result of facts without. That is not the word of Mark 
here. This word suggests self-determining sovereignty, 
choice based upon reason within personality. "Whom 
He Himself would." He was entirely uninfluenced by 
temporary appeals. No appeal that any man might have 
made to Him would have influenced Him in the least. 
No protests of inability that any man might have sug-. 
gested would have changed His purpose. His choosing 
was choosing from within, the choosing of His own 
sovereignty; a choosing therefore in which He assumed 
all responsibility for what He did. " He called unto Him 
twelve, whom He Himself would." That is the funda- 
mental fact. 

His choice proceeded out of His infinite wisdom and 

[ 66] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 7-ipa] 

understanding. When He called them, it was not be- 
cause they had asked to be called; and when He called 
them, there was no room for protests of inability. He 
assumed responsibility. 

Those whom He Himself had thus chosen He called 
unto Himself, and by that call first set them free from all 
responsibility; and secondly, imposed upon them serious 
responsibility. He set them free from all responsibility. 
If there were any mistake, He made it. They were not 
responsible. If there were defects in them, He must deal 
with them and remedy them. They were not responsible. 
They did not choose to be His apostles, and at the last, 
in the Paschal discourses He said to them with infinite 
tenderness, and yet with wonderful illumination, " Ye 
did not choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, 
that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit 
should abide." That was surely a word of infinite com- 
fort to those men to the end of their ministry. There is 
an infinite ease in doing things He gives us to do, when 
we can say to Him, Lord, we did not choose this. Thou 
art responsible! 

And yet that call brought them into a place of very 
definite and real responsibility. It called them to confi- 
dence in the wisdom of His choice. How much these 
men must have needed this, in subsequent hours of fear 
and failure, of faltering and denial. It called them also 
to obedience to His commands, and therefore to yield to 
His power. 

Think of the comfort of all this. Truly it was a 
strange and mixed group of men ; not many mighty, not 
many wise; some of them full of that human force 
which compels attention, some of them unobtrusive and 
willing to be obscure. Yet they were His choice, and 
He chose them in the interest of the work. He had 
chosen them because they already had powers which He 
needed. He had chosen them because they were capable 
of appropriating the power He supplied. 

[ 67 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : 7-193] 

In his Theological Essays R. H. Hutton has this most 
interesting paragraph: 

"The chosen apostles themselves misunderstand and 
misinterpret their Master. Peter, after being told that 
his confession is the rock on which the Church should be 
built, is spoken of as a tempter and an offence to his 
Master, as one who savours not of the things which are 
of God, but of those which are of men. John is twice 
rebuked, once for his revengeful spirit, once for his short- 
sighted ambition. Judas's treachery is predicted. All 
the twelve are warned that they will fail at the hour of 
Christ's trial, and that warning, like the more individual 
prediction addressed to Peter, is certainly most unlikely 
to have been conceived after the event. In a word, from 
beginning to end of the Gospels, we have evidence which 
no one could have managed to forge, that Christ delib- 
erately chose materials of which it would have been im- 
possible for any one to build a great organization, unless 
he could otherwise provide, and continue to provide, the 
power by which that organization was to stand." 

All that is true. When He chose those men He did 
indeed choose men utterly inadequate to the doing of His 
work, knowing that He Himself could empower them to 
do it; but it is also true that He chose men in whom there 
were capacities which He would sanctify and employ. 
That is a principle never to be forgotten. I sometimes 
hear it said that God chooses men entirely unfitted for 
certain work by nature, and fits them by grace. I deny 
it absolutely. There is no such discord between God's 
original creation of a man, and His use of him for the 
purposes of His work. How often have I heard it said 
that D. L. Moody was a man with no natural gift of 
speech. I deny it. Those who knew Moody best would 
agree that had he never been a Christian man he would 
yet have been a master of assemblies, an orator, sweeping 
and swaying men by the force of his natural eloquence. 
Upon that capacity God fastened, sanctified it, cleansed 

[68] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 7-ipaJ 

it, filled it with the true fire, gave him the godly vision, 
and made him the mightiest evangelist of the last century. 

So, when our Lord chose these men, He chose them, 
knowing His power and their powers ; and knowing that 
in the fact of their cession to Him, and His cession of 
Himself to them in the Spirit's fellowship, He had found 
the men best suited to the doing of His work. 

Let us proceed to consider what Mark tells us con- 
cerning the appointment of the men thus elected. He ap- 
pointed them to two things; first to be with Him; and 
secondly that He might send them forth to preach and 
to have authority to cast out demons. 

The first was initial, preparatory, fundamental, neces- 
sary. He appointed them to be with Him. The immedi- 
ate application of the words undoubtedly was, that He 
called them at this time in some senses all the details of 
which we cannot explain, for we have no record into 
closer association with Himself. He called them to a 
special training which was to consist of more intimate 
nearness to Himself. I am inclined to think that from 
this hour, He spent a 'great deal of time in private with 
them, gave Himself to them more completely than He 
had done before, and began that process which was so 
marked in the latter part of His ministry, of withdrawing 
Himself from the multitudes, and devoting Himself more 
and more to them. He appointed them to be with Him. 
This, however, does not for a moment exhaust the 
meaning of the phrase. The very preposition made use 
of is illuminative. The preposition with indicates the 
very closest association, an association which inevitably 
and invariably issues in resemblance, and consequently in 
true instrumentality. They became men through whom 
He could act unhindered. In the mystic mystery of 
Pentecost they became actual members of His body, mas- 
tered by His intelligence, driven by His emotions, gov- 
erned by His volitions. In this sense also He appointed 
them to be with Him. 

[69] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : 7-iga] 

In the last great prayer of Christ He made use of this 
same preposition several times. First, "And now, Father, 
glorify Thou Me with Thine own Self, with the glory 
which I had with Thee before the world was." That 
threefold use of that particular preposition illuminates its 
value in my text, " He appointed them to be with Him." 
Again, " While I was with them, I kept them in Thy name 
which Thou hast given Me : and I guarded them, and not 
one of them perished, but the son of perdition." And 
yet once more : " Father, I desire that they also whom 
Thou hast given Me be with Me where I am ; that they 
may behold My glory, which Thou hast given Me." 

I know how unsafe it may be to build doctrines upon 
prepositions, but there is much of suggestiveness in this ; 
and in our Lord's use of this one in that great prayer, 
we have a revelation of union with His Father, of His 
giving of Himself to His disciples in the days of His 
flesh, and of His perpetual purpose for them that they 
should be with Him to behold His glory not in heaven 
only, but here in travail with Him, and presently in 
triumph. 

Having appointed them to be with Him, He appointed 
them also to go forth to preach and to have authority 
to cast out demons. In a flash their relationship to Him- 
self, to men, and to the underworld of evil is revealed. 
Their relationship to Himself was that He appointed 
them as His apostles. Originally the word means those 
who are set apart. Resultantly it means those who are 
sent forth. The suggestiveness of the word is that He 
only sends forth those whom He has set apart. This was 
their relationship to Himself. Wherever they went, and 
whatever they did, and whatever they said, they were 
His apostles, set apart to Him, and in the power of that 
setting apart, sent forth. 

They were sent forth to preach. The word made use 
of here suggests that preaching which is the work of the 
herald. It was a common word in the Greek language, 

[ 70 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 7-ipa] 

and from Homer was used to describe the work of the 
messengers of kings, magistrates, princes, military com- 
manders, those vested with public authority. The word 
always suggests formality, gravity,, an authority that must 
be listened to and obeyed. He sent that strange group 
of men, so mixed and so varied and so lacking in strength 
and wisdom, to preach. 

He sent them, moreover, to have authority over de- 
mons; authority, not power; power was always His. 
They had authority to speak in His name, so that His 
power might become operative for the casting out of 
demons, and the mastery of the underworld of evil. 

He appointed them, and the very word made use of 
here is poetic and beautiful with the poetry and the 
beauty of Greece. Paul writing his Ephesian letter, said, 
" We are His workmanship." That is the same root idea, 
and might be translated, We are His poems. His work 
is always a thing of beauty and a thing of use. His ap- 
pointments are of the same character. Their appoint- 
ment was infinitely more than official. It was an enabling. 
His appointment is His workmanship. 

This was the secret of strength in both applications. 
He appointed them to be with Him, and because He ap- 
pointed them to be with Him, they must be fitted for the 
fellowship. Because He appointed them to service, they 
must be strengthened for the service, difficult as it in- 
evitably would be. 

Thus we come to the last matter, one of interest and 
suggestiveness, that of His distinctions. He surnamed 
three of them, Peter and James and John. Our word 
surnamed is the translation of a phrase, which quite lit- 
erally means He imposed a name upon them; the phrase 
itself suggesting a naming indicative of His authority, 
and the outcome of their character. 

With His naming of Peter, we are all familiar. It has 
been the subject of many a consideration. He surnamed 
him prophetically when He first met him. That was 

[ 71 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : 7-iga] 

Peter's introduction to Jesus. It came in that hour when 
Jesus, looking into his eyes said, " Thou art Simon the 
son of John: thou shalt be called rock." Later at 
Caesarea Philippi, when Peter made his great confession, 
Jesus looked again into his eyes and said, " Blessed art 
thou, Simon son of Jonah." He named him rock the 
symbol of strength and solidity the most changeable and 
vacillating man among them. 

Now let it be observed that He did not name him 
something that he could not be. There was no contradic- 
tion of the true nature of this man in this name. It was 
a contradiction of the experience of the man, but not of 
his nature. Peter stands out on the New Testament 
page as the elemental man, the man in whom all ele- 
mental forces were found. He was a man of intellectual 
strength; a man of emotion; a man of marvellous voli- 
tional powers ; strong-willed and yet weak and frail ; all 
the elemental forces there, but lacking cohesion, con- 
sistency, because lacking a principle, which would weld 
them into strength. To him Jesus said, I have chosen 
you, Simon, and I have appointed you to be with Me, 
and to preach, and to cast out demons, and I impose a 
name upon you that will indicate what you will become. 
Peter would never have become rock apart from Christ, 
but the capacities that became rock were in his nature. 
What Christ did was to take hold of the elemental capaci- 
ties which were in him by his first birth, and by supply- 
ing the one thing he lacked, to weld them into strength. 

James and John He surnamed Boanerges. Now it is 
generally imagined that Jesus called these men Boa- 
nerges because of what they were. As a matter of fact, 
exactly the same principle obtained in their case, as in 
that of Peter. He named them for what He would make 
them, Boanerges, sons of Thunder; a poetic description 
of force and high enthusiasm. The capacities were there, 
and yet how different these brothers were. John was 
poet, dreamer, visionary. Of James we know little, and 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 7-ipa] 

in that fact there is a- revelation of the man; he was quiet 
and retiring. Christ saw the capacities of the men, and 
named them Boanerges, sons of Thunder. James, when 
for loyalty to his Lord, he yielded himself and died by 
the sword of Herod; and John, when in the Isle of 
Patmos, he saw his visions and wrote, were true sons of 
Thunder. 

There were a number not surnamed. Some of them 
we know. Andrew, the first enquirer; Philip, the first 
whom Jesus really called; Bartholomew, undoubtedly 
Nathanael, the guileless; Matthew, the publican. Here 
are also some new names. We have not met them before 
in our study of this Gospel. Thomas, we shall find him 
presently, the magnificent sceptic; another James, about 
whom we know nothing; Thaddseus or Jude, whom we 
shall hear speak once in the upper room; Simon the 
Canaanean, that is, the Zealot, a member of a very trou- 
blesome political party who had now become a Christian 
and doubtless would bring his enthusiasm into Chris- 
tianity, as he ought to do. That is all we know about 
these men. 

Yes, but there is one other, a tragic figure, Judas. As 
the rest, he was chosen, called, appointed to be with Him 
and to preach and to have power over demons. And as 
God is my witness I hardly know how to speak of this 
thing, this appallingly solemn fact that He appointed one 
to be with Him who never by any means came into that 
close and mystic association which was his appointment; 
appointed one to preaching, whose preaching if it ever 
began, ceased, and changed into betrayal; that He ap- 
pointed one to cast out demons, who so failed to re- 
spond, that Satan entered into him. I do not think any 
words of mine are necessary. The appalling fact is one 
to be faced alone ; and I resolutely leave it there for my- 
self when I am alone, for you when you are alone. 

The same Lord is still directly, immediately, choosing, 
calling, appointing. We cannot choose to be His apostles. 

[73] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : 7-ipa] 

We must be His chosen^ or we can never serve. I cannot 
choose to be a missionary or a Christian minister. I must 
be chosen. The restfulness of this consideration lies in 
the fact that His choices are right choices, and that His 
calls are vindications. If He has called me I know it, 
and if He has called me. He has chosen me. 

Every day I live I wonder more why He called me; 
but I know He did, and therein is my rest, my peace. 

Now for a solemn enquiry. I have emphasized the fact 
that none can choose to be minister or missionary. He 
must choose. This, however, leads on to the solemn en- 
quiry as to whether perchance He has called and chosen, 
and there has not been obedience. I think this is a ques- 
tion that young men should be asking very seriously to- 
day everywhere. I cannot go to young men and ask 
them to become missionaries. They cannot choose to be 
ministers or missionaries. But I can and I do ask them 
whether the call has come to them. It may have come 
in some early morning hour of quiet communion, or in 
the appalling solemnity of some great convocation of 
the people of God; and yet they may have been busy 
ever since trying to persuade themselves that it was no 
call, listening to the voices of time and of the world and 
of earthly advantage. 

Young men^ my brothers within the Christian Church, 
young women, my sisters within the Christian Church, 
you cannot elect to serve. But if He has elected and 
called you, how solemn the responsibility that rests upon 
you. I pray you, be of good cheer, for if He calls it is 
because He has chosen, and your responsibility is only 
that of yielding. He is responsible. If it is a mistake it 
is His mistake. If there are difficulties in you, He knows 
them, He is responsible, He will deal with them. Blessed 
be God, He is able to deal with them; for He takes the 
weak things to confound the mighty, and the foolish <f 
bring to naught the wise, and the things that are not, in 
order that He may destroy the things that are. 

[ 74 ] 



VII 

"And He cometh into a house." MARK 3 : ipb. 

Mark3:19b-35. 

THESE words separate and connect two paragraphs, 
the first recording the special setting apart of the twelve, 
'and the second telling of some things following there- 
upon. 

The twelve had been chosen, called, and appointed by 
the Lord. They were now to be with Him in a new and 
special sense 'before being sent forth to preach and to 
have authority to cast out demons. From this time there 
was most evidently a deeper note in His teaching, and 
His operations brought out into greater clearness the 
forces which were against Him, and His power over 
them. From this point in the narrative of Mark, to the 
sixth verse of the sixth chapter, (after which follows 
the account of the sending forth of the twelve), we find 
recorded, in sequence, some of the events in which these 
twelve were " with Him." 

After the solemn ordination on the mountain, the Lord 
and the twelve entered a house, probably still that of 
Simon and Andrew, which He seems to have made His 
home and headquarters. The marginal reading of the 
Revised Version, suggesting that these words should be 
translated, "And He cometh home," is indeed an illumina- 
tive one, for the phrase literally translated is, " He cometh 
into house"; not the house, or a house, but into house, 
It is a phrase suggesting the idea of home. The Greek 
word here translated "house" is one never used of a 
building merely. It was always used of a building in- 
habited; sometimes of the Temple as inhabited by God, 
sometimes of the dwellings of men as inhabited by men. 

[751 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : ipb-35] 

So the suggestion here is that He came home, and 
immediately the crowds congregated, and their demands 
were such that He and His disciples could not so much 
as eat bread. In that statement of Mark a there is a won- 
derful revelation, first of the attractiveness of Jesus; 
and then also, of His self-surrender. Wherever He was, 
they came with their sick and suffering, their sad and 
sorrowing; and He gave Himself to them. 

Mark has not recorded for us all that transpired at 
that time. Other of the evangelists give more of His 
teaching. But Mark has given us the account of two 
matters which illustrate the opposition which Jesus en- 
countered, on the one hand from His friends, well-mean- 
ing but nevertheless opposition; and on the other hand 
from His foes, by no means well-meaning, and quite 
definitely hostile. 

It is important, therefore, in order to an intelligent 
study of the story that we observe the method of Mark, 
and the order of events. He records the fact that His 
friends, hearing of His doings, started out to find Him, 
and to put Him under restraint (verses 20, 21 ). This is 
a reference, undoubtedly, to His mother and His brethren. 
The literal translation of the words rendered " His 
friends " is, " They who were from beside Him " ; that 
is, those who were related to Him. They, hearing of the 
unstintedness of His giving of Himself to the crowding 
multitudes, said, " He is beside Himself " ; and they 
started to find Him, and to restrain Him; started prob- 
ably from Nazareth, whither the news of Him and of 
His immediate activities had reached. 

In the meantime, while they travelled toward Caper- 
naum, both Matthew and Luke state that, there in the 
house, He healed a demoniac Mark making no reference 
to the healing and that gave occasion for the criticism 
of Himself and His work by the Jerusalem scribes, in 
which they declared that He had Beelzebub, and that by 
the prince of the demons He cast out demons. Then in 

[ 76 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : ipb-35] 

the midst of His teaching, consequent upon that criticism, 
His mother and His brethren arrived. Matthew says 
"While He was yet speaking" His mother and His 
brethren came. 

Let us observe then, the opposition which this para- 
graph reveals; dealing first with the opposition of His 
foes as revealed in the criticism of the Pharisees; and 
then with the opposition of His friends as revealed in 
the hour when His mother and His brethren arrived. 

We have observed in a previous study the opposition 
r that was offered to our Lord in Galilee. The first mani- 
festation was in the house at Capernaum, when He had 
said to a man, " Thy sins are forgiven," they said, " He 
blasphemeth: who can forgive sins but One, even God." 
This was a perfectly sincere criticism, entirely justified 
if He had been such as they thought Him, merely a hu- 
man teacher. None can forgive sins save God. That was 
the first manifestation of opposition. 

The second manifestation was in Levi's house, when 
they criticized Him for consorting with sinners; and 
again, through His disciples, because they had not ob- 
served the fasts. 

Then followed the opposition in the cornfields, when 
they charged His disciples with breaking the Sabbath as 
they plucked the ears of corn on their journey. 

That opposition culminated with the scene in the syna- 
gogue when they watched Him that they might accuse 
Him, and He gave them the opportunity they sought, as 
He healed the man with a withered hand. The result 
of that healing was that of the coalition between Phari- 
sees and Herodians, and their taking counsel together, 
how they might destroy Him. 

In the interval between the hour when that coalition 
was formed and this, great things had taken place. Mul- 
titudes had come from north, south, and east, from all the 
country side, and had followed Him. Great wonders had 
been wrought, and the special note which Mark perpetu- 

[ 77] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : igb-35] 

ally emphasizes, and to which, we shall come for more 
particular consideration a little later on, was that of His 
power over evil spirits. There had been special and 
persistent exorcisms in the course of our Lord's ministry. 
Before thinking of the criticism offered and the oppo- 
sition manifested, it is well that we remind ourselves 
that nothing new had taken place. Only one more demon 
was cast out, one more man healed, restored; there had 
been one other putting forth of power, not in violation 
of order, but for the restoration of order on the part of 
our Lord. Therefore in the criticism of the Pharisees at 
this point we discover no criticism proceeding honestly 
against some new difficulty, but criticism proceeding out 
of the hatred for the Lord which had taken possession 
of their hearts. They had been watching for the oppor- 
tunity. These Jerusalem scribes now uttered their criti- 
cism. 

Observe with care, moreover, in the reading of the 
story that their criticism was twofold. It is important 
to see this, because our Lord answered the two parts of 
that criticism quite distinctly. The form of the statement 
by Mark makes this quite clear. They said, " He hath 
Beelzebub," and, " By the prince of the demons casteth 
He out the demons." Their criticisms declared first 
something concerning Himself, and secondly something 
concerning His work. As to Himself, they said, "He 
hath Beelzebub." As to His work, that particular work 
which He had been doing in the casting out of the de- 
mons, they said, " By the prince of the demons casteth 
He out the demons." 

In our Lord's reply He dealt first with the second part 
of their criticism, that of His work; and secondly and 
most solemnly, with the first part of their criticism, that 
of Himself. 

There is no need that we should dwell at any great 
length upon their criticism. They said, " He hath Beel- 
zebub." The exact significance of that word Beelzebub 

[78] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : ipb-35] 

it is impossible to decide. It may have meant quite sim- 
ply " the lord of the house/' a reference to the whole 
underworld of evil, and to the presidency over that un- 
derworld of one master. In that case it meant quite 
simply, " the lord of the demons," and was synonymous 
with the description that follows, "the prince of the 
demons." Translated, by a common use, it may have 
meant " the dung-god." The general meaning is plain. 
They declared that Jesus was possessed by, and under 
the mastery of, Satan; that He was acting in league with 
one who was the source of all uncleanness. They charged 
Him with being possessed by an evil spirit, supreme in 
uncleanness, the master and fountainhead of everything 
that was impure. 

From that criticism of Himself to the criticism of His 
work was an easy stage, the second being a sequence of 
the first. " By the prince of the demons casteth He out 
the demons." This was indeed a subtle word. They 
declared, in effect, that in all these exorcisms He was 
trifling with men and with evil spirits for personal am- 
bition. ' They declared that there was no beneficence in 
His activities, no compassion in the things that He was 
doing; that He was not casting out evil spirits because 
He compassionated the men whom they possessed, but 
that He was acting in the realm of which He was a 
native, the underworld of uncleanness. In order to at- 
tract attention to Himself, and so to gain for Himself 
some passing popularity, He was trifling with men, and 
was trifling even with that very underworld of evil. 

We turn then to the answer of Jesus, and look at Him, 
listen to Him, as the Servant of God, as He is supremely 
set forth in these stories. Dealing first with the second 
part of their criticism, that of His work, He answered 
them negatively and positively, showing first the false- 
ness of their philosophy ; and secondly making quite clear 
the secret of His own power. 

Showing first the falseness of their philosophy, He de- 

[79] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3: ipb-asj 

clared the folly of their suggestion. They understood the 
motive of Satan, personal aggrandisement and ambition; 
but they were ignorant of his devices ; they did not know 
his method. When they suggested that Satan was trifling 
with the underworld for purposes of personal aggrandise- 
ment, they were entirely ignorant of his methods. Our 
Lord's words so familiar that we may miss the pro- 
fundity of their philosophy revealed His perfect knowl- 
edge of the subtlety of His foe. He reminded them that 
Satan does not fight against Satan, for in so doing he 
would bring his kingdom to an end, and would frustrate 
the purpose of his own ambition. If a house be divided 
against itself it cannot stand, and perchance in that very 
employment of the word " house " He was remembering 
the significance of what they had said, that He was in 
league with the lord of the house of evil. A house di- 
vided against itself cannot stand. "If Satan hath risen 
up against himself^ and is divided, he cannot stand, but 
hath an end." So He immediately showed the folly of 
their suggestion in that while assuming the motive under- 
lying the mastery of the underworld of evil, they were en- 
tirely ignorant of the devices of Satan. 

By that reply, moreover, the whole underworld of evil 
is set in the light. There came a day when Paul the 
apostle wrote, "We are not ignorant of his devices." 
These men were ignorant of the devices of Satan. But 
these devices were dragged into the light, and made clear 
before the eyes of men by the very ministry of our Lord. 
This is one instance in which we see Christ revealing the 
fact that through these very men Satan was attempting 
to deceive men about his own methods, in order ulti- 
mately to hold them within his grasp. In their suggesting 
that Satan himself had been working the wonders of de- 
mon exorcism he was deceiving men as to his devices. 
The earnestness and clarity of our Lord's reply was in- 
tended to silence opposition ; and for evermore to set out 
in clear outline, the revelation of the fact that at the heart 

[80] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : ipb-35] 

of evil is a perpetual untruth, and that Satan will for 
evermore proceed upon the basis of the lie that deceives 
and slanders men, and that slanders God. 

He did not, however, leave His answer to this criti- 
cism at that point. In words, the ultimate value of 
which we shall only refer to, He declared the secret of 
His victories. Using a parable, He said that the strong 
man armed can only be defeated by one who is stronger 
than he. In that picture our Lord claimed that He was 
stronger than the strong man armed. The strong man 
armed is Satan himself, the master of the underworld of 
evil, holding its hosts of opposition under his control. 
But the One upon Whom they had been looking, to 
Whom they had been listening, Whose works they had 
been discussing, against Whom their hearts were now 
moving in hatred, because they were unable to under- 
stand Him, and were not honest enough to follow Him, 
claimed in that hour to be stronger than the strong man 
armed ; and declared that every exorcism that He wrought 
was the result of His power, which was superior to tine 
whole underworld of evil. 

Then passing to the first part of their criticism which 
was far the more serious^ He uttered these words which 
are so full of appalling solemnity: "Verily I say unto 
you, All their sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of 
men, and their blasphemies wherewith soever they shall 
blaspheme; but whosoever shall blaspheme against the 
Holy Spirit hath never forgiveness, but is guilty " suffer 
a change in the word " guilty " " is held by an age-abid- 
ing sin"; and therefore cannot be forgiven. We have 
no reason whatever to imagine that these men had com- 
mitted that sin, but they were in the danger-zone, they 
were approaching the sin. 

Let us approach the meaning of our Lord here by an 
ordinary, every-day illustration. The ultimate sin which 
any man commits against his brother is that of the mis- 
interpretation of his motive. The one sin against my 

[81 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : ipb-35] 

brother that can never know forgiveness is that I wilfully 
misinterpret his motive. If we could but remember that, 
from how many blunders should we be saved! A man 
may criticize my method, he may show how my action 
does not harmonize with my profession. I may attempt 
to show him how his method does not harmonize with 
his profession. I may say of this man, who in the po- 
litical or religious world differs from me, that I hold his 
policy to be entirely wrong^ but I have no right to say 
that his motive is impure or unholy or wrong. God is 
the God of motive. By Him alone are motives measured 
and weighed. 

If this is a superlative fact in the realm of human inter- 
relationships, then we begin to see what was happening 
here, and why our Lord's words were so severe. They 
were now attempting to account for His motive; they 
were invading that inner, secret, lonely, holy sanctuary 
of the reason why He did what He was doing. They 
did what men always do when they invade that sanctu- 
ary. They carried into it their own pollutions, their own 
distorted senses of values ; and all unconsciously they read 
into the reason of the doings of Jesus, the reason that 
was prompting them at the moment. They, and not He, 
were in league with the devil. It is almost always so. I 
very rarely hear a man criticize the motive of another 
man without being at least suspicious that he is attributing 
to the other man the inspiration of his own activities. 

These men had now invaded that realm. All their 
previous opposition had been against Himself, as to His 
methods, but this invaded the realm of motive where in 
His case the Holy Spirit was supreme. He had taken no 
journey and sought no rest, He had eaten no meal save in 
communion with God the Holy Spirit. He had healed 
no sick soul save as the result of unutterable and in- 
expressible anguish, the anguish of God which atones for 
human guilt. He had cast out no demons save by the 
finger of God. When these men suggested that the 

[ 82 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : ipb-351 

motive of His activity was that of league with unutter- 
able filthiness, with the source and origin of all unclean- 
ness, can we wonder that not on His own behalf, but 
on behalf of eternal right, and the principles that must 
constitute the foundations of the Kingdom of God, He 
made a protest so severe and so solemn. They were in 
the danger-zone, approaching a blasphemy against the 
Holy Spirit, which is only committed by men who have 
so yielded themselves to the mastery of unholy things, 
that they fail to detect good when they see it, and so 
attribute the results produced to a deeper evil, and de- 
"clare that the producer is in partnership with Beelzebub. 
That is eternal sin, which in the nature of it never can be 
changed, and consequently for which there never can be 
forgiveness. We have no reason to believe these men 
had committed that sin in its finality, but they were com- 
ing into its region. Our Lord at that moment was look- 
ing on, as He ever was, to His larger day of ministry, to 
that ministry which should succeed His Cross, Resurrec- 
tion, Ascension, and Pentecost, to that ministry in the 
midst of which we live our lives; rejoicing in the fact 
of the wider and more intimate and marvellous ministry 
that followed Pentecost, more intimate and more marvel- 
lous than that of the days, of His flesh. Jesus lifted His 
eyes, and looking to those days when the Spirit should be 
poured in fulness upon men who should continue His 
work in spiritual power and without geographical limi- 
tations, said, In that hour it will be possible for men to 
sin a sin for which there shall be no forgiveness. 

We now pass on to look at the opposition of His 
friends. Quite literally, as we have said, the phrase " His 
friends" means "they that were from beside Him." 
Wycliffe translated with great accuracy, " His kinsmen " ; 
and Tyndale, employing a colloquialism of the time, " they 
that belonged unto Him," His own blood relations, un- 
doubtedly His mother and His brethren. 

It is interesting to observe in passing that this is the 

[83] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : iQb-35 j 

first appearance of Mary since Cana, when Jesus had said 
to her, What is. there between thee and Me ; and indi- 
cated that there were things in Himself that she dicorot 
apprehend at the time. This is also the first appearance 
of His brethren since they travelled with Him from Cana 
to Capernaum in that early year of His ministry. Now 
they are seen coming to Him. Their complaint was that 
He was beside Himself. This was their interpretation of 
the ceaselessness of His activity. Their criticism was not 
directed against the particular work He was doing, but 
that He was doing 'so much. They were not concerned 
as to His motive. That, they were not questioning. They 
were there believing that One Who would so give Him- 
self to great motives as to have no time for eating or rest, 
must be beside Himself, and their intention was one of 
solicitude. They wanted to save Him, to restrain Him. 
In that spirit they travelled; how far we do not know; 
perchance from Nazareth. So far as we have any right 
to measure the emotion of Jesus by our emotion, and 
we have some right, for He entered into our humanity 
this opposition was surely harder to bear than the oppo- 
sition of the Jerusalem scribes ; more difficult to contend 
with. One was an opposition resulting from malice ; the 
other, opposition resulting from love; the first that of 
those who were against Him because they were out of 
harmony with His purity; the second that of those who 
would try and save Him from folly, and take care of 
Him. 

Jesus looked round about upon the twelve ; upon those 
men who were with Him. Think what He saw. All the 
subsequent story will reveal it. He saw one man who, 
mastered by fear and saved by cowardice would swear 
in the darkness of the night that he did not know any- 
thing about Him ; and He saw ten others who in the ulti- 
mate hours of His agony would run away. But He saw 
men who in the deepest fact of their lives that very 
realm of motive were consecrated to God and to Him. 

[ 84 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 3 : 19^-35] 

He saw all the possibilities of failure and knew how they 
were all to work out. But He found that central fact, 
the motive; He invaded that realm which none other 
could invade, and He said, Behold My brethren, born for 
My adversity. Behold My sisters, born for all sweet con- 
fidences and sympathy. Behold My mother, born for all 
comfort and solace. " For whosoever shall do the will of 
God, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother." 

He thus revealed a spiritual relation so high as to be 
infinitely above the affinity of blood relationship. He de- 
clared that in these men He found His true comfort and 
solace ; not in those who tried to save Him from the un- 
ceasing pressure of the path of duty, but in those who 
were going to tramp the pathway with Him; and who, 
even if for a little while they would leave Him, would 
come back again, and presently count it all joy that they 
were considered worthy to suffer shame for His Name. 
To this high relationship Mary and His brethren also 
came after a while, but not immediately. 

Our Lord has passed beyond this opposition now, even 
with regard to His earthly ministry. In the light of the 
accumulating and accumulated testimony of two millen- 
niums, no sane critic to-day suggests that He was in 
league with the devil; or that He was mad. Oh! there 
are other ways of dealing with the difficulties now. They 
get rid of the devil, and get rid of these stories of exor- 
cisms ! Yet mark it well, for it is a significant and valu- 
able fact, that when those who are unable to believe the 
things that some of us verily do believe, when they have 
sifted and attempted to destroy the documents, the Lord 
emerges, and they still hold Him in reverence, and sug- 
gest no complicity with Satan and no madness. 

But the principle of opposition revealed persists against 
His disciples to-day. The first of these lines of criticism 
is rarely if ever boldly advanced. We are not often 
charged definitely with being in complicity with the devil. 
But the same thought is subtly suggested even to-day 

[8s 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 3 : iQb-35] 

when it is affirmed that the motive of Christian service 
is self -aggrandisement. 

The second is more subtle, and is more persistent. 
Our friends still say " He is beside himself." What a re- 
markable fact it is that even within the Christian Church, 
ties of blood relationship constitute terrible hindrances to 
Christian service. Men to-day never seem to think that 
out-and-out, passionate, and sacrificial devotion, suggests 
madness in any realm, except that of the spiritual. No 
man suggests that the scientist, so devoted to his science 
that he will give himself to its operations and shorten his 
life, is beside himself. No one suggests that the soldier 
who gives himself to the high places of the field, and 
sacrifices life in the interests of his country, is beside 
himself. No man thinks that the explorer who shortens 
life by his intrepid daring is beside himself. No one 
imagines that the commercial man who is so devoted to 
the amassing of wealth that he shortens life, is beside 
himself. No! this suggestion is still retained for those 
who make their service for the souls of men sacrificial. 

Let all such be comforted. They are in holy comrade- 
ship ! At the same time let them endeavour resolutely to 
be of. the number of those who have the highest affinity 
with the Son of man, because they are devoted to the 
will of God ; who will not try to hinder Him in sacrificial 
service, or to save themselves therefrom, but walking 
with Him the rough road, will find larger life in the 
shortening of the present. 



[863 



VIII 

" He taught them many things in parables." MARK 4 : 2. 

Mark 4: 1-34. 

As the text suggests, our theme is that of the parabolic 
teaching 1 of the Lord. This is the special subject of the 
first thirty-four verses in the fourth chapter of Mark. 
The whole paragraph contains three parables of the King- 
dom: those of. the Sower, the Development from the 
Blade to the Full Corn, and the Mustard Seed. The 
paragraph opens and closes with declarations that our 
Lord employed the parabolic method. " He taught them 
many things in parables." "With many such parables 
spake He the word unto them, as they were able to hear 
it: and without a parable spake He not unto them; but 
privately to His own disciples He expounded all things.". 

In the course of the paragraph there are two sections 
dealing with the reason and purpose of that method 
(verses 10-12 and 21-25). The first of these explana- 
tory passages is somewhat obscure and creates a difficulty. 
I propose, then, first to state the difficulty; secondly, to 
consider it with some care; in order that thirdly and 
finally, we may make some deductions from our study. 

The difficulty is caused by the way^ in which Mark re- 
cords the fact that our Lord employed this parabolic 
method. It is quite evident that at this point in His 
ministry our Lord adopted this method as He had never 
done before in His dealing 1 with the multitudes. From 
this time to the. end of His public ministry He followed 
it almost exclusively. Prior to this time He had upon 
occasion made use of what may be described as parabolic 
illustrations. For instance, when speaking to the woman 

[87] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4 -.1-34] 

of Samaria, He referred to the water of life springing up 
unto age-abiding life. Again in the same connection He 
spoke to His disciples of fields white to harvest. At 
Nazareth He made use of the parabolic proverb, " Phy- 
sician, heal thyself." To His disciples He had said, " I 
will make you to become fishers of men." In the course 
of the great Manifesto He had employed the parabolic 
symbolism of salt, light, and house-building. 

The first full parable that Jesus ever uttered all three 
evangelists agreeing was that of the Sower. Recogniz- 
ing the fact, then, that we are now at the parting of the 
ways in the method of His ministry so far as the outside 
world was concerned, and that from here to the end, 
when addressing Himself to the multitudes, He spoke in 
parables as Mark specifically declares, " without a para- 
ble spake He not unto them" it is pertinent that we 
should inquire concerning the reason of this method, in 
order to the following of our Lord upon the pathway of 
His public ministry as revealed in Mark. 

Let us further prepare for our inquiry by reminding 
ourselves of the nature of the hour in the ministry of 
Jesus, and the condition of affairs in which He was now 
situated. 

It was the hour when opposition was becoming far 
more definite and hostile. We have observed the growth 
of that opposition. In the Galilean ministry it was first 
manifested in the house at Capernaum when He forgave 
sins, and the scribes challenged Him, saying, Who is this 
that forgiveth sins? None can forgive sins save God. 
Then in the house of Levi He was criticized for consort- 
ing with sinners, and for permitting His disciples to 
neglect the ceremonial fasts. Later in the cornfields He 
was criticized for permitting His disciples to pluck the 
ears of com for the satisfaction of their hunger. On 
another Sabbath in the synagogue He healed the man 
with a withered hand, and the result was that Pharisees 
and Herodians took counsel together how they might 

[88] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4: 1-34] 

destroy Him. Yet once more, and finally, in the house at 
Capernaum they had definitely declared that He had 
Beelzebub, and that by the prince of the demons He 
cast out the demons; and He had answered them with 
words among the most solemn that ever fell from His 
lips. 

Our Lord was exercising His ministry in the midst of 
this atmosphere of growing hostility and opposition, com- 
ing from the rulers, but undoubtedly affecting the multi- 
tudes that were still gathering about Him. We have seen 
how He looked at those men in the synagogue, and that 
He was filled with anger as He looked at them, the reason 
of His anger being that He was "grieved at the hardening 
of their heart." That is a most significant declaration in 
its application to our present study. They were harden- 
ing their hearts against Him> and at this point He began 
to use the parable definitely, and of set purpose. 

This brings us immediately to the difficult passage. 
" When He was alone " separated from the multitudes 
" they that were about Him with the twelve asked of 
Him the parables. And He said unto them, Unto you is 
given the mystery of the Kingdom of God: but unto them 
that are without, all things are done in parables: that 
seeing they may see, and not perceive ; and hearing they 
may hear, and not understand; lest haply they should 
turn again, and it should be forgiven them." 

No careful student of that passage has read it without 
at some time feeling the difficulty of it. This difficulty 
lies in its apparent meaning, which is that the Lord 
adopted the parabolic method in order that these people 
might see and not see, might hear and not hear, lest they 
should turn, and should be forgiven. 

There have been two methods of dealing with that 
difficulty. Devout, earnest, sincere, and loyal expositors 
of the passage have declared that this is true ; that even 
though We cannot understand it, and may find ourselves 
in revolt against it; not upon the basis of our own reason, 

[89] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4 : 1-34] 

but because it is out of harmony with the whole revela- 
tion of God in Christ, we must nevertheless accept it as 
true, that at this point for some reason, He did adopt in 
His teaching a method which He intended should result 
in hindering these people rinding forgiveness. 

The other method of dealing with the difficulty has 
been that of declaring that it is not true, that it is a mis- 
take; therefore the passage is untrustworthy, and is to 
be eliminated. 

The second method of reasoning is impossible to me. 
As to the first, I would ask, Is the difficulty due to what 
the passage actually says, or is it due to long-continued 
misunderstanding and misinterpretation of it? 

There are some preliminary things to be considered as 
we look carefully at this matter. First, the narrative of 
Mark is condensed. This particular passage is evidently 
very much condensed. The parallel passage in Luke is 
even more 'condensed than that of Mark, so that-there the 
same difficulty seems to be suggested, if not stated in such 
obtrusive form. But the account of the beginning of the 
parabolic method, and our Lord's interpretation of its 
meaning as recorded in Matthew is very much fuller. 

Secondly and therefore, the three narratives are needed 
for an interpretation of what our Lord said. Carefully 
putting their testimony together, we shall necessarily be 
nearer a full understanding of our Lord's teaching. 

The last preliminary word is that the subject as pre- 
sented by Mark is not exhausted in this one paragraph 
(verses 10-12). The second paragraph (verses 21-25) 
is needed, for that also deals with the reason for our 
J-ord's parabolic method. 

To turn to the paragraph itself, the disciples' inquiry 
first arrests us, showing that they were face to face, not 
with the difficulty presented to us by these paragraphs, 
but with the fact that our Lord did here and now adopt 
a new method of teaching. He had asked for the little 
boat, and His disciples, at His request pulling a short 

[90] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4 -.1-34] 

distance out from the shore, He sat in the boat, and to 
the multitudes gathered on the beach, He spoke the first 
full, and formulated parable, that of the Sower. When 
He had finished, Mark says that "when He was alone, 
they that were about Him with the twelve, asked of Him 
the parables." That is a perfectly accurate statement, 
but somewhat ambiguous. Matthew simply says that 
they asked Him why He spoke in parables. That state- 
ment illuminates this, and reveals the fact that these men 
noticed He spoke in a parable and when they were alone, 
that is, while still in the boat, but privately, they asked 
Him why He did so. This inquiry He answered imme- 
diately in the words that follow. 

We turn then to the answer. The first part of the 
answer is contained in these words, " Unto you is given 
the mystery of the Kingdom of God; but unto them that 
are without, all things are done in parables." This was a 
revelation of His intention at that moment to confine 
Himself to the parabolic method. It is interesting, as 
well as valuable and important, that we should remember, 
what we have already noted, that the record of His dis- 
course, as Mark gives it, is not as full as that of Matthew, 
but is fuller than that of Luke. There are differences 
in all, but the fundamental affirmation is given by each 
of the evangelists in almost the same words : " Unto you 
is given the mystery (or mysteries) of the Kingdom of 
God : but unto them that are without, all things are done 
in parables." Unto you is 'given the mysteries, the hidden 
things, the secret things, the profound things, the ulti- 
mate meaning of things; but to those that are without, is 
given the parable, the picture. Thus when they asked 
Him the reason of the parabolic method, He first said 
that the difference in method was due to the difference in 
relationship between Him and men. To His disciples He 
could tell secrets, and make known mysteries. To the 
people without, who lacked the capacity to understand, 
He could no longer tell the mystery, reveal the secret, or 

[91 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4 : 1-34] 

utter the profound thing in definite speech. For them, 
therefore, the parable, the picture was necessary. 

Our Lord then proceeded to explain His reason for 
adopting the parabolic method. If we only had the pas- 
sage in Matthew, I venture to suggest that the difficulty 
would not be present to our minds. 

Let us read it: 

"Therefore speak I to them in parables; because see- 
ing they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do 
they understand. And unto them is f ulfilled the prophecy 
of Isaiah, which saith: 

" By hearing ye shall hear, and shall in no wise under- 
stand ; 

And seeing ye shall see, and shall in no wise perceive : 
For this people's heart is waxed gross, 
And their ears are dull of hearing, 
And their eyes they have closed ; 
Lest haply they should perceive with their eyes, 
And hear with their ears, 
And understand with their heart, 
And should turn again, 
And I should heal them." 



In that answer is emphasized our Lord's revelation of 
the reason for the adoption of the parabolic method. He 
adopted it because He was surrounded by people who had 
eyes, but could not see; and ears but could not hear; 
neither could they understand; and they were blind and 
deaf and dull because they had become gross of heart, 
and had wilfully and resolutely shut their ears, and closed 
their eyes, lest they should turn and be healed. Lest the 
light should lead them back to God, lest the truth pro- 
claimed should produce conviction, they had resolutely 
shut their own eyes. Therefore Jesus used the parabolic 
method, not in order to blind them, but in order to make 
them look again; not in order to prevent them coming 

[ 92 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4: 1-34] 

to forgiveness, but in order to lure them toward a new 
attention. 

"""Now while this is perfectly plain in Matthew's record, 
at the first, it does not seem to be so evident in the pas- 
sage in Mark. Therefore we return to it. 
In the twelfth verse we read: 

"That seeing they may see, and not perceive; and 
hearing they may hear, and not understand." 

Is that the same statement as in Matthew ? That ques- 
tion must be faced. Matthew reads: "Because seeing 
they see not, and hearing they hear not, neither do they 
understand." Mark reads, and the translation is quite 
to be trusted here" that seeing they may see, and not 
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not under- 
stand." These being two reports of the words of Jesus 
on the same occasion, one must interpret the other. Shall 
we then adopt the statement as found in Matthew, that 
He employed the parable because these people seeing, 
could not see; and hearing, could not hear; or shall we 
adopt the apparent meaning of Mark, that He used the 
parable here in order that seeing they might see, and yet 
not perceive; and hearing they might hear, and yet not 
understand? It is impossible to say that on the surface, 
they convey the same idea. Which then interprets which ? 

I believe here that Matthew must interpret Mark, be- 
cause Matthew's treatment is in consonance with the 
whole fact of the mission of Christ in the world. He 
did not come for judgment, or to make it impossible for 
men to see and live; but for mercy, and so to make it 
possible for men to see and live. I do not, however, per- 
sonally think that we are driven to the alternative of sup- 
posing that there is disagreement. I believe rather that 
Mark's is a very much condensed report of what Jesus 
said, and that our difficulty is created entirely by that 
condensation. 

I 931 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4: 1-34] 

Let us look at the particular declaration of Mark again. 
" That seeing they may see, and not perceive." Our Lord 
was presenting a truth concerning the Kingdom of God 
in parabolic form to these men that they may see it, but 
not perceive it. He was hiding the mystery of the King- 
dom from these men, not the fact of the Kingdom. He 
was presenting the truth concerning the Kingdom to these 
men in parabolic form that they might hear, and yet not 
understand the deep, hidden mystery of the Kingdom of 
God. In other words, our Lord was now adapting His 
method to the strange and appalling attitude of mind 
which had filled Him with anger, which anger was the 
outcome of grief. He saw them hardening their heart, 
and refusing to listen to His teaching, and consequently 
He now adopted a method by which He would show them 
as much as may be seen, in order to attract them, by 
hiding from them those deeper, mysterious things which 
were giving them offence and driving them away from 
Him. 

Then the question naturally arises, What about the re- 
mainder of the verse, "Lest haply they should turn 
again " ? This is a partial quotation. We have therefore 
no right to link the " lest haply " with the statement of 
the reason of our Lord's parabolic method. It must be 
linked with that whole quotation from which it is taken, 
which Matthew records fully, and Mark does not. The 
" lest haply " does not refer to any action of Christ or of 
God, but to the action of the men themselves. Not that 
He adopted the parabolic method, lest haply they might 
be forgiven; but that He adopted the parabolic method 
because they had shut their own eyes, lest haply they 
should be forgiven. The " lest haply " does not indicate 
the purpose of Jesus in the parabolic method, but the 
attitude of soul that made the parabolic method neces- 
sary. 

To ask one other question. Why then did H[e hide 
from these men the mystery? After He had finished His 

[94] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4: 1-34] 

parabolic teaching in the presence of the crowd, He ex- 
pounded all things to His disciples, but why not to the 
crowds? Why did He hide the mystery from them? 

At this point the second paragraph in our chapter be- 
comes valuable (verses 21-25). Here again we have the 
two thoughts of the first paragraph, seeing and hearing. 
The lamp is for seeing; the truth is for hearing. Our 
Lord deliberately declared that the reason for the hiding 
of the mystery from the crowd was in order to its ulti- 
mate revelation. The man who hardens his heart against 
the great things Christ has been saying, and closes his 
eyes, Christ will now lure by a picture which conveys to 
him no revelation of the secret and profound things, but 
which is in itself true to those secret and profound things. 
He put the limit, not to bewilder men, but to enlighten 
men; and if they will but be lured by the parable to in- 
quire concerning the thing hidden from them, there may 
be ultimate revelation. Nothing is hidden save that it 
might be manifested; nothing made secret save that it 
should come to the light. 

Immediately at the close of His first parable, He said, 
" He that hath ears to hear, let him hear." That was the 
word to the multitudes. Now, in talking to His disci- 
ciples, He repeated it. " If any man hath ears to hear, let 
him hear." The parable hides the mystery, does not de- 
clare the underlying principle of truth and life. But let 
these men hear the parable, and with what measure they 
mete it shall be measured to them. Their attitude of 
hearing shall create the ultimate result. It shall be 
measured to them again according to the way they meas- 
ure. If they will hear honestly, even though for the 
moment the parable has hidden the mystery, through the 
door of the parable they will find their way to the mys- 
tery. Our Lord was now adopting a method, not of 
preventing these men coming back to Himself and God ; 
but was employing the last and only method possible in 
public teaching for luring them toward the things which 

[95 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4: 1-34] 

they would not receive in their nakedness, and in the un- 
veiling of their essential glories. Therefore He adopted 
the parabolic method. 

The last word of explanation here is an important one. 
" He that hath, to him shall be given; and he that hath 
not, from him shall be taken away even that which he 
hath/' Matthew places that quotation earlier in the dis- 
course. He introduces the answer of Jesus by that quo- 
tation. Mark concludes with it. This word marks the 
difference between the disciples and the multitudes. The 
disciples have; these men have not. The disciples have 
gained what they have by obedient relationship with Him 
as King; to them, therefore, can be given the mystery. 
But the men who have not come into that relationship, 
who have not obeyed His first teaching, if now they re- 
fuse the parabolic teaching, ultimately there will be taken 
away from them even that which they have. 

Thus our Lord is seen at the parting of the ways, 
adopting the new method of the parable, not to prevent 
men coming to Himself, but to lure them and win them. 
So the beneficence of the parabolic method is revealed. 

Can one believe otherwise? When later on these men, 
still in hostility, bitterly criticized Him for eating and 
drinking with publicans and sinners, and in answer 
thereto our Lord spoke to them the matchless parable of 
lost things ; the lost sheep, the lost silver, and the lost son, 
it is unthinkable that Jesus was adopting that method to 
prevent men reaching the Father. He was luring men 
who would not listen to the essential truth, with pictures. 
To men who would not believe in the meaning of His 
Shepherd ministry, nor in the declaration concerning the 
Father's interest in men, nor in His declaration concern- 
ing His Father; to them He gave pictures to explain His 
mission, not to prevent their coming, but to hasten their 
steps, and lure them toward the heart of God. 

In conclusion, let us make some deductions. 'The 
method of Christ with rebellious souls who have become 

[96] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4:i~34] 

gross of heart, dull of hearing, wilfully blind, is the hid- 
ing of the mysteries which would affright and offend 
them and the presenting of pictures which invite and sug- 
gest. If they will answer the invitation of the picture, 
and follow its suggestion, lo! they will find themselves 
face to face with the mystery. 

Therefore the parable is ever an open door to the mys- 
tery. The mystery is not stated within it, the profound 
and underlying secrets are not therein declared, but they 
are involved. If men will but consider the picture, they 
will be compelled to inquiry, and if they will inquire, He 
will answer, and will lead them beyond the picture to the 
fact behind, through the parable to the mystery of life. 

Now let me remark in this connection that that method 
is vaster and more perpetual in the Divine economy than 
that of the actual parables of our Lord. When He 
adopted the parabolic method at this dividing of the ways 
in His ministry, and followed it to the end, it was not 
something new, but something perpetual and persistent. 
Whatever the writer of the proverb may have meant, 
there is remarkable significance in the first proverb in the 
collection made by the men of Hezekiah's days. " It is 
the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of 
kings is to search out a matter" (Prov. 25:2). There 
is the whole principle in a flash. There is a crystal- 
lized statement of God's perpetual method. It is the glory 
of God to conceal. He does so first, because things con- 
cealed are things that men at the moment cannot look at, 
understand, or accept. He conceals them in the vesture 
of the material, the passing, the parabolic. But the glory 
of kings is to search out the matter, and a man demon- 
strates his true kingship as obeying the suggestion of the 
picture and the parable, he presses to the heart of it. 
Whenever he does that, God Who has concealed the 
matter, answers him in revelation. 

That is God's method in all creation. It is the glory 
of God to conceal a thing. Imagine how much God con- 

[97] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4: 1-34] 

cealed from man in this earth, when He made it. We 
live in an age of discovery. What is discovery? Reve- 
lation, always! The glory of kings is to search out a 
matter. But God has hidden all they are searching out. 
Why did He conceal it? Why does He still conceal it? 
Because men are not prepared for revelation at the mo- 
ment, and they must find their way to the secret and 
hidden things, through the processes of suggestion that 
are made. 

There is another illustration, more supreme, more tre- 
mendous; absolutely final and inclusive^ most familiar, 
and yet most mysterious and wonderful. " No man hath 
seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in 
the bosom of the Father, He hath declared Him." Jesus 
was the final parable. Let John, who wrote these words 
ultimately, tell us what happened. We looked at Him, 
our hands handled Him, and then we found the mystery, 
the Word of life, the Logos of God. 

When Jesus looked around, and saw the grossness and 
hardness of men's hearts, He turned to parables, Him- 
self being the supreme parable. He uttered parables, as 
He had come, "God contracted to a span," to woo re- 
bellious hearts back to the heart of God, Whom they 
could not, or would not know. He gave them parables to 
woo their rebellious hearts back to Himself, Whom they 
were about to refuse. It is the perpetual method of God. 

Then let us dare to use His method, never forcing the 
mysteries of our faith upon unwilling souls, as necessary 
to salvation; never demanding in the .first place from 
gross, deaf, blind men and women that they accept doc- 
trines of Deity, of Resurrection, and of Atonement, which 
men cannot understand. Let us rather lure them back 
by pictures which are true to the mysteries, and which 
must inevitably lead on to those mysteries. 



[98] 



IX 

"Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea 
obey Him? " MARK 4 : 41. 

Mark 4: 35-41. 

THIS was the question of a great fear. The statement 
of Mark, which our translators have rendered, "They 
feared exceedingly," quite literally rendered is, They 
feared with a great fear. 

Moreover this fear was not produced by the storm, but 
by the calm. Whatever fear they had in the presence of 
the storm was lost as the greater fear and consternation 
took possession of them, when the storm was suddenly 
hushed and ended. In the question, therefore, we dis- 
cover the effect produced upon the twelve by what the 
Lord had done. The stilling of the storm was a sign 
granted to the twelve only, the men who at this time were 
'* with Him," by His appointment, being specially trained 
for work to which presently they were to be sent. 

Mark was most careful to link this wonderful stilling 
of the storm with the day of parabolic teaching, that day 
of wonderful teaching, when Jesus requested His disci- 
ples that they should cross to the other side, and when 
their compliance with His request was ready and immedi- 
ate. As Mark graphically states it, they took Him " as 
He was " in the boat ; that is, without making 1 any change 
of situation, without making any special preparation for 
crossing over, or for being away for any length of time. 
In all probability the phrase " as He was " also suggests 
that He was tired with the strain and tension of that day, 
the crowds pressing upon Him, and the pouring out of 
Himself in parabolic teaching, followed by the private 
exposition of His teaching to His own disciples. 

[99] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4:35-41] 

. The boat put away from the land in the quiet and the 
calm of the evening. Almost immediately they were in 
the midst of the storm, one of those furious storms that 
still sweep so suddenly from the mountains and lash the 
sea into turmoil and unrest, storms which Rob Roy has 
described for us so 'graphically as to enable us for all time 
to understand this story better. As he has said, the wind, 
having gathered force, seems literally to tumble in ava- 
lanches upon the water, and beat it into wildness. The 
word that Mark used here means more than an ordinary 
storm, it means a furious storm. 

There, in the hinder part of the vessel, with His head 
upon the cushion (not a cushion, but the only one there), 
Jesus was asleep. , The disciples were filled with pertur- 
bation. The storm undoubtedly was of unusual severity, 
for these men were sailors who understood the manage- 
ment of their craft; but they were at their wits' end, and 
at last made their way toward the sleeping Jesus, and 
waking Him, said to Him: Master, is it no concern to 
Thee that we perish ? Then quietly rising from His slum- 
ber, He looked out over the storm-tossed waters, and ad- 
dressed the wind with anger: "He rebuked the wind." 
This is a very strong word. One of the earliest trans- 
lators rendered it, " He menaced the wind." Morison, 
with that quaint accuracy which characterized him, says 
that the real force of the statement is, I He rebuked the 
wind, and then addressing Himself to tne sea, said, Be 
muzzled. The peculiar quality of what happened was 
that of the suddenness of the change. The wind ceased ; 
and the sea, which in the ordinary course of events would 
be a long time sobbing itself back into quietness, was al- 
most immediately to use the forcible thought of the 
Greek word beaten back into levelness. Over the sea, 
and away to the mountains, and everywhere, with sudden 
swiftness there was quietness and calm. Then, looking 
at the disciples, Jesus said to them, " Why are ye fearful? 
Have ye not yet faith? " They then forgot all about the 

[ loo ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4:35-41] 

terror of the storm in the new fear, a great fear, an 
exceeding great fear that possessed them, a fear that had 
at its heart a sense of awe. They said one to another, 
" Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey 
Him?'^ 

The story is suggestive in a hundred ways. Perhaps 
every preacher turns to it sooner or later, some often in 
the course of a life's ministry ; and yet it is ever fresh, 
fascinating, forceful. It is so full of suggestiveness that 
it has inspired the poets also, and we have a rich collec- 
tion of hymns expressive of its varied values. The story 
has values which make for new strength and new joy, 
however tempest-tossed man may be. 

The first value of the event to the twelve is revealed in 
this question, "Who then is this, that even the wind 
and the sea obey Him ? " To understand their question 
we must observe with some care what they observed, 
the things that gave rise to the question. We will try 
to observe them from their standpoint as though in very 
deed we were with them in the boat and passing through 
their experiences. What did they see that day in Jesus 
that made them ask the question? The question was 
new, "and one compelled by some new manifestation. 
These men had been with Him now for some time. They 
had seen Him in many circumstances. They had heard 
many different tones in that voice which in itself was all 
music. Yet something happened which made them say, 
Who then is this? , 

Then secondly, in order to understand them, we must 
pay special attention to their question; These remarks 
will indicate the lines of our meditation. First, let us 
see Jesus as the disciples saw Him that day ; secondly, let 
us see the disciples as they are revealed by the question 
they asked. 

Jesus as the disciples saw Him. For the sake of 
brevity, I will summarize everything by saying they saw 
Him asleep, and they saw Him awake. 

l * ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4:35-41] 

They saw Him asleep? Let us look at Him as they 
thus saw Him. He had been teaching. The day had 
come to its close, the shadows of the evening were about 
them, but He had requested them to cross to the other 
side of the sea. With alacrity and immediateness they 
had yielded to His request, and the boat was moving 
away. They saw Him find His way to the after-part of 
the boat, and pillow His head upon the one cushion there, 
and go to sleep. They saw a Man tired, feeling the 
strain of suffering, conscious of the drain made upon Him 
by the success of those gathered multitudes, and the op- 
position which was growing against Him. He was asleep. 
He needed sleep; and He was able to sleep. That in it- 
self was a sign, that He was a Man of perfect physical 
health, and of mental peace. Mark their own word when 
they presently came to Him. Have You no concern? 
That was exactly it. He had no concern, and was at 
peace. He was a Man therefore of spiritual holiness. 
These are the elements that make for sleep. A man 
who is in physical health, without mental concern, and 
at peace with God, will sleep. 

We have seen Jesus asleep. Responsive to their touch 
and their cry, He awoke. The rush of the storm, and 
the sweep of the wind did not wake Him; but the touch 
of the trembling hand, and the cry of men in trouble, 
did. The moment they touched Him, and said, " Teacher, 
carest Thou not that we perish ? " He was awake. There 
is no need to lift that thought to any higher level than 
that of His glorious humanity. That does not deny His 
Deity, but it does help us to see what we supremely need 
to be reminded of the perfection of His humanity. We 
have seen something of this glory in a mother, whom all 
the noise of traffic will not waken, but who will be 
aroused by the sigh of a baby. This was supremely 
manifest in the Lord, for all the excellencies of mother- 
hood were also in Him. Thus awakened, He looked out 
upon the storm, unperturbed in His own soul; and with 

[ 102 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4 : 35-4i] 

authority He rebuked the winds 2 and said to the sea, 
"Peace, be still!") 

Without laying undue emphasis upon the fact, it is 
interesting to notice in passing that in His dealing with 
the storm upon this occasion, our Lord employed exactly 
the same method as when dealing with demons. For the 
sake of illustration, glance back at the story, of the first 
Sabbath morning in Capernaum. Then a demon cried 
out and disturbed Him in His teaching: " What have we 
to do with Thee, Thou Jesus of Nazareth. Art Thou come 
to destroy us ? I know Thee Who Thou art, the Holy One 
of God." Jesus listened to the words, and rebuked him, 
employing exactly the same words. This fact is sugges- 
tive; It does seem to suggest that there was something in 
that storm of the nature of the storms that swept upon 
Job in the olden days, which were caused by the prince of 
the power of the air, the spirit that works in the kingdom 
of darkness. I will not argue it, nor dogmatize about 
it; but I cannot understand Jesus speaking evidently in 
tones of anger to a wind. He rebuked the wind; and the 
word suggests anger. I cannot understand Him saying 
to the sea z Be muzzled. I believe that He knew that the 
storm was due to the spirit of darkness, to the under- 
world of evil. 

Dismiss that thought if you will, and simply look at 
the actual fact, that He rebuked the wind, and it ceased; 
and then spoke to the sea, and it beat itself back into 
leyelness, and was calm. 

Then while their hearts were filled with wonder at 
the deed, they heard Him reproving them : " Why are ye 
fearful? Have ye not yet faith?" 

Mark the strange merging. The disciples saw a tired 
Man asleep. They saw a Man so tremendous in power, 
that the wind that tossed the sea into fury ceased; and 
the sea, tossed into fury, was immediately calm. What 
wonder that they asked: "Who then is this?" 

We have more than those men had. We have the story 

t r <>3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4:35-41] 

in the light of subsequent events. Observe the things 
which they did not see, which they could not observe, 
for they themselves must be observed also. They saw 
the tired Man suddenly rising 1 from the slumber made 
necessary by His weariness, and hushing the storm to 
rest. What can we see? We see the mighty One Who 
f can hush the storm to rest, confronting the human soul, 
and saying, " Why are ye fearful." In other words, it is 
suggested by this story that the problem that confronted 
God was not that of stilling the storm on the sea, but that 
of stilling the storm in a human soul, and that is a harder 
work for God! With a word the storm on the sea is 
over, but even He must ask these men, "Why are ye 
fearful? Have ye not yet faith ?" 

In that question there is reminiscence of the way along 
which He had led them, of the things He had said to 
them, of the things He had done, of all the pathway along 
which they had travelled. We see the mighty One lim- 
ited in the presence of a human soul ; but not ultimately, 
nor finally. Before He has finished He will also bring 
peace there ; but He had not yet accomplished it, in the 
case of these men. For the moment we see men, to 
whom this very operation of peace brings no peace, but 
'a new fear. 

Let us look then at the disciples themselves as they are 
revealed by their question. We must observe them in 
the immediate experiences of the storm; in the sign that 
was given to them by the stilling of the storm. 

Look first at the start they made. Wondering at His 
wisdom, after the day of parabolic teaching, doing His 
behests with eagerness, they immediately put out to sea. 
Then, suddenly, the storm came. At first they forgot 
everything in their terror in the presence of the storm, 
for they were reduced to the point of hopelessness. The 
waves beating into the boat, threatened to engulf it; it 
seemed that all must be over ; nothing could save them,; 
they were going down; they were going to perish; there 

[ 104 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4:35-41] 

was no help for it ; this was the end of everything ! Then 
they woke HimJ| Here we must watch them with great 
care. They remonstrated with Him in protest, not ex- 
pecting that He would do anything. We have generally 
been inclined to interpret this story by saying that they 
woke Him in order that He might still the storm. Noth- 
ing of the kind. They were intensely surprised when He 
did still the storm. When they said, " Carest Thou not 
that we perish," we need to be very careful to understand 
what they meant. They were not protesting against Him 
for being careless that they were perishing. They were 
protesting against His lack of concern in view of the fact 
that they were all going to perish, Himself amongst the 
number. Their " we " referred, not to the disciples only, 
but to all who were in the boat. To take their words 
exactly as they were uttered, this is what they said: Is it 
no concern to Thee that we perish? Not, Art Thou 
neglecting us ? But, Thou art not perturbed in an hour 
like this, when the boat is in peril, and our lives are in 
peril, and Thy mission is in peril, when we are all about 
to perish beneath these waters which in the morning will 
be blue and placid again, with all the enterprise of the 
Kingdom buried beneath them? Is it no concern to Thee 
that we perish? It was not a request to Him to do any- 
thing; but a protest against His apparent indifference. 

Then He awoke, and they watched Him. They heard 
His angry rebuke, His authoritative command. They 
heard the rushing and moaning of the wind cease; and 
they saw the waves beaten back into levelness. 

Then He startled them more than ever. He turned 
round and reproved them, " Why are ye fearful ? Have 
ye not yet faith? " No word of comfort this, but a word 
of reproof !; If this story had been a fabrication, it 
would never have entered into the heart of man to make 
Jesus speak that word of rebuke! He rebuked them, 
and they were startled; so startled were they, that they 
feared with a great fear. It was not the storm that filled 

[ 105 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4:35-41] 

them with fear, but the calm, and what He said to 

them. 

"Who then is this?" said they. "Who then" in 
view of this rebuke " is this, that even the winds and 
the sea obey Him?" These facts demonstrated His 
right to rebuke. Evidently He was justified in sleeping. 
They had no right to awaken Him; and they ought to 
have known that they had no right to awaken Him, or 
else there is no meaning in His rebuke. 

What then were the ultimate values of this event, and 
what the place that this scene really occupied in our 
Lord's method with these men, and in His training of 
them? 

The first value is that of the question which they 
asked ; in the fact that they were compelled to the atti- 
tude of mind that expressed itself in that question. They 
had discovered in their Master, in that hour of stress and 
strain and storm, followed by quiet and peace and calm, 
followed again by strange and new rebuke, an authority 
and a power, demanding a more intensive discipleship ; 
and that more intensive discipleship had its manifestation 
in the question, "Who then is this?" We must get 
nearer to Him! We must find out more about Him! 

This was a fine attitude of soul to which He brought 
these men by that event. All down the centuries again 
and again He has brought men to that attitude through 
storms. " Who then is this, that even the wind and the 
sea obey Him? " The attitude of mind that inspired the 
inquiry is the first value of the experiences through which 
they had passed^ 

The second value is that of the necessary effect upon 
the past, and upon the future of His ministry, produced 
by the things that had happened that day, by that actual 
stilling of the storm, and by His strange rebuke of them. 
In that hour there was a seal set upon the authority of 
all He had been saying. Among other things, in that 
hour there was a vindication as well as an illustration of 

[106] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4:35-41] 

His parabolic method. He had been employing the para- 
ble in all that long day of teaching. They had chal- 
lenged Him as to His reason for employing the parabolic 
method, and He had answered them. Here was an il- 
lustration in their experience. This also was a parable, a 
parable not in words but in deed, intended to explain and 
correct an attitude in- their own lives. It was a parable 
made necessary by their dullness; seeing, they did not 
see ; hearing, they did not hear, neither had they under- 
stood; or y they never would have awakened Him. But 
because they were blihd and deaf and dull, He gave 
them a parable by stilling the tempest; and having done 
so, suggesting the reason of His absence of concern, and 
the meaning of His sleeping, and why it was unnecessary 
to wake Him ; then He rebuked them, and left upon 
their souls the impression of the teaching of the parable. 
He exercised this parabolic activity of power, in order 
to remove the dullness that made it necessary; arid in that 
hour there was a vindication of what He had said about 
His parabolic teaching; and thus a new authority was 
set upon all His teaching by reason of what He had done. 
From that time forward the event became to them, and 
not to them alone, but to all the Christian Church our 
sermons, expositions, and hymns bearing witness a 
source of strength in days of stress and storm. Can we 
think that these men could ever forget that scene ? There 
was another occasion when He came to them in the 
night, over the sea and through the wind, and that also 
was for them alone.) Neither of these wonders of the 
deep were wrought in view of the multitude, but for these 
men alone. The sea is always typical of the possibility of 
storm, even when most beautiful, as it is lulled to quiet- 
ness and rest. The sea is ever the symbol of peril. At 
last the seer in the island washed by the sea, wrote as One 
of the ultimate things of the final order, "There shall 
be no more sea." To repeat our question therefore, can 
we imagine that these men who were with Him that day 

[ 107 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 4:35-41] 
in the boat, ever forgot the spiritual values of that event, 

and the fact that He slept at the heart of the storm? 
Could they ever forget that when they went to Him z He 
woke and ended the storm? 

I do not think that His waking and ending of the storm 
was the value of the lesson to them. I think the chief 
value of the day's experience was its revelation of the 
fact that there was no need to wake Him; that 

" No waters can swallow the ship where lies 
The Master of ocean, and earth, and skies." 

They certainly did learn that in days of stress and strain 
and storm, if they cried out, He would end the storm. 
Yes ! but the deeper thing they learned was this ; that no 
storm can wreck the programme of God ; that though all 
hell be let loose, and though it have power over elements, 
and events, and the hearts of men, and the passions of 
the world, to stir them into storm, and wreck the ap- 
parently frail bark where Christ lies asleep, it is all use- 
less. If He be there, all is well ! 

That is the profoundest lesson of all. I am not pre- 
pared to say that these men learned it so perfectly as 
always to live in its power; but whenever they failed, He 
would help them, and the memory of it and of His re- 
buke would come back. 

"With Christ in the vessel, 
I smile at the storm." 

That is not waking Him ! Can I smile at the storm with 
Christ in the vessel? I am not sure that I can; but I 
ought to, and I want to. I believe it is one of the pro- 
foundest lessons of life, whether in regard to personal 
experience, or world- wide affairs. ^ There ought to be no 
panic in the heart of a man, when he knows Christ. We 
may be sure that Christ is at the heart of every storm. 
He apparently sleeps in the hour of our anxiety. We go 

[ 108 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 4 : 35-41] 

to Him, and say what these men said, and as others have 
said, Carest Thou not that we perish, Lord? What art 
Thou doing? 

" See round Thine ark the angry billows curling." 

We are in danger of being swamped. Everything is go- 
ing wrong ! 

AH such panic is unnecessary, and unworthy. The 
Lord is at the heart of the storm, and we may rest in 
Him, and smile at the storm. It is, perhaps, more easy 
to believe that about the world, than it is about our own 
lifet It is a curious fact, but it is quite true. We can 
often trust Him for the world, more readily than for our- 
selves. Does Christ seem asleep? Ah! but He is there. 
If we would see the greatest things we had better not 
waken Him. It will be great if He will hush the storm! 
But there are greater things. What are they ? Watching 
Him through the storm. That is what He wanted these 
men to do. In proportion as we believe this, we ought to 
have no panic. 

Though nearly two thousand years have run their 
course, and in some senses we know more than these men, 
we are still driven to say, Who then is this? In the an- 
swer to that question is the secret of rest. In proportion 
as we really know Him, in that proportion we shall be 
quiet. It was Jeremy Taylor who said that we are far 
safer in the middle of a storm with God, than anywhere 
else without Him. And that is what we need to learn 
and to remember, that we may be at peace, and that we 
may cooperate with Him. 



[ 109 ] 



" There met Him out of the tombs a man with an un- 
clean spirit." MARK 5:2. 

Mark 5: 1-20. 

BY these words our attention is immediately fastened 
upon our subject^ that namely of our Lord's dealing with 
demoniacs. 

That special importance attaches to the subject is evir 
denced by the fact that Mark has given so much space to 
this particular story, relating it with much more of detail 
than either Matthew or Luke, who nevertheless both re- 
cord the miracle. 

The subject has arisen before in the course of these 
narratives. On the first wonderful Sabbath in Caper- 
naum, in the synagogue in the morning, Jesus healed a 
demoniac, and still others in the evening of the same day 
(1:23-27, 32-34). Mark records the fact that as He 
journeyed through Galilee He constantly did the same 
thing (1:39). Mark also declares that in the course of 
His ministry "the unclean spirits, whensoever they be- 
held Him, fell down before Him and cried, saying, Thou 
art the Son of God. And He charged them much that 
they should not make Him known " (3 : 11-12). In the 
choosing of the twelve also, He appointed them to have 
authority ultimately to do the same work (3 : 15). More- 
over, He had answered the declarations of the Jerusalem 
scribes on tnis subject with great solemnity, and solemn 
warning, as they declared that by the prince of the de- 
mons He cast out the demons (3:22-30). 

Our story is significantly the next in order. As we 
proceed with our study of the Gospel we shall itouch it 

[ no ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

again and yet again; when He sent out the apostles, He 
gave them this authority (6: 7 and 13) ; when He healed 
the daughter of the Syrophoenician woman (7 : 25-30) ; 
when at the foot of the mount of transfiguration He 
healed the boy (9 : 17-29) ; when John reported that one, 
not of the twelve, had been casting out demons (9:38); 
in a final reference to Mary of Magdala, out of whom 
He cast seven demons (16: 9), and last of all in the com- 
mission as Marie recorded it (16: 17). 

In this story of the man in the country of the Gera- 
senes the subject is evidently purposely dealt with most 
fully. The case was a remarkable one in many ways, 
and, Mark recorded it with much of detail. Matthew 
alone tells us that there were two men. Both Luke and 
Mark refer to one only, evidently because the case was a 
notorious one in itself, and the healing of the man there- 
fore was all the more wonderful. The words of the text 
quite literally rendered are, "There met Him out of the 
tombs, a man in an unclean spirit." Dr. Morison says 
that the suggestiveness of the expression is that "the 
demoniac in the man was more conspicuous and obtrusive 
than the man's own manhood." Our Lord here came 
face to face with one of the most terrible cases of de- 
mon-possession. The special nature of the case, and the 
prominence thus given to it, compel special attention to 
the subject. I propose, therefore, now to deal generally 
with demon-possession, and to consider the illustration 
particularly as it bears on the subject. 

The testimony of the sacred writings to the existence 
of spiritual beings is unequivocal. Behind that testimony 
I do not go. w The whole Bible recognizes this world of 
spiritual beings, and the fact that under certain condi- 
tions, and for certain purposes, they have access to men. 
The testimony of the Gospel narratives to the fact of 
demon-possession, and to the further fact that our Lord, 
during the course of His earthly ministry exercised au- 
thority over demons, which He manifested by casting 

[ in ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

them out of human beings, is equally without question. 
At the commencement of our study of this Gospel I 
drew attention to a book published in 1864, on Progress 
in Revelation, being the Bampton Lectures by Bernard, 
in which book attention is drawn to the fact that this 
seems to have been one of the dominant notes in this 
Gospel according to Mark. 

The things that precede this particular story, leave the 
impression upon the mind that our Lord was constantly 
coming into contact with these demons, in men, women, 
and children; and that He ever acted with authority and 
with power over them. 

Some objections have been raised to this view. It is 
said that our Lord did not know the truth about these 
cases. That I am not going to argue, for it involves our 
Christology, and I cannot accept that definition or inter- 
pretation of the Gospel stories. 

It is suggested that there was no such thing as demon- 
possession, but that He adapted His language, using the 
method of expression of His age, well knowing that these 
people were not really possessed by demons. For me 
personally this charges Him with giving countenance to 
superstition, and I cannot accept the interpretation. 

It is suggested that the language of the records is that 
of the writers, who have thus explained certain things 
which Jesus did ; that He never really talked with demons 
as the narratives would lead a plain man to suppose, but 
that He did produce upon a madman a certain effect of 
quietness and peace, and that the disciples interpreted 
what He did in the way in which we have read the stories. 
That, for me, would destroy the authority of the writ- 
ings in every particular, and I should immediately say of 
my New Testament, there is nothing here upon which I 
can depend. 

Therefore, dealing no longer with objections, let ^ us 
face the subject. In order to its intelligent consideration 
it is important that we should observe a distinction which 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

is made in the English Revision, in the marginal notes, 
between a devil and a demon. The American Revisers 
have brought the correction into the actual text. It is 
a very important change, and one that must be borne in 
mind. As a matter of fact, the word translated " devil" 
as a substantive, occurs thirty times in the New Testa- 
ment, but always in reference to Satan. It is found ad- 
jectively three times in the pastoral epistles, always in 
reference to men. In the New Testament .then, taken as 
a whole, the word " devil " is always used of one strange, 
mystic, awful personality, whom we speak of as Satan. 
The word translated " demons " is used repeatedly. It 
wa a common word at the time, a word with which men 
were perfectly familiar. It may be a little difficult for 
us to interpret its meaning to-day, although we know of 
its use, at the time. Confining ourselves to- the New 
Testament, we find that the synonym for demon is always 
either " evil spirit " or " unclean spirit." 

It is important in the second place that we should 
recognize all that the New Testament reveals, as to the 
relation between the one who is described as " the devil," 
and those who are referred to as " demons." In that 
controversy between our Lord and the Jerusalem scribes, 
which we have considered, they charged Him with cast- 
ing out demons through Beelzebub, whom they named 
the prince of the demons, thus revealing the popular view 
and conception. It is to be borne most carefully in mind 
that in our Lord's answer to what they said, an answer 
characterized by the utmost solemnity, He did not cor- 
rect that view. He accepted it, and based His argument 
upon its accuracy, as He declared that if Satan cast out 
Satan, then his kingdom is divided; admitting therefore 
that very conception which they held, of a great under- 
world of evil spirits or demons, controlled, marshalled, 
ordered, governed, so far as such words can be used in 
that connection, by this one of whom they spoke as 
Beelzebub, the prince of the demons. 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

The mission of Jesus Christ was once expressed by an 
apostle in these words, " He went about, doing good, and 
healing all that were oppressed of the devil," the refer- 
ence being to the healing of sickness and to the casting 
out of demons; and the entire conception being that of 
this world under the control of this one personality. Our 
Lord made no contradiction of this; but accepting it, in 
all His dealings with demonized men and women, pro- 
ceeded upon the assumption of the accuracy of that view. 
Let it at once be said there is nothing final in the New 
Testament as to whom these spirits really are. The old 
view was that they were the spirits of men. The view of 
Greek philosophy was that these were the spirits of those 
who lived in the Golden Age. They were not looked 
upon as necessarily evil in all cases. Hence there was 
demon-worship, the worship not necessarily of evil spir- 
its; but of the spirits of those who had existed in the 
Golden Age. That view, or a modification of it is held 
to-day by some. Both Pember and Gall in their most 
interesting books, have suggested that these spirits were 
those of pre- Adamite man, of a race that fell before the 
story as recorded in Genesis. I but refer to these things 
in order to say that they are speculations with more or 
less likelihood of being true. Certainly when considering 
the subject, the weird revelation of the New Testament 
should be remembered, that these spirits were always 
seeking some material resting-place, always hankering 
after some material instrument through which to act, and 
in which to dwell. Nothing can finally be said concerning 
this, but it is repeatedly revealed. 

There is also the generally accepted theory that these 
spirits are angels who were involved in the primal fall, 
when Lucifer, son of the morning, himself became the 
arch enemy, the prince of the power of the air, the god 
of this world. 

The New Testament is quite clear as to the existence 
of these spirits, quite clear as to their access to humanity, 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

quite clear in its revelation of the fact that their access 
to humanity always meant harm wrought in human life, 
both in intention and purpose. The pictures that the 
New Testament presents of demonized humanity are 
very terrible ones. Here once more let us halt for a 
definition. Our phrase " possessed of a demon " does not 
occur in the New Testament. The phrase is really " de- 
monized man," or one who may be called " a demoniac." 
While not desiring to build anything final upon that dis- 
tinction, it is well to bear it in mind, because when 
speaking of a man being demon-possessed, we have our 
own imagination as to what that means. Let us then 
correct, or hold in suspense our imagination by remem- 
bering that the actual word of the New Testament is not 
" demon-possessed," but " demonized " ; a man under the 
influence of one or more of these evil spirits.- The pos- 
sibility of this is clearly taught in the New Testament. 

It is taught also by modern experience, especially by 
the experience of missionaries in certain lands. They 
testify that to-day they find exactly the same conditions 
as those described in the New Testament; and they add 
to that testimony the fact that they also find the name 
and power of/ Christ, are sufficient for casting out these 
demons, and setting people free. 

The purpose of demon-possession, so far as the demon 
is concerned, is always that of finding an instrument. 
The power of the demon is acquired from without, and is 
terrible in its finality. There is no single instance in the 
New Testament which suggests that a spirit of good takes 
possession of a human being, other than the Spirit of 
God. There is no single suggestion of a spirit taking pos- 
session of a human being in order to the enlightenment, 
healing and uplifting of that human being. There is no 
case in the Bible of men finding communion with spirits 
who are in themselves good and pure and holy, save 
the lonely exception of the appearance of Samuel to 
Saul. 

3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

What is revealed as to the condition of the man thus 
demonized? First of all, that he had passed to the place 
of terrible isolation; he was living among the tombs, hi 
the region of death, as far as possible from his fellow 
beings. Secondly, that he was characterized by terrible 
lawlessness, breaking through all restraint. Thirdly, that 
his whole experience was one of restlessness, crying out 
night and day. Fourthly, that it was one of suffering 
self-inflicted, cutting himself with stones. Finally, that 
it was one of menace to all men, as one of the evan- 
gelists records so that it was not possible for men to 
pass by that way. The picture is a terrible one of the 
ultimate effect of the possession of a human being by an 
evil spirit. 

What is here revealed as to the demons themselves? 
Perhaps the most suggestive thing, and it is not peculiar 
to this story is their recognition of Christ, the obeisance 
they yielded to Him. This man, seeing Jesus from afar, 
as our translation says, hastened to Him and worshipped 
Him. The word worshipped may simply mean that he 
yielded obeisance to Him, bowed in His presence; but 
what he said suggests that attitude of worship in the 
presence of Christ. The question asked was a strange 
and startling one: "What have I to do with Thee, 
Jesus ? " Or, What is there to me and to Thee, Jesus ? 
That is, What have we in common ? Then came that 
strange word, so constantly recurring when evil spirits 
came into the presence of Christ, "Thou Son of the 
Most High God." Then followed the plea of the evil 
spirit : " I adjure Thee by God, torment me not " ; and the 
weird request. " He besought Him much that He would 
not send them away out of the country" says Mark; and 
Luke says, " They entreated Him that He would not com- 
mand them to depart into the abyss." At the last mo- 
ment they clamoured that if they were to be driven out 
from possession of this man, they might enter into the 
swine; thus manifesting their desire for some material 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

instrumentality; in order to the satisfaction of some crav- 
ing of their nature. 

Look at the story once again in order to observe the 
dealing of Christ with this demonized man. In answer 
to the challenge, " What is there to me and to Thee ? " 
the man speaking, and yet voicing the demon, Jesus 
said, " Come forth thou unclean spirit out of the man." 
That was the word of quiet authority, which impressed 
the disciples, who listened and observed. In the first 
morning scene in the Capernaum synagogue, they were 
amazed, not that He cast the demons out, for the scribes 
also were doing this, but that He did it with a word, and 
with apparent ease, with an authority which the demon 
immediately recognized and obeyed. So in this case He 
spoke the word, " Come forth, thou unclean spirit out of 
the man," and the word was enough. 

In the next place, in answer to the plea of the evil one, 
" I adjure Thee, torment me not," Christ asked a ques- 
tion: " What is thy name? " Here perhaps we are at the 
point of special arrest. The careful reading of the story 
convinces me that our Lord was not asking the demon 
his name, but the man; thus recalling him to the sense 
of personality. I believe that the question was asked 
with infinite tenderness. The Lord spoke to the man as 
he was emerging from the terrible control that had 
wrought havoc in his life: "What is thy name?" He 
was answered by the spirit of evil, which nevertheless was 
an answer revealing the man's agony, and sense of hope- 
lessness, "My name is Legion, for we are many." It 
seems to me that in that answer also there is evidence of 
the man himself, wakened to a sense of his own person- 
ality. " My name is Legion, for we. are many." Notice 
the awakened sense of personality, " My name," and then 
the swift return to the terrific sense of mystery that had 
blighted and ruined his life, " we are many." 

When the spirits made their request that they might 
enter into the herd of swine, Mark says, " He gave them 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

leave"; Matthew records His answer in one word, 
" Go ! " The answer of Jesus, which was permission to 
the evil spirits to enter the herd of swine, was also His 
word of judgment on them; for the herd, possessed by 
the evil spirits, perished in the waters, and so were lost 
to the demons, who passed on into the abyss. 

I am not going to enter into any discussion of the old- 
time difficulty, the controversy between Huxley and Glad- 
stone, about that herd of swine. Suffice it to say that our 
Lord was exercising His ministry in Jewish territory, arid 
even if Josephus is right, that this, was a Greek city, it 
is nevertheless true that our Lord was dealing with the 
children of Israel, and in the destruction of the swine 
He was rebuking their indulgence in a traffic absolutely 
forbidden. 

The Lord's last word to the man was this, " Go to thy 
house unto thy friends, and tell them how great things 
the Lord hath done for thee, and how He had mercy 
on thee." Thus the whole incident was set in the light 
of the purpose of the ministry of Christ; the compas- 
sionating of man, and his deliverance from all evil domi- 
nation. Thus also the whole purpose of demon-posses- 
sion is revealed, as being, that of the spoiling of human- 
ity. 

The last scene is one full of sadness. It is that of the 
people as they besought Him to depart out of their coasts. 
They saw the man, sitting, clothed, and in his right mind; 
but they would dispense with such benefits rather than 
have their gains interfered with. Christ is seen there- 
fore, taking boat and passing back to the other side. 

What value has such a consideration for us? I sug- 
gest first of all that the fact of the incorporation of these 
stories in the records is proof that they are not without 
value. They serve first as an unveiling of the underworld 
of evil ; and secondly, as a revelation of our Lord's power 
over that underworld. ' 

But it is objected that there are *io such cases now. 

I "8 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

That is a hasty conclusion. I have already stated that 
the testimony of missionaries as to their experience in 
what we call heathen lands at this time, is unequivocal. 
I suggest also that the whole of the phenomena of spiri- 
tualism is closely allied; and that the moment the word 
" medium " is employed, the word " demonized man "or 
"demonized woman " may be substituted. Christians 
make a terrible mistake when they laugh at spiritualism, 
and treat it as a fancy. It is a reality. Men are holding 
traffic with spirits, and obtaining answers from the spirit 
world; and yielding themselves thus to the control of 
spirits, they become mastered by spirits, and the media 
through which the spirits actually speak. But the whole 
realm of spirits, with which men thus communicate, is 
the realm under the dominion of Satan. 

Admitting, however, for the sake o{ argument, that we 
have no such manifestations to-day in our own land, as 
those which the Gospels describe, the question arises as 
to whether this also is not a method of Satan. To-day, 
in this land, in the places where the Gospel has been 
preached, and where therefore the common level of 
spiritual intelligence, quite apart from the intelligence 
of definitely Christian people, is far higher than it can 
be in places where the Gospel has not been preached ; the 
very fact that there are no such manifestations proves 
the subtlety of Satan. In such places he has girded him- 
self as an angel of light, seducing men by evil spirits that 
come to them, as if they were spirits of God. 

The underworld of evil spirits still exists. It is still 
true that " our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, 
but against the principalities, against the powers, against 
the world-rulers of this darkness, against the spiritual 
hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places." But it is 
also true that the power of the Lord, and His authority 
over the whole of this realm abides ; and therefore there 
may be for us perfect and constant victory over all the 
power of evil spirits as they approach us from without; 

[ "9 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 1-20] 

and moreover, in and through His name there may be 
for us perfect authority and power for the exorcising of 
evil spirits from other men, if we will but place our- 
selves in true relation to the Lord Himself. 

To quote again from Paul's language in his Ephesian 
letter, in order that we enter into the conflict with this 
underworld of evil, it is necessary that we should "put 
on the whole panoply of God, that we may be able to 
stand against the wiles of the devil." We fight our way 
toward the ultimate victory through unseen forces and 
foes; the principalities and powers, that are under the 
control of the arch-enemy of the race. 

But if we recognize the foe, let it be none the less our 
business to remember the power of the Lord. When the 
apostle wrote, "We are not ignorant of his devices," he 
wrote as one who had come to a true understanding of 
the whole underworld of evil, into which he looked with 
intrepid eyes, and to which he perpetually made refer- 
ence ; and that understanding resulted from, the light that 
Christ had brought to him. 

It is for us therefore, to study these stories, not as 
though we were face to face with exceptional things of 
long ago, not as though the adversaries therein described 
did then exist, and now are non-existent; but as those 
who take their way toward the perfecting of the realiza- 
tion of the Kingdom of God on earth amid these hosts of 
darkness. 

O'er this whole realm of darkness also our Lord and 
Master has sovereign rule. As our trust is in Him, and 
we are yielded to Him, we in this regard also, may be 
more than conquerors. 

Only let us ever remember that if 

"Hell is nigh, . . . God is nigher, 
Circling us with hosts of fire. 
For lo ! to faith's enlightened sight 
All the mountain flames with light." 

[ 120 ] 



XI 

" One of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus; . . . 
and a woman." MARK 5 : 22, 25. 

Mark 5: 21-43. 

AMONG all the stories of the ministry of our Lord, 
none, in certain regards, is more beautiful than this of 
two sorrowful souls who found their way to Him, and 
were comforted. 

It is one story. Matthew, Mark, and Luke each record 
it in the same way, telling how, while Jesus was on His 
way to the house of Jairus, the woman came to Him; 
and, from the viewpoint of Jairus, hindered Him; but 
from the standpoint of Jesus, enabled Him to help Jairus. 

Taken thus, as one story, it is supremely a revelation 
of the sensitiveness of the Servant of God to human 
sorrow ; and of His ready, almost eager response thereto. 

In language, most simple and most natural, the suffer- 
ing ones are presented to us. To read this story natu- 
rally, is inevitably to be brought into very close sympathy 
with these two suffering people. In proportion as we 
have trodden the sorrowful way, and ourselves have 
known anything of pain, we read these stories intelli- 
gently, and are carried immediately over the two inter- 
vening millenniums, to Jairus and to the woman; for 
their successors are with us yet. 

Such emotional sympathy prepares us for the appre- 
hensio^i of the tenderness and strength of the attitude and 
activity of Jesus, as the result of which peace and joy 
took the place of turmoil and sorrow in the experience of 
these two people. 

In the country of the Gerasenes the Lord had mani- 
fested His power over demons most remarkably* 

[ 121 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

by the strange and inexplicable mystery of human nature, 
requested by the inhabitants, He had departed from their 
borders, crossing back with His disciples over the sea 
which He had so recently hushed into rest. On the 
other side great multitudes gathered about Him, and He 
continued His work. The word that Mark employs here 
is a very suggestive one ; the multitudes " thronged Him," 
the exact thought being that of actually pressing upon 
Him. It was impossible for Him to move easily, they 
crowded Him so. When presently He started with 
Jairus, they still thronged Him, jostled Him, not with 
intentional rudeness, but with a great anxiety to be near 
Him. These multitudes were curious, interested, and 
crudely sympathetic; and yet entirely ignorant of all the 
tenderness and compassion of His heart, or of the ca- 
pacity of that heart for love. 

The disciples were with Him also, the twelve who 
were appointed to be with Him ; and this as every other 
incident had its bearing upon their training and prepara- 
tion for the work that lay before them. They were 
loyal-hearted and yet very ignorant, so that presently 
when He asked that strange question, "Who touched 
Me?" they did not at all understand Him; and when 
later He lifted to life the little damsel, they were amazed. 
This is a great scene. I like to dwell upon it. If I 
were an artist, I would try to paint the picture of this 
crowd, some of them with happiness on their faces, others 
with sorrow; mothers perhaps lifting their bairns up that 
they might see Him as He passed; eager men jostling 
Him, getting a little ahead of the rest of the crowd to 
look back into His face. It is a great human picture. 

Let us leave them all, the crowds and the disciples, and 
fasten our attention upon the central figures in the pic- 
ture; Jairus, the woman, and Jesus. We will attempt 
carefully to look at Jairus, and understand his sorrow ; to 
look at the woman, and come into sympathy ; witii her 
desolation; in order that with reverence we may watch 

[ 122 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43} 

the Lord in the presence of such sorrowful folk, our 
predecessors in the experiences of pain and loneliness. 

We will try first to imagine jairus and the mother of 
the maid. The mother did not travel with Jairus, to 
persuade Jesus to come. She stayed where mothers do, 
by the side of the child in her illness. She is only men- 
tioned in the story once, and would not have been men- 
tioned then perchance, except for the undefstandingness 
of Jesus ; for when presently He came to the house, He 
took into that inner chamber Jairus and the mother. 
Thus then they are first presented to us; Jairus in the 
presence of Jesus, the mother at home by the side of the 
damsel. * 

How many can really see these people? How many 
know the parental love that is here revealed? It is 
strange, mystic, different from all other loves, having 
qualities that are all its own^ so fine, so subtle, so delicate, 
that any words by which we try to describe it seem coarse, 
hard, and inadequate ! 

Jairus employed a phrase which had at its very heart, 
a sense of proprietorship: my little daughter! Ah! we 
may love all children, all the bairns may seem to us the 
special messengers of God to mortals ; but there is a dif- 
ference. Parental love has within itself an almost terrify- 
ing, and yet most exquisitely tender sense of responsi- 
bility. If a man shall say to me, It is your duty to do 
thus or so, I shall challenge him for his reason; and if he 
shall reply, For your own sake; I may answer, Stand out 
of my sunlight, and do not interfere with me ! But if he 
shall say, For the sake of that boy in your home ; he has 
conquered me, he has mastered me! Oh! that strange 
agony in the love of parent for child, that makes the par- 
ent ever tremble ! "My little daughter." That is a pic- 
ture in itself. Luke records the fact that she was an only 
daughter, and that she was twelve years of age. Twelve 
years of sunshine, twelve years of music in the home! 
She had come to that wonderful age which to-day we 

[ 123 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO'MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

are describing as the period of adolescence, when will is 
becoming supreme, and choices and elections are being 
made alone, when all life seems to be breaking from bud 
into larger blossom with the potentiality of fruitage. 
Twelve years of age ! 

Then the sorrow is revealed in the one graphic sen- 
tence: "My little daughter lieth at the point of death." 
The cloud is over the home ! Silence is within the home ! 
Nothing need be added! Jairus stands forevermore as 
a type. 

Then we turn to look at the woman, for deep as is 
the sorrow of Jairus, there are deeper depths here. 
Home, society, and religion, are the great things in the 
reallife of all true womanhood. Of these home is first. 
From the connection I do not propose to omit the word 
society. I am using it in the sanctuary, and therefore 
using it correctly, not with reference to that most ve- 
neered and rotten thing that we call society, but in its 
true sense, the social circle of life. The inner sanctuary 
of religion is always open to true womanhood, and into 
its mysteries she again and again finds her way with 
light and experience such as others do not know. 
/ Now look at this woman. She was suffering from an 
V ailment which had weakened her, and was in itself de- 
structive. That, however, does not tell the story of the 
depth of her sorrow. We must look at this woman in 
relation to her own age, and to those very things to 
which I have already made reference, as the things of 
her full and beautiful life. All women suffering from 
haemorrhage in that age were suspect. Consequently, by 
jthe very law of her people, she was divorced from her 
tmsband, and could not live in her home; she was ostra- 
Icized from all society, and must not come into contact 
jwith her old friends; she was excommunicated from the 
Iservices of the synagogue, and thus shut out from the 
[women's courts in the temple. Hers is indeed a pathetic 
[figure! Twelve years in which the passionate desire, not 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

so much unless I misunderstand this story and misun-! 
derstand women, for her healing, as for restoration to 
all those places of life which were her joy, home, society, 
and religion. Twelve years of agony, physical, mental,/ 
spiritual, in which she had poured out her wealth in the- 
attempt to regain her health, with no success. As Mark,! 
with bluntness puts it, she "was nothing bettered, buti 
rather grew worse." ,~^ 

In the case of Jairus, twelve years of sunshine sud-\ 
denly devastated, with the death of the bairn. In the 
case of this woman twelve years of suffering, gradually j 
issuing in weary desolation. X 

Now let us observe the Lord. We have been following 
Him through these holy fields. We have, with the multi- 
tudes, been amazed by the wisdom of His teaching; we 
have been watchful in the presence of His power. We 
have seen Him dealing with the vast underworld of evil, 
casting out demons. Now let us look at Him in the 
presence of these people of sorrow. 

Both these people came to Him. Jairus came to Him 
with public request; the woman came to Him in a pri- 
vate approach. The man came to Him in the midst of the 
crowds asking Him definitely and openly that all might 
hear, that He would come and help him. The woman 
Kjame; and how she did so, I can never quite understand. 
How difficult some of us, in full vigour and health, find 
it to get through the crowds of London. Think of this 
jostling crowd of eager people thronging Him, and then of 
this woman, weak and wan and worn and emaciated, with 
twelve years of suffering. Yet she reached Him! She 
came, and she came quietly. She touched Him. The 
word " touched " really does not convey the true thought. 
It was not a delicate touch; it was the clutch of the hand 
of despair. The woman in this thronging pressing crowd 
said, If I may but snatch at it, if I may but clutch it, I 
shall be healed! So she came. 

Mark, with that bluntness which is often so full of the 

t 125 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

poetry of revelation, simply tells us that when Jainis had 
made his request, " He went with him." Notice the in*- 
mediate response. That cry from the heart of Jainis had 
touched the soul of Jesus. " My little daughter is at the 
point of death/' The compassion of Jesus was not for 
the little daughter. He is never touched with pity for 
those who die. It is for those who live. It was the 
agony of the father and mother that appealed to Him. 
\On the way He delayed. That is the second thing to 
notice. He went; but ...He tarried. The woman had 
touched HinC Power had gone out to her healing, and 
He tarried. Why not pass on? Why did He not go 
on? Not merely in order that He might talk to the 
woman. That assuredly; but this also; He knew that at 
the house of Jainis the child lay dead, and He knew per- 
fectly well that those messengers were already starting to 
tell Jairus the sad news. He paused to lead Jairus into 
an atmosphere in which it would be possible for him to 
believe; when the news came that it was too late. He 
paused for Jairus's sake. Yet if I were painting the 
picture I should try to represent Jairus as impatient! 
Why does He tarry so long? My child is dying! 

In a few moments there came the last blow on the 
father's heart, "Thy daughter is dead! Why troublest 
thou the Teacher any further?" It was necessary that 
Mark should write this, " But Jesus, not heeding the word 
spoken, saith unto the ruler of the synagogue." Let us, 
however, dare to be dramatic, and leaving out the expla- 
nation, see what happened. Christ had just said to this 
woman, " Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole ; go 
in peace." Then the messengers came; " Thy daughter is 
dead. Why troublest thou the Teacher any further?" 
Then said Jesus, " Fear not, only believe." Thus the 
voice of the uttermost desolation was immediately fol- 
lowed by the voice of the uttermost consolation. Yes, 
but how could Jairus believe the thing that was said? 
There was the woman; something strange had happened 

[126] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

to her. She declared she had been made whole by a 
touch, and He had said, " Go into peace." There was a 
method and a purpose in the halting of Jesus. There is 
always a meaning in His delay. Out of the delay will 
come help, out of the darkness will come light. It is 
always so with this Christ of ours. 

Then He came to the house, and no words of ours are 
needed to describe the scene. It is so full of exquisite 
beauty., Listen to His first words: "Why make ye a 
tumult, and weep? the child is not dead, but sleepeth." 
That is God's outlook on death. He said the same thing 
when Lazarus died, and then because they could not un- 
derstand Him, He had to say plainly, " Lazarus is dead," 
accommodating Himself to the ignorance of the human 
outlook upon death. So He said to these people in the 
house, The child is not dead; she is asleep. 

Then there flashes out in the story a touch of dignity 
and authority. When they laughed Him to scorn, He 
put them all out, and taking with Him only Peter, James, 
and John, and the father and mother, He came in and 
took her by the hand; and dropping into Aramaic (for I 
believe He spoke in Greek, and the very reason why the 
Aramaic is retained for us here is to show that He 
adopted the language of the inner home circle, those 
diminutives which are the very essence of love) ; He said, 
" Talitha cumi." Damsel arise, is a harsh translation. 
The real meaning of the word is, "Little lamb, arise." 
He took her by the hand, and He said 2 " Little lamb, 



arise." 



Then He gave her back to father and mother. Poor 
little lamb ! He gave her back to tears, He gave her back 
to pain, He gave her back to sorrow. Not out of com- 
passion for her did He bring her back, but out of com* 
passion for them. So after all, my little lamb, that He 
took, was better off than she was, though I have been 
left lonely through many years. It was the father's heart 
that appealed to Him. He gave him back his child. It was 

[ 127 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

the mother's heart that moved Him, and He gave her back 
the little one. Oh ! it was all right with the little one also, 
undoubtedly so, in the long issues, but He brought her 
back to sorrow. 

Now let us watch Him with the woman. One or two 
things are brought together here so closely that we hardly 
notice that they are together. " She felt in her body that 
she was healed. . . . Jesus perceiving in Himself 
that the power proceeding from Him had gone forth." 
That is the whole story. She touched. They said, How 
sayest Thou, Who touched Me? The multitudes throng 
Thee, and press Thee. Ah ! yes, my brethren ! Augus- 
tine long ago said of this story, " Flesh presses, faith 
touches." Crowds jostle Him, but agony and need touch 
Him; and He can always distinguish between the jostle 
of a curious mob, and the agonized touch of a needy soul. 
He is still making that distinction. . He is always ask- 
ing the same question, " Who touched Me ? " So many 
people jostle Him, crowd Him, press on Him. We are 
really interested. We love to hear about Him. We en- 
joy terrible word the service! But, thank God, there 
is always some soul who touches Him, and reaches Him. 
Whenever a soul does that in desperation, as the last pos- 
sible thing He answers. He knows the touch of need, 
and responds to it. 

Then the woman who had touched Him, must come 

and tell. She must confess, not for her own sake, nor 

for His sake only ; but principally for the sake of Jairus. 

So as the result of His question, she came and told Him 

all the truth. Then, looking into her eyes, He said, 

" Daughter." This is the only occasion on record when 

He used this particular kind of endearing epithet, 

to a woman. " Daughter ... go into peace " ; not 

j "in peace," but " into." All the land behind for twelve 

\ years had been wilderness, a land of darkness and deso- 

\ lation. Now He said: Daughter, go into peace. Thou 

vhast been divorced from home. Come into My home. 

[ 128 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

Thou hast been ostracized from society. Come into closer 
kinship with Me. Thou hast been excommunicated from 
the rites of religion. Come into fellowship with the One 
Who brings thee to God. " Daughter, go into peace." 

She is moving away. Where is she going? Perhaps 
back home, perhaps back to friends, perhaps back to the 
synagogue next Sabbath. I do not know. This I know, 
she is going into peace ! What does it matter if she is 
never readmitted into the synagogue? She is in peace. 
She is His child. 

What are the permanent values of these stories? In 
this particular unveiling of Jesus we have a revelation of 
His extreme sensitiveness. Oh, the ugliness of human 
words when we try to talk about Christ! I want some 
new language. Sensitiveness is indeed a beautiful word, 
and yet it is not rich enough to express the thought. In 
Him sensitiveness was responsiveness, quick, immediate,; 
full, generous, magnificent. Then again we have here a 
wonderful revelation of the understanding of Jesus. I 
think that is one of the most wonderful qualities in hu- 
man love and friendship. Understandingness ! That is 
why He tarried to talk to the woman and help her. That 
is the meaning of the very word upon which we have 
already dwelt. Daughter! So much was not said; and 
consequently so much more was said ! Perhaps the most 
beautiful sacramental symbol of His Understandingness 
in all the narrative is its last touch. The dead child was 
lifted by His hand. She arose to life at the music of His 
voice. Then He commanded that they should give her 
something to eat. If we had been inventing this story 
we dare not have added that. Even now we are a little 

1 i. 

afraid to believe it. But He is God ; He knew that the 
little child wakening back after the long unconscious 
slumber, with the little body thrilling with new life, was 
hungry. Give her something to eat. With a touch gentle 
enough for a little maiden's dimpled hand, and with a 
voice musical enough to bring the sweet spirit back from 

[ 129 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 5 : 21-43] 

the far-off place, He did not forget that she wanted 
something to eat. Oh, the understandingness of Jesus ! 

Yes, but, you say, my child died, and I lost her ! Yes, 
but, you say, I am not cured. I am still suffering ! How 
shall I reply to that kind of statement? Reverently I say 
in answer; even though our children went, and He did 
not let us have them; even though we were not cured, and 
long, long suffering runs on, there is something to be 
sure of. Seeing that we have had that unveiling of 
Him; we know His heart and therefore are sure of His 
sympathy. 

There is another thing to remember. Many children 
are raised up even yet. Do not put these stories back two 
millenniums. That one lassie that God took out of my 
home I did so want to keep; but she went. But I have 
other bairns in the home who have seemed to be as near 
the end as she. I asked for them, and they are with me 
yet. He still touches the little hands, and raises up the 
children. He still heals, and He has cured many a soul 
of bodily infirmity. 

Therefore we know that those who are not raised up 
or cured, are still in His love. Therefore that which hap- 
pens to them is. best for them, and must be best for us. 
He did not let me have my lassie. He took her. Then 
that was best. .1 do not quite see how, for me, and yet I 
am sure it was so. If He Who can, does not, then it is 
better so! 

He can raise up that child you have left at home sick. 
But perhaps over against the ability of actual power there 
is the disability of some larger meaning of His grace for 
you and for that child. 

So we thank God for these pictures. This Jesus is 
here now; 

"The healing^ of His seamless dress 

Is by our beds of pain. 
We touch Him in life's throng and press 
And we are whole again." 

[ 130 ] 



XII 

"He could there do no mighty work." MARK 6: 5. 

Mark 6: 1-6. 

MATTHEW and Mark tell the story of this second visit 
of our Lord to Nazareth. Luke records the first visit, 
about a year earlier, at the beginning of His more public 
ministry in Galilee. There is an evident difference be- 
tween the two stories. On the occasion of the first visit 
He went to Nazareth unaccompanied by His disciples ; 
on this Mark distinctly declares "His disciples follow 
Him." On that first occasion He wrought no miracle; 
on this He laid His hands upon a few sick folk and 
healed them. On that occasion, when with madness they 
attempted to cast Him from the hill, He immediately de- 
parted from the neighbourhood ; on this, He seems to 
have tarried in the adjacent villages. 

During the interval between the first and second visits 
His fame had grown, and His power had been yet more 
wonderfully manifested. But recently His mother and 
brethren had travelled together from Nazareth to Caper- 
naum to dissuade Him from continuing His arduous la- 
bours. They said, " He is beside Himself," and for very 
love of Him they attempted to persuade Him to return 
with them to Nazareth, and to quietness ; but He had de- 
clined to do so. 

Now, just before sending out the twelve who had been 
with Him in preparation for their work, He returned to 
Nazareth, taking them with Him. Thus the men ap- 
pointed to coming service, who since He had appointed 
them to be with Him for special training, had seen Him, 
in the exercise of His power, Master in every realm of 
human experience, now saw Him in a situation where 
"He could do no mighty work." It was a new revela- 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

tion to them of His limitation. They saw Him in such 
conditions that all the power that had been so remarkably; 
manifest spontaneous, victorious, and irresistible was 
now inoperative. This also was part of their training. 

Let us first attempt to understand the unbelief of the 
Nazarenes in its manifestation, in its cause, and in its 
effect; then in the light of that consideration, glance at 
some phases and manifestations of modern unbelief. 

First then, the unbelief of the Nazarenes in its manifes- 
tation, its cause, and its effect. The story, brief as it is, 
reveals first, what these men knew of Jesus. They were 
attempting to reconcile that which was immediate with 
that which they knew of Him before this time. They 
were in His presence, facing what they had heard from 
Him, what they, had seen Him do, or more probably, what 
they had heard that He had been doing. Then they were 
thinking of Him, as they had known Him during those 
years in which He had lived amongst them. 

They asked two questions. First, " Whence hath this 
Man these things ? " and secondly, " What is the wisdom 
that is given unto this Man, and what mean such mighty 
works wrought by His hands ? " The two words, " what 
mean " have been introduced by the translators. In all 
probability they are helpful, but we may substitute two 
others, and read thus : " What is the wisdom that is given 
unto this Man, and what are such mighty works wrought 
by His hands ? " That .carries the real thought of their 
question more correctly to our minds. 

There are two questions. "Whence hath this Man 
these things ? " Secondly, What are these things ? What 
is the wisdom, and what are the works that He is doing? 

The questions which follow reveal the reason of the 
first two. " Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, 
and brother of James, and Joses, and Judas, and Simon? 
and are not His sisters here with us ? " , . 

All this story is perfectly natural, tragically natural! 
Nazareth was a town 4 probably of about ten thousand in- 

[ 132 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

habitants, one of those towns where every one knows 
every one else, and every one knows every one else's busi- 
ness, as a rule a little better than people know their own 
business! So they said of Jesus; this is the carpenter; 
the Man we know so well ; His mother, and brothers and 
sisters are here with us. 

We will now invert the order of our consideration, 
coming secondly to what they mentioned first. What did 
these men know of Jesus? They knew first, that He was 
one of a most ordinary family in Nazareth. They knew 
His brothers, they knew His sisters. 

They knew also that He was "The Son of Mary." 
When He visited Nazareth a year before they did not say 
that. Then they said, " Is not this Joseph's Son? " Now 
they said, " Is not this the carpenter, the Son of Mary? " 
While not daring to dogmatize at this point, I am going to 
suggest a question. How much of suspicion and con- 
tempt may have lurked behind that particular description 
of Him? I do not think there can be any careful read- 
ing of these narratives, without recognizing that there 
were those who fastened upon Jesus an insufferable and 
intolerable stigma. There was another occasion upon 
which He was speaking of His Father, God, and the 
Father of the men by whom He was surrounded. They 
said unto Him and there is the accent of a great satire 
and bitterness in it " We were not born of fornication." 
I believe the sword that pierced through the soul of Mary 
was partly the fact that she also had to share the tragedy 
of misunderstanding, in the presence of the most infinite 
Mystery in all human history. 

Then they knew Him as " the carpenter," the Man to 
Whom they had gone when they had required that yokes 
should be repaired, or ploughs refashioned ; the carpenter 
Whom they had employed to attend to their houses, and 
probably to build them. These were the things they knew 
about Him. 

But they now knew other things about Him, They 

[ 133 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6: 1-6] 

knew that He was a worker of powers. It was impossible 
to deny it. They admitted it. 

Perchance His working of powers was but the report 
which had come from other places, but they knew Him 
as a teacher of wisdom. On that very Sabbath they had 
listened to Him once more, and were amazed at His wis- 
dom. 

Now look carefully at the story. Observe their mental 
activity in the presence of what they knew, and their 
consequent mental attitude. I have already drawn atten- 
tion to the fact that they asked two questions, and we 
want to understand them. They said, " Whence hath 
this Man these things?" Whence hath this Man 
what man? This Man we know so well, Whose broth- 
ers and sisters are with us, the carpenter, the Son of 
Mary ; this Man Who has lived in our town, by our 
side. We have observed no halo about His brow, no 
sign of supernatural glory; He is one of ourselves; 
whence hath this Man these things? Now mark the 
second question. What is this wisdom, and what are 
these works ? 

Lurking beneath these questions was a suspicion, which 
ultimately became a conclusion, that the wisdom which 
had amazed them, and the works that had filled them with 
astonishment, resulted from His complicity with the un- 
derworld of evil. The wisdom was patent, the works 
were evident! How did He get this wisdom; how did 
He do these works? They said in effect; They are not 
His own, these works ; the wisdom He utters is not His 
own. What is the secret of it all? Had they decided that 
the secret was that of His fellowship with God, that 
He was an instrument of God, that God was working 
mighty works through Him, that God was giving Him the 
wisdom which fell from His lips, then they had not been 
offended in Him 1 . They were offended in Him because 
they came to the conclusion that He was in complicity 
with the underworld of evil. 

[ 134 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

This was no new thought. It had been declared before. 
There were those who affirmed that by the Prince of the 
demons He cast out the demons; that He was in very 
deed an instrument of the underworld of evil. Now in 
Nazareth we detect the same line of thought, and the 
suspicion suggested by the question became their con- 
clusion. " They were offended in Him/' they were scan- 
dalized in Him, they tripped over Him and fell, for He 
was a stumbling-block in the way. They were scandalized 
in another sense. They were refusing to submit them- 
selves to His wisdom, or to the appeal of His works, be- 
cause, seeing that they thought they knew all about Him, 
they thought that these things could not be from above, 
but were from beneath. So wrought the minds of these 
men in Nazareth. 

We come now to consider the cause of their unbelief. 
What brought them to this decision ? The solution is not 
far to seek. It may be found in the words of our Lord 
upon this occasion, and in words that He uttered upon 
a similar occasion in Jerusalem, not to His fellow towns- 
men, but to the men of light and leading who were face 
to face with the same problem. In order to understand 
this unbelief, I shall make my appeal to the words He 
spoke here, and to the words He spoke upon the occasion 
referred to, in Jerusalem. 

" A prophet is not without honour, save in his own 
country, and among his own kin, and in his own house." 
These are words which we constantly quote, and there- 
fore I need not tarry with them, but will take the ugly 
heart out of the centre of them, and say that Jesus af- 
firmed that the reason for their unbelief was that of envy, 
of the difficulty of acknowledging the superiority over 
themselves of one of their own number. That needs no 
exposition. We understand it so well. It is a part of 
humanity's inherent vulgarity, which persists through 
all the centuries, and is as powerful to-day as in Nazareth 
in the olden time. It is part of humanity's contempt for 

t '35 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6: 1-6] 

itself, in which humanity imagines that it thinks highly 
of itself; the inability to believe that the man who 
worked by our side could ever be our teacher. We know 
all about him, and therefore we cannot believe in him. 

Observe then some implicates of this attitude as re- 
vealed here in Nazareth. First and this is patent 
its unreasonableness. There were the facts, the wisdom 
which they admitted, the powers which they acknowl- 
edged; but they refused the appeal of the wisdom 
and of the works. What reason was there in such 
refusal? Mark the falseness of the attitude. The 
only escape for them was that of attributing good to 
evil. These good things came out of evil. This wis- 
dom, which they admitted, came from the underworld 
of evil. Yet listen once again to these men of Nazareth, 
and notice the reaction of their criticism upon themselves. 
He is one of us, therefore He is incapable of being an in- 
strument of good ! Mark how their criticism of Him, 
had they understood it, was condemnation of themselves. 
This man, who has worked by my side, cannot teach me 
anything. Why not? Because he is on my level. Then 
you can never teach any one anything. This man who 
comes from our village, cannot come back to our village 
and teach us anything. Why not? Because he is one 
of us. Then the whole community labours under the dis- 
ability of being unfit for doing anything that in itself is 
great. Oh! these critics of Jesus in Nazareth! How 
tacitly and unconsciously they were confessing their own 
limitations. 

But we have not touched the deepest note. It seems 
to me that Jesus was very tender and patient with these 
provincials. He did not say the deepest or profoundest 
or most searching thing there. He reserved it for Jeru- 
salem. There came a time a little later on when He was 
in Jerusalem^ and there in the midst of its light and cul- 
ture and refinement, in Jerusalem as here at Nazareth, 
they asked the question, Whence hath this Man the let- 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

ters, never having learned? In Nazareth, the little pro- 
vincial town, they said, "Whence hath this Man these 
things?" But in Jerusalem they did not ask the ques- 
tion in that way. In Jerusalem they said, " How knoweth 
this Man the grammata, the letters ? " As they might say 
to-day, Whence hath this man culture, never having been 
to Oxford or Cambridge, to Yale or Harvard? That is 
exactly the spirit of the enquiry. Oh, how it persists! 
There are some men preaching to-day who have to live 
in that atmosphere of criticism, and will do so, to the 
end. 

But get behind their criticism, and see the marvel of 
it; that the Galilean Peasant Who astonished the Naza- 
renes, astonished metropolitan Jerusalem also, astonished 
them particularly in the realm of their own thinking. 
When Savonarola began to preach in Florence, people 
would not go to hear him, for they were offended at his 
Lombard accent. The people were living under the sway 
of Lorenzo de' Medici, in that wonderfully cultured age 
when Cardinal Bembo warned his clergy against studying 
the epistles of St. Paul, lest they should spoil their style ! 
Dwight Lyman Moody beginning to preach in London, 
London was offended at his American accent. That is 
illustration by contrast. When Jesus went to Jerusalem 
there was no accent that marked Him as provincial. 
When Moody began to preach here, some people were 
offended at his grammar, or lack of it. When Jesus went 
to Jerusalem they said, " How knoweth this Man the 
letters, having never learned ? " The Nazarenes and the 
men of Jerusalem, the provincials and metropolitans, were 
in the same difficulty. Whence ? When Jesus accounted 
for the fact in Nazareth He said, " A prophet is not with- 
out honour, save in his own country." When He ac- 
counted for it in Jerusalem, He said : " My teaching is 
not Mine, but His that sent Me. If any man willeth to 
do His will, he shall know of the teaching, whether it be 
of God, or whether I speak from Myself." 

[ 137 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

Now with that word of Jesus in mind, we leave these 
metropolitans, and go back to Nazareth, and ask, what 
was the cause of the unbelief? Mark this tremendous 
thing. Jesus said in Jerusalem that willing to do God's 
will, created the capacity for detecting the Divine author- 
ship and authority of what He said. He that wills to do 
the will of God shall know! Perhaps Jesus never said 
a more daring thing than that. In that word He chal- 
lenged the attention of men to the end of time, declaring 
that wherever a man is found who in his heart wants to 
do the -will of God, when that man hears His teaching, 
he will know it as the voice of God. In that word there 
is involved a revelation of the cause of their unbelief. 
The central motive of life was wrong. These men were 
not living solely to do the will of God. That they were 
not doing the will of God is not the point. Jesus did not 
say, He that doeth the will of God shall know; but, " He 
that willeth to do " it. There is a man who is not doing 
the will of God, but he wants to do it, Christ said, I 
can reach that man with Divine authority. Christ did 
not say the perfect man is the one who will know; but 
the man who wants to be perfect. His appeal was to the 
underlying motive, passion, desire of the heart, however 
it might be crippled, broken, paralyzed ; for if the desire 
be there, said Christ, I have that to which I can appeal ; 
and he who has such desire is the man who will discover 1 
the authority of My appeal. 

These men in Nazareth were without that desire ; the 
central motive of life was wrong. Instead of wanting to 
do the will of God, they wanted to please themselves. 
Consequently they were blinded in their outlookj and 
therefore were unbelieving. 

Finally, then, what was the effect of their unbelief? 
Here we face at once the mystery, marvel, wonder, and 
solemnity of the whole meditation. " He could there do 
no mighty work." That is the paralysis of omnipotence. 
Why could He do no mighty work there ? Because God 

[ 138 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

was excluded from the central desire and motive of life ; 
and as a result the men were degraded; when the light 
of His wisdom and His works flashed upon them, they 
loved the darkness, and hurried back into it, refusing 
the light, and so God was shut out anew. "He could 
there do no mighty work." 

In this connection we find another of the most arrest- 
ing statements of the New Testament. " He marvelled " 
not at their unbelief ; but " because of their unbelief." 
Their unbelief was not the object of His marvelling; it 
was the cause of it. If you are inclined to think that 
is a distinction without a difference, I admit at once that 
there is a sense in which the unbelief itself was an ob- 
ject. But He marvelled not at the fact, but at the nature 
of it. Their unbelief opened up a far wider range; 
and when I read that He marvelled, He was astonished 
because of their unbelief, I begin to wonder over what 
area His thinking ranged,, when His soul was thus aston- 
ished. Perfectly understanding the unbelief, He mar- 
velled at it; knowing its genesis He marvelled at it; 
knowing its paralyzing power He marvelled at it. 

I think there is a clear light on this in the Old Testa- 
ment in one passage which, in some respects, has no re- 
lation to this, story. Jeremiah in one high and exalted 
hour of prophetic insight, said this most astonishing 
thing : " My people have changed their glory for that 
which doth not profit. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at 
this, and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith 
Jehovah. For My people have committed two evils ; they 
have forsaken Me, the fountain of living waters, and 
hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold 
no water." From that terrific passage in Jeremiah, take 
out once more the central word, that daring thought 
which assaults the soul, and almost makes it breathless. 
"Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this;" be horribly 
afraid, ye very heavens, at this; be ye desolate in the 
presence of this ! " He marvelled at their unbelief." It 

[ 139 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6: 1-6] 

was God's astonishment in the presence of the unutter- 
able and appalling folly of human unbelief. 

The final effect of their unbelief was that He left 
them, never to return. Yet mark the discrimination of 
His grace. There were a few sick folk, whose longing 
eyes were fixed upon Him, and from whose hearts there 
came to Him an appeal, and He healed them ! There He 
could do no mighty work; and yet so fine in its discrim- 
ination, and so quick and sensitive in its operation was 
the power of His infinite grace, that in the town hard- 
ened in its unbelief, paralyzing His own power, where 
there were weak hearts trembling toward Him, He laid 
His hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them. 

We turn from this meditation upon the strange story 
of Nazareth, and think of modern unbelief. I am at 
once halted by my term. Modern unbelief? We are 
to-day a little in fear of the word modern; indeed, we 
are a little inclined to pay homage to it. I am getting 
somewhat tired of the modern mind, and the perpetual 
burning of incense to the modern mind, this eager, fitful 
anxiety to accommodate faith's declarations, and the 
whole Biblical revelation to the modern mind. 

What is the modern mind? What is the meaning of 
the word modern? Modern simply means of the present 
time; modernus, of the present time; coming from that 
very simple Latin word modo, which means just now. 
Sometimes it is translated, and suitably so, only; some- 
times but. Supposing we substitute some of these words, 
the modern mind, the just now mind. That is better. 
We are getting nearer to the meaning ! The very word, 
modern, contradicts the idea of finality. It has, more- 
over, very close association etymologically with other 
words from which it seems to be entirely severed at the 
present moment. Modern has very close association with 
moderate, and modest. We are apt to forget this some- 
times. 

However modern the mind may be, and however much 

[ 140 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

we may burn incense to it, we need carefully to remember 
the continuity of some elements in men, and in the hu- 
man mind. We need to remember the persistent place 
and importance of motive in mental activity. We need 
also constantly to remember that in all mental activity 
there is an alternative motive; the motive of truth, or the 
motive of casuistry. Behind that is the motive of God, 
or the motive of self. Thus the modern mind, and mod- 
ern unbelief will be found very near akin to that modern 
unbelief of Nazareth. 

What does modern unbelief know about Jesus ? What 
are the established things from which neither faith nor 
unfaith can escape? There is first, the fact of the asso- 
ciation of Jesus with persistent spiritual revolutions, sec- 
ondly -the association of Jesus with persistent, moral 
transformations; and finally the association of Jesus with 
persistent, material betterment. We name the name of 
Jesus. We remember it first as the name found in our 
New Testament. We then think of the name to-day, held 
in high reverence. From that first use of it by the men 
of Nazareth, until this latter use of it, it has had asso- 
ciated with it these things, spiritual revolutions, moral 
transformations, material betterment of the people, 

One other thing modern unbelief must acknowledge. 
All these facts are related to the Jesus of the New Testa- 
ment. All the results which are so rapidly covered by 
the phrases, spiritual revolutions, moral transformation, 
material betterment, have followed where the Jesus of 
these Gospel narratives has been preached and known. 
These results are not due to the Church as an ecclesi- 
astical organization. These spiritual and moral and ma- 
terial results are not due to the theologians. They are 
due to Jesus, to the Jesus of the Gospels. It is as men 
have read these stories, and have seen Him, have lis- 
tened to these very words, that these things have hap- 
pened; and that through all the running centuries. 

Remembering these facts, observe the attitudes of mod- 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

ern unbelief. Modern unbelief admits the first three, 
spiritual revolutions, moral transformations, material bet- 
terment, but denies the fourth; it is busy denying these 
very stories of the Gospels. 

But mark where that kind of unbelief is leading men. 
They are not making the blunder of the Nazarenes of 
attributing good to evil. It is too late in the day to tnake 
that blunder. Modern unbelief is seeking to reconstruct 
the cause ; admitting these results, it is offended in Him. 
It takes Jesus and the Gospel stories, and says, No, no, 
these things cannot spring from such an One. The 
ground of its mental operation may be covered by de- 
claring that on the one hand it denies all the supernatural 
elements; and on the other and this is the very latest 
phase it denies the natural elements. Modern unbelief 
says first of all, that these stories of the supernatural are 
not true. Then modern Unbelief is left to face facts with- 
out a sufficient cause, for if this Jesus be not as these 
Gospels represent Hun of our humanity, and yet other 
than our humanity, closely and intimately related in some 
infinite mystery to the Godhead and to our human ex- 
perience, while yet for ever standing separate therefrom 
if He be not the Logos incarnate, Man born of the 
will and power of God alone, then I am not surprised that 
modern unbelief says that these results cannot have 
sprung from such an One, and so comes at last to this 
final deduction, the denial of the natural, declaring that 
Jesus did not live. 

Then what must unbelief do? Modern unbelief is 
seeking among the things of spiritual darkness, moral 
turpitude, and material degradation, for the things that 
change the darkness into the light, the turpitude into 
morality, and the degradation into liberty. Modern un- 
belief is face to face in that search with an impasse. 

What is the effect of modern unbelief, wherever it 
asserts itself? This, "He could there do no mighty 
works." Modern unbelief without Jesus can work no 

[ 142 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 1-6] 

spiritual revolution, and produce no moral transforma- 
tion; and therefore in the long issue will produce no 
material betterment. All attempts to better the condi- 
tion of humanity fail save as they are under the mas- 
tery of moral conceptions ; and moral conceptions perish 
save as they result from spiritual inspirations. 

We remind ourselves to-day, that His wisdom under- 
lies all modern thinking, and His mighty works have 
moulded all modern history. That wisdom is found in 
the speech of Jesus as recorded, and in those very works 
in the presence of which men are stumbling to-day; in all 
that "He began both to do and teach." 

We ask anew, Whence hath this Man these things? 
We affirm our belief in His own answer as John records 
it, both in regard to the teaching and the doing. Hear 
then these words of Jesus. " The very works that I do, 
bear witness of Me, that the Father hath sent Me." 
Hear Him again. "My teaching is not Mine, but His 
that sent Me." 

Then, by the works and teaching of long ago; pro- 
ceeding in their prevailing power through every succes- 
sive century unto this moment ; these being the things that 
inspire the best thinking of the age, and formulate its 
highest activities; by these things we affirm Him still, 
this Man of Nazareth, the Sent of God, and therefore the 
Saviour of the world. 



[I43l 



XIII 

"And the apostles gather themselves together unto 
Jesus; and they, told Him all things, whatsoever they had 
done, and whatsoever they had taught. And He saith 
unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, 
and rest a while. For there were many coming and go- 
ing, and they had no leisure so much as to eat. And 
they went away in the boat to a desert place apart" 

MARK 6 : 30-32. 

Mark 6: 7-56. 

IN these words we have the account of how the first 
apostolic mission ended. They constitute the minutes 
of a meeting for report and review, most probably held 
in the month of April. 

The story of this first mission of the twelve is told by 
Matthew, Mark, and Luke, in each case with arresting 
and notable brevity. Mark and Luke each give a clear 
and concise statement of the facts, while Matthew gives 
some particulars. 

It is at once an interesting and important story. Its 
brevity is part of its value. There can be no better 
vantage ground for considering the story, than this report 
of the gathering which followed the mission. 

According to His appointment, these men had been 
with Him for a period of training, at least about a year. 
From that moment when from among the number of His 
disciples He selected twelve, and appointed them to be 
with Him in order that ultimately He might send them 
forth to preach and to cast out demons, that period had 
passed. During that time they knew that they were be- 
ing prepared to be sent away from Him to do His work. 
They had been observing Him at His work, and listening 
to His words. In that period they had seen His power 

[ 144 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6:7-56] 

manifested in every department of human life. They 
had observed the wonderful ease with which He had 
healed physical infirmity, the majesty with which He had 
cast out demons ; in full and final authority, they had 
watched His working in the spiritual realm, forgiving 
sin, and bringing peace to the conscience. They had 
finally seen Him unable to do anything, His power para- 
lyzed; He could do no mighty works in Nazareth be- 
cause of their unbelief. 

Then the hour had arrived when He had sent them 
forth, the men who had been with Him so constantly; 
sent them away to be His representatives, to say the 
things He had Himself been saying, to do the things He 
had Himself been doing. On their return this gathering 
was held. Let us then consider the report of the apos- 
tles; the response of the Lord; and then look at the 
things immediately following, as recorded in this chapter. 

First, with regard to the report of the apostles, note 
that it is not printed. There is no account of anything 
they did in detail, no mention of any place to which they 
went definitely, no record of any discourse that either 
of their number delivered, no story of any interesting 
incident. That is the first arresting fact. 

Yet the essential things are revealed. The story begins 
in the sixth chapter of Mark, at verse seven, immediately 
after a declaration which in the arrangement of the Re- 
vised Version is put with singular aptness, quite alone. 
Verse six is divided, almost strangely divided, and yet 
very properly so. The last part of the verse reads thus, 
"And He went round about the villages teaching." This 
immediately followed His rejection at Nazareth. It is 
a lonely little paragraph, hardly a paragraph, a sentence 
merely. For the illumination of that sentence we need 
the longer paragraph and more detailed declaration which 
is found in the Gospel of Matthew at the close of the 
ninth chapter, where Matthew also draws attention, not 
to any one particular occasion, but to the general ministry 

[I4S] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6:7-56] 

of our Lord, to that itinerating ministry which Mark dis- 
misses in this brief sentence. Matthew declares in that 
paragraph that He went about all the cities and villages, 
teaching in their synagogues, preaching the Gospel of the 
Kingdom, healing all manner of diseases ; and that when 
He saw the multitudes He was moved with compassion 
for them, for they were as sheep not having a shepherd, 
distressed and scattered. In that declaration of Mark, so 
briefly made, without note or comment or explanation, in 
the light of the fuller declaration of Matthew, we have 
discovered the inspiration of the apostolic mission. It 
was that of the King's compassion for His people. He 
saw them as sheep without a shepherd, that is as a mob, 
disorganized, lacking the true principle of government; 
for the shepherd figure in Biblical literature, and in all 
Eastern literature, is the true figure of the kingly position. 
Here the King, rejected of His own, is seen moving 
through the villages and cities, and moved with compas- 
sion for the people as He saw them, distressed, scattered 
sheep without a shepherd, a people without the true cen- 
tral authority which is based upon love, expressing itself 
in righteousness. 

That was the inspiration of the apostolic mission. It 
was as the result of this seeing of the people that Jesus 
called the twelve whom He had been preparing, and 
immediately enlarged the sphere and scope of His own 
ministry, by calling them to share His ministry and His 
power. Our Lord was labouring under limited and strait- 
ened circumstances; and in order that more of the vil- 
lages might be reached, that more of the folk of the 
cities might hear the message; that the proclamation of 
the Kingdom with its exhibition of power in the won- 
ders wrought, in the exorcising of demons, in the healing 
of the sick might have a wider area^ He sent these 
twelve men out. 

We also haye here a revelation of the nature of their 
mission. There are distinct differences between their 

[ 146 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6:7-56] 

mission and ours. There are also fundamental similari- 
ties. In their case the mission was limited, and their ma- 
terial equipment was a limited one. Later on our Lord 
changed that entirely. The instructions given to them 
here regarding hospitality were instructions that marked 
the transitory nature of their stay at a place, and the 
necessity for pressing on quickly that ground might be 
covered. Also they were strictly charged, as Matthew 
tells us, not to go to the Gentiles, nor to enter into any 
city of the Samaritans. They were limited to the house 
of Israel. These are things in which this particular mis- 
sion differed from that which is now the full mission of 
the Church. 

But the mission upon which these men were sent was a 
most important one. They went in His name; thus they 
were apostles now who never had been before. They had 
been disciples, but now they became apostles, men sent 
in His name, to represent Him, having entered into the 
fellowship of His authority because they had His mes- 
sage, and because they had the power that He had given 
them to do His works. They were sent forth with a def- 
inite message, "the Kingdom of heaven is at hand." 
They had given to them, special powers over the under- 
world of evil for the casting out of demons^ and to heal 
the sick. 

These men were sent out two by two. Our Lord never 
sent any man alone to a difficult sphere of work. We 
have often done so, and do it yet, and in that way wan- 
der from a fundamental principle. We will presently 
glance back at Matthew's Gospel, and see the couples as 
they went on that first missionary journey, a passage full 
of light and suggestiveness. 

What do we know of their work? No place is indi- 
cated, no journey described, no discourse recorded, no 
special day referred to, no interesting incident recounted. 
But we are told certain things. 

First they preached that men should repent. That is 

[ 147 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 7-56] 

a declaration that needs careful consideration. It does 
not mean that they told men to repent, but that they 
preached in such a way as to produce repentance. While 
this is a brief sentence, how much there is suggested by 
it, of personal conviction, of earnest statement, of argu- 
ment, of appeal. They so preached that men should 
repent 

Their going was that of faith. They had nothing to 
prove to them that they possessed the power except the 
Lord's own word spoken, until they demonstrated their 
possession of it in the presence of demon-possessed men 
and women. A little later in His ministry, when He 
sent out the seventy, they came back amazed at the re- 
sults themselves, and full of joy that "the demons are 
subject unto us." One cannot read this story without 
feeling that when first one of these twelve men stood 
confronted by a demon-possessed man, and commanded 
him to come out, it was a venture of faith. 

One other thing is revealed here; the effect produced 
by their mission. The statement is a little involved, and 
the greater fact is declared in a secondary sentence. This 
is the summary of the whole effect that their mission 
produced : " His name had become known " ; and as a 
result, " King Herod heard " ! What then was the result 
of this first apostolic mission? The cumulative and 
sufficient answer will not take any count of the number 
of demons cast out, there are no statistics ; will not take 
any count of the number of people healed, there are no 
records; but the answer is this: " His name had become 
known." He was given a wider area through which He 
was known, a larger space in which He bulked, as the 
result of their work. Every evangelist gives as the cen- 
tral evidence of the spread of the fame of Jesus, that of 
the terror of Herod. With the story of Herod I am now 
not interested, save as it has a bearing upon this medita- 
tion. Here however are two evidences of the victory 
of the apostles ; the first being that " His name had be- 

[ 148 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6 : 7-56] 

come known " ; secondly, that the incarnation of all evil, 
vulgarity, and sin, trembled, even though he sat upon a 
throne. Such were the effects produced. 

The second thing, to observe in the consideration of 
this report of the twelve is that they told the Lord all 
the things that they had done, and all the things that 
they had taught. Imagine those six reports, not written 
but spoken. Let us look at these couples as they were 
given by Matthew. Notice the grouping. 

"Simon . . . and. Andrew his brother." Andrew was 
the first disciple of Jesus. Simon was his brother, whom 
he had brought to Christ. They had been somewhere 
working together ; we do not know where. 

" James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother." 
John had been with Andrew when Andrew first followed 
the Lord, and I think he went and found James. That 
is speculation, and may be dismissed. These brothers 
went together. What they did we do not know. I can 
believe they had some fiery times, these Boanerges men ! 

The next two ; Philip, who was the first disciple whom. 
Jesus definitely called, and with him. Bartholomew. This 
man Philip went and found Nathanael. So Philip, the 
quiet man, always on the outskirts of the crowd, helpful, 
sympathetic toward the strangers, and Nathanael the 
guileless, went somewhere; we do not know where. I 
think their meetings were much quieter than those of 
the first and second couples. 

" James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus." No one 
knows much about them. There are always two or three 
people in the Lord's elect company whom no one knows 
much about; but He knows all about them. 

" Thomas, and Matthew." Thomas the sceptic, which 
simply means the man who looks at things from a dis- 
tance, and investigates them. Matthew, the man whose 
business it was to keep accounts and give records. They 
went together, and I do not think that I could describe 
their meetings. 

I *49 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6 : 7-56] 

Then there were two others^ "Simon the Canan- 
sean," the Zealot, the member of a hot political party, and 
" Judas Iscariot." These were the couples. 

Now they had all returned, and were giving in their 
reports, and they told Him all that they had done. 
There is no list of deeds, there is no schedule of results. 
They went over with Him the things they had said. They 
told all to the Lord from Whom they had received their 
message, from Whom they had derived their power, to 
Whom alone they were responsible. Those reports 
would probably be very varied. I am glad that they are 
not printed. We might have had a School adopting the 
methods of James and John, the School of Boanerges; 
and another adopting the methods of Philip and Na- 
thanael, the School of the quiet men; and so on. In the 
telling of everything to the Lord, and in His presence, 
they would discover the necessity for the man who goes 
about quietly, the Nathanael type of man; and the men 
who move like thunder-storms, James and John ! 

So we come to the second suggestion of the text, that 
namely of the response of the Lord. " Come ye your- 
selves apart into a desert place, and rest a while." As we 
read the words we should be careful lest we rob them of 
all their beauty by wholly spiritualizing them. Of course 
they have spiritual significance and intention. But to 
interpret them in the true sense, we need to go back 
in imagination, and look at the scene. Look into the 
face of Jesus, into those wonderful eyes that we have 
never seen with eyes of sense, but yet know so much 
about, those eyes which are always looking. The New 
Testament is full of the seeing and the looking of Jesus. 
He looked upon these men and listened to them. He 
noted the fact of their physical weariness, and began 
there. " Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and 
rest a while " ; and we will not go anywhere, where we 
have to walk; let us get into the boat, and go over the 
sea. So they went. The rest was mental; no teaching 

t'50] ' 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6: 7-56] 

for a little while and no thinking. The rest was spiri- 
tual; no conflict with the underworld of evil for a while, 
and no praying for a little. 

What were the conditions? They were to go with 
Him. They were to go themselves. They were to go 
apart. They were to go to the desert place. What a 
revelation is this of the understandingness of Jesus. 
What a revelation it is of the tender character of Jesus. 
Some people do not understand this, because they are 
well and strong, and are fit and eager for service. There 
are men and women who understand! He knew that 
these men were tired, and He said, Come and rest a 
while. Never mind any more journeyings for a little 
time. Do not think ; do not pray for a little time. Rest ! 

If the story is a revelation of His understandingness, 
of His care, I go further and say it is a stupendous rev- 
elation of His wisdom. It is a rebuking revelation to 
some of us. Recently I came across this little paragraph 
fromAmiel: 

"We must know how to put occupation aside, which 
does not mean that we must be idle. In an inaction which 
is meditative and attentive the wrinkles of the soul are 
smoothed away. The soul itself spreads, unfolds, and 
springs afresh; and, like the trodden grass of the road- 
side or the bruised leaf of a plant, repairs its injuries, 
becomes new, spontaneous, true, and original." 

So Jesus said to these men : " Come ye yourselves 
apart, and rest a while." Did they rest ? The first thing 
was the boat, and a short voyage and not in a modern 
Atlantic liner! It was a voyage to Eastern Bethsaida; 
for there are two places of that name, one in the north- 
east, to which they went; and the other on the western 
shore of the lake. It was a voyage of tea or twelve 
miles of quietness and bodily rest. 

But when they came to the desert place crowds were 
waiting. Then Mark records that He, the King Who had 

3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 6: 7-56] 

sent them forth, and Who having received them and their 
report, had called them to rest, was moved with com- 
passion for that waiting crowd ; because they were as 
sheep having no shepherd. The inspiration that had 
sent them forth was still burning within the heart of the 
King, and He gave Himself to teach the multitudes. 
The disciples did nothing. They were resting, as they 
watched Him, for Whom there was no rest, until He 
had accomplished His mission finally. They watched Him 
Who had to say in answer to criticism, " My Father 
worketh even until now, and I work." They watched 
Him give Himself once again with unstinted sacrifice 
to the crowds. But they were resting. Oh yes ! they had 
their rest. I think I know enough of how they felt that 
day. It was a wonderfully restful time, such as that man, 
whose work is preaching, has, when he sits quietly down 
in some little village chapel, and listens to another man 
breaking the bread of life. No responsibility; just the 
quiet rest of it all. Oh yes ! they had their rest. I have 
often said they had no rest; and thought they had not, 
until I began to look more carefully. They had their 
rest, but He did not. There was no resting time for 
Him during the days of His flesh. 

But now glance at the two pictures which immediately 
follow ; the story of the feeding of the five thousand, and 
the story of the storm. 

When the day was far spent the crowds that Jesus 
had been teaching became a responsibility. The disciples 
said to Him, " Send them away, that they may go into 
the country and villages round about, and buy themselves 
somewhat to eat." That was the voice of the apostles. 
They said, " Send them away " ; but Jesus said, " Give ye 
them to eat." Then the apostles spoke again, " Shall we 
go and buy two hundred shillings' worth of bread, and 
give them to eat ? " It was the inquiry of protest. Jesus 
said, " How many loaves have ye ? " They replied, 
" Five, and two fishes." And He said, " Bring them 

'5* 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6 : 7-56] 

hither to Me." The results were that the multitudes were 
filled ; and the disciples gathered up twelve basketf uls. 

The story of the storm is one concerning these men, in 
the way of His will. He asked them to enter the boat, 
and cross back again to the other shore. They went. 
Remember that the way of His will was the way of the 
storm. He sent them into the storm, and there is a 
strong word used here concerning that storm. We have 
translated it " distressed." Far more literally we may 
render, They were "tormented in rowing." Why did 
they not turn back to the other shore? The wind was 
contrary. There was the difficulty. The wind was blow-- 
ing off the shore to which He had commanded them to 
go. It would have been the simplest thing to tack, to put 
about, and run before the wind. But no ! they must not 
do that Why not? He sent them in that direction! 
They were tormented in the very path of obedience. But 
it was also the way of His power. He came after them. 
The wind was contrary to Him also, but did not hinder 
Him. The waters were storm-tossed for Him also, but 
they constituted the pavement of His victorious footsteps. 
When presently He was in the boat, the storm ceased. 

Now look at the apostles, and mark the things that are 
said concerning them carefully. They were amazed. 
Why were they amazed ? Mark says that it was because 
" They understood not concerning the loaves." These 
were apostles, not outsiders. Then why was it that they 
understood not concerning the loaves ? Mark tells us that 
their heart was hardened; which means that they were 
dull, stupid, and therefore did not understand the miracle 
of the loaves, and consequently they were amazed at His 
mastery of the elements. 

Now in all this my purpose has been that we should 
see the apostles. It was an interesting and revealing 
meeting when they told Him all they had done, and all 
they had taught; and the things following are equally 
interesting and revealing. So these were the apostles; 

[153] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 6 17-56] 

these men, who when they had been on that mission and 
returned, could only say in the presence of the hungry 
crowd, Send them away to buy; these men, who when 
Jesus told them to do the most natural thing, and feed 
them, argued, Shall we go and buy two hundred shillings' 
worth of bread; these men, who when He mastered the 
supernatural personally and for them, were amazed ; these 
men who did not understand; these men who were dull 
and stupid! These were the apostles. Thank God! I 
think I can pray now, and go on a little longer. They 
were His apostles. He chose thein, and He makes no 
mistakes. Consequently what is the ultimate truth that 
breaks upon the soul after such a consideration? That 
in all our service we must say, " Not unto us, O Jehovah, 
not unto us, But unto Thy name give glory." 

He chooses, Oh gracious thing! He equips, Oh most 
wondrous thing ! He uses, Oh amazing thing ! He gives 
rest, and He patiently bears with all inability to under- 
stand Him in the presence of the hungry multitude, and 
all the inability to understand Him when He masters the 
waves and the winds. Oh tender and beautiful thing ! 

My deliberate conclusion is that the report is hardly 
worth printing ; and it never is ! It would be well for us 
if we told the Lord more often what we do and teach; 
and told each other less often. 



[ 154 I 



XIV 

" Ye leave the commandment of God, and hold fast the 
tradition of men. . . . Full well do ye reject the 
commandment of God, that ye may keep your tradition." 

MARK 7 : 8, 9. 
Mark 7: 1-23. 

THE narrative of these first twenty-three verses of the 
seventh chapter of Mark's Gospel stands in striking con- 
trast to that of the last twenty-seven verses of the previ- 
ous chapter. That was the story of the gathering to the 
Lord of His apostles. This is the story of the gathering 
to the Lord of His adversaries. The respective begin- 
nings show this. " And the apostles gather themselves to- 
gether unto Jesus/' "And there are gathered together 
unto Him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes, which 
had come from Jerusalem." The first was the gathering 
of friends whose mission was to help Him. The second 
was the gathering of foes, whose purpose was to hinder 
Him. 

That this story is of special importance there can be 
no doubt. These men who gathered to the Lord came 
officially from Jerusalem. The sending out of the twelve 
had drawn new attention to Jesus, impressing even Herod 
in the royal palace. The movement in Galilee was evi- 
dently growing, and that rapidly. The religious leaders 
in Jerusalem were perturbed, and sent a deputation to 
investigate. The occasion of controversy, apparently a 
trifling one, was nevertheless a most revealing one. In it, 
the religious ideal for which these men stood, is clearly 
manifested. The way in which our Lord dealt with them 
is singularly arresting in its anger, satire, directness, and 
scorn; and in that careful explanation of the meaning of 
His method which He subsequently gave to His disciples. 

I 155 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

In this incident two opposing ideals of religion are seen 
coming into conflict; that of the Pharisees and scribes, 
and that of Jesus. Theirs was that of the punctilious 
observance of traditions ; His was that of simple obedi- 
ence to the commandment of God. He shocked them in 
the habits of His disciples; they shocked Him in their 
disregard of the will of God. 

Now there is a sense in which this story does not 
startle us. This is due to the fact that this whole question 
of ceremonial washings appears to us as patently futile, 
and we have a sense of real satisfaction in the way in 
which our Lord dealt with these men. But in that very- 
feeling of satisfaction there is peril. It may be that our 
satisfaction results from a very superficial understanding 
of what our Lord really meant. If we can disengage the 
elemental principles from the incidental circumstances, 
we may be startled., perchance, quite as much as these 
men were. 

If our Lord were here to-day in bodily form, He would 
not say to us the things He said to these men, because we 
should not say to Him the things they said. But I am 
not at all sure that He would not shock very many of 
those who bear His name, not so much by what He would 
do, as by the apparently religious things He would not do. 
That method of statement may bring us nearer to the 
real meaning of this story. 

Let us then endeavour to understand this clashing of 
ideals revealed in the controversy between the deputation 
from Jerusalem, and Jesus. This we will do by con- 
sidering, first, the history and intention of tradition ; sec- 
ondly, the genesis of obedience to tradition as Jesus laid 
it bare on this occasion ; and thirdly and finally, the effects 
of tradition as our Lord revealed them. 

It is pertinent therefore to our enquiry that we first 
simply ask what was meant by tradition upon this occa- 
sion, and in this atmosphere. What were these traditions 
to which our Lord made reference, not here alone, but 

[156] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

again and again in the course of His public ministry, 
always in order to denounce them? They were precepts 
orally transmitted, illustrating, applying, expounding the 
written law. Some of the later Jewish teachers of that 
period claimed that the traditions were orally given by 
Moses. Earlier teachers had claimed that the traditions 
came from the elders who were associated with Moses. 
I am not proposing to argue this matter, but simply say 
that neither position was warranted. 

The history and development of the traditions to which 
our Lord made reference here, and to which these men 
themselves made reference, were largely Pharisaic. The 
whole Pharisaic movement was born in the period. of 
Jewish history, of which we practically have no record 
in our Bible. It was born, of an intensely religious con- 
viction. It is sometimes said and the definition is morel 
accurate than we are always willing to admit that the 1 
Pharisees were originally the Puritans of their age. In 
that period the people had been gathered together and 
localized at Jerusalem, under different leaders; and 
Babylonian and Greek influences were threatening alto- 
gether the lonely separateness of the Hebrew people. 
The Pharisees were men who at this time had banded 
themselves together to maintain, by all means in their 
power, the distinction between the Jewish people and 
the nations surrounding them. 

There arose at the same time the order of the scribes, 
who were always associated with the Pharisees. Not all 
scribes were Pharisees, and not all Pharisees were 
scribes; but there was the closest association between 
them. The work of the scribes was that of taking the 
law of God, illustrating it, and applying it to local cir- 
cumstances, and local situations. As men enquired: 
What does the law of God mean for us at this point, or 
this juncture ? the scribes interpreted the law of God. 

Gradually they formulated precepts to meet the new 
conditions. These precepts constantly increased in num- 

[ 157 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

her, in an attempt to keep pace with the ever-growing 
complexity of the conditions of lifCi until there had 
grown up a great body of traditions ; traditions which in 
the first place were intended to be interpretations of the 
law, and applications of the law to local circumstances; 
traditions which in the second place became interpreta- 
tions of traditions, and applications of traditions; and 
traditions in the third place, which were interpretations of 
interpretations of interpretations of traditions! So the 
movement ran, until there existed between the people of 
God and the law of God such a mass of tradition, that 
the law of God itself was out of sight, and practically 
forgotten. 

Into the midst of this ideal of religious life Jesus came. 
The intention of tradition was that of the maintenance 
of religion. Here therefore we must make a very neces- 
sary distinction, which distinction our Lord made so 
graphic and patent in the words of our text, between the 
traditions and the law of God. That distinction must be 
made even in the highest realm of the consideration of 
tradition. The law of God must be kept separate and 
apart, quite alone from any human interpretation of it, 
which is a tradition. The law was given, and men in such 
sincere and devout ages, obediently desiring to maintain 
the law, interpreted the law to men. That was tradition, 
human tradition, human interpretation of the law. 

To leave the Hebrew atmosphere, it may be that some 
may think this can have very little application to us. 
Certainly in the beginning of the Christian era, within 
the Christian Church, there were very few traditions. 
Those early Christians lived in such close relationship 
with the first Christian movement, that traditions were 
very few. That is wonderfully illustrated in the book of 
the Acts of the Apostles, in which if there be one thing 
that is more manifestly and gloriously surprising than an- 
other is seen the freedom of life in the Spirit. A par- 
ticular Church doctrine cannot be based upon the Acts 

[ 158 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

of the Apostles. A formulated creed cannot be found in 
the Acts of the Apostles. The warrant for any particular 
liturgical service cannot be deduced from anything there 
written. The Spirit is the Spirit of freedom, the Spirit 
of love, Who fulfils Himself in a thousand ways, but has 
always the one life. As the book of the Acts is read from i 
that standpoint, we are greatly impressed with the fact 
that if we would make our appeal for anything that is 
.traditional, we cannot go to the book of the Acts of the / 
Apostles for our confirmation. 

But traditions came within the Christian Church; they 
grew in number; and had exactly the same intention, that 
of maintaining the strength and character of the life. 
Systematic expressions of the belief of the Christian 
Church, are but systematic expressions of belief, and are 
to be numbered among the traditions of the Christian 
Church; sincere, wonderful, but human interpretation 
only. When some man or number of men, some college; 
apostolic band, or council of the Church, gathered to- 
gether and formulated into definite expression the doc- 
trines of the Church, they were giving their traditions, 
and human interpretations. So also came in process of 
time certain definitely declared forms of Church polity, 
as men wrought out the things they believed concerning 
the true method of the government of the Church, in 
order to its fulfilment of life and service. Thus there 
grew up in process of time such forms of Church life as 
differed from each other by traditions. That most won- 
derful of all, the Book of Common Prayer, is one of the 
more modern illustrations of what I mean. It is a won- 
derful compilation ! It is impossible for any man to join 
in a service where it is used without feeling that he is 
being brought into the true atmosphere of reverent wor- 
ship ; but it is a tradition, a set form of worship arranged 
by men. 

Sometimes these traditions take other forms : uniform- 
ity of dress, modes of common speech; until the Church 

[159] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

of God to-day is a mass of tradition, conflicting, con- 
tradictory, as great as were the traditions that had cov- 
ered up the Hebrew religion in the time of Christ. 

Here again the necessary distinction must be made be- 
tween the revelation which is given to us, which is au- 
thoritative and final; and these traditions. The revela- 
tion is that of the Old Testament Scriptures interpreted 
by the New, and never apart from the New; and that of 
the New Testament Scriptures, in their revelation of 
Christ, and in their declaration of the principles of Chris- 
tian service in the great writings of the Apostles and 
others. We must remember to distinguish between these, 
and traditions which are but human interpretations of 
them. Every creed of the Church, Athanasian, Nicene, 
or any other, is but an attempt to interpret the things of 
the Oracles of God; reverent attempts, made necessary 
in some hour of crisis, when for the crystallization of 
truth into the phrases and terms of the hour, men were 
making an attempt which had to be made; but after all, 
they were human interpretations, and nothing more. 

Notice in the second place, what our Lord said to these 
men concerning the genesis, not of tradition, but of obedi- 
ence to tradition: "Ye leave the commandment of God, 
and hold fast the tradition of men." This is a most star- 
tling announcement. He declared in that statement that the 
movement which leads men into subjugation to tradition 
is one of departure from the commandment of God. 
Directly a precept made for an occasion becomes a bind- 
ing tradition to be subsequently obeyed, it is evil. Di- 
rectly a creed formulated for an hour is crystallized into 
that which is to dominate the thought of men for subse- 
quent ages, it is a curse. Directly a form of worship, or 
a form of church organization made necessary by the 
exigency of an age, is stereotyped into something that is 
to arrest the mind and soul of men perpetually, it be- 
comes an evil thing. Men only submit to such when they 
pass out of immediate relationship with God. The in- 

[ 160 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

dividual soul never submits to the partial human inter- 
pretation, if that soul is living in immediate fellowship with 
God. The corporate Church of God, living in fellowship 
with the living Head, knowing His truth and righteous- 
ness and prevailing power, will never suffer itself to be 
brought under the trammels of human teachers or the 
arrangements of human office-bearers. Ever and anon 
we have seen such a corporate Church of Jesus Christ, 
almost always to be spoiled within a decade by tradition. 
The first movement toward the mastery of the soul by 
tradition is the movement of that soul away from imme- 
diate, direct, first-hand fellowship with God. 

All this line of thinking is illuminated strangely and 
wonderfully by the habit of Jesus. Follow Him along the 
way of His earthly ministry, from that strange and won- 
derful hour when hearing the voice of the Hebrew 
prophet, He emerged from the silent seclusion of Naza- 
reth, and commenced the work of public teaching; and 
watch Him carefully. The whole truth may be sum- 
marized by declaring that Jesus violated these traditions 
systematically, intentionally, resolutely. Gather out the 
instances which reveal His attitude toward the Sabbath, 
and it will be found that the first cause of quarrel be- 
tween Himself and the rulers was His violation of the 
tradition concerning the Sabbath. 

Then observe that again and again, in spite of the ob- 
jection which they raised, which was bitter with the bit- 
terness of great anger and hatred, He resolutely set Him- 
self to do the same thing, over and over again. He 
wrought His wonders of healing on the Sabbath, violating 
their traditions, and trampling them under His feet, 
shocking them with the irreligiousness, as it seemed to 
them of His attitude toward the Sabbath. 

I am not for a moment inferring that our Lord violated 
the Sabbath. He never did so; but He violated their 
false conceptions concerning it. He flung Himself per- 
sistently, in habit, word, deed, and attitude, against all 

[ 161 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

those traditions that stood between the soul of the people 
and their God. 

Let us come away once more from the immediate and 
the incidental, and see the application of this teaching. In 
the examples already taken, mark the continuity of re- 
yligious principles. No man who is living in true fellow- 
i ship with God will consent to be mastered mentally by any 
/ creed that ever yet has been prepared for him. The 
proportion in which a man knows the high life of fellow- 
ship with God, is the proportion in which he knows that 
no creed his brother may write for him, no creed he may 
write for himself, can be final. No man or company of 
men, no Church living in true fellowship with God, will 
consent that its polity be stereotyped, or will confuse form 
with power, or life with the method of its expression. I 
have sometimes said, and shocked some of my friends by 
saying it, that I could hold a brief for every known form 
of Church polity on the basis of the New Testament. I 
could argue at length^ if not eloquently, for Baptists. I 
could do the same for Presbyterianism, for Episcopalian- 
ism, and of course for Congregationalism. And I never 
forget that my argument would be based upon this fact, 
that life is more than a form of expression. Life may 
change its form of expression under different circum- 
stances, with the coming of different needs. Conse- 
quently I can never quarrel with my brethren who are 
not following my conviction so far as Church polity is 
concerned. But I must never allow myself to be mas- 
tered by any polity when it interferes with my relation 
to life in the Lord Jesus Christ. Depend upon it, the 
souls who are enslaved by some form of ecclesiastical 
polity are weak and anaemic. The soul of man has im- 
mediate, first-hand fellowship with God. I hold that to 
be peculiarly true of any order of service that ever yet 
has been arranged for the worship of the saints, of any 
uniformity of dress, or manner of speech that has been 
adopted by the saints. 

[ 162 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

This teaching of Christ flings itself with force against 
every habit of excommunication on the basis of human 
creeds. It makes its undying protest against the habit of 
isolation on ecclesiastical grounds. It denies the possi- 
bility of stereotyped orders of service, so that there is no 
room for the movement of the life of God. It smiles with 
patience on all peculiarities of dress and modes of speech 
that are supposed to be symbols of sanctity, and of rela- 
tionship to Christ. And the smile is not satirical^ it is 
sympathetic. 

Further, in this word of Jesus spoken long ago, there is 
a deeper note. He revealed here not only the genesis of 
obedience to tradition as being that of departure from 
God ; but He revealed in the most startling way the ef- 
fects of obedience to tradition. All we have already said 
needs qualification by way of explanation. His violation 
was not for the sake of violation. He only violated the 
tradition because it violated the law which it was intended 
to honour. 

As we come to the remainder of this story, we hear the 
things He said as they reveal the real reason of His satire, 
His anger, His ruthless violating of all human traditions. 
He made it perfectly clear first of all that the tradition of 
man misses its own aim. Men are still defiled, wash they 
never so often. The inner life is never reached by ex- 
ternal ceremony. External observance is only valuable as 
an expression of an inner life, and the expression of the 
inner life cannot be stereotyped. Consequently if the 
tradition be made, that there must be ceremonial ablution 
before men eat a meali what is the value of it? Unless 
the ablution be an outward physical sign of inward spir- 
itual cleansing, it is worthless. When the washing of bap- 
tism is the outward and physical sign of the inward and 
invisible grace, then it is useful and in its proper place. 
But when a man shall imagine that the ablution, the 
washing of baptism makes him a child of God, an in- 
heritor of the Kingdom of heaven, he is mastered by a 

I 163 1 " 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

tradition that is blighting him, and robbing him of the 

faith he desires to realize, and misses his aim. 

More than that, it stultifies its own purpose. The law 
of God, which tradition was intended to interpret and 
maintain, is insulted by it. Here again is an illustration 
with which we are very familiar, and yet how much light 
it throws upon the time in which Jesus lived, and then 
upon our own times. Their tradition was that a man 
might escape responsibility for father or mother by de- 
claring that that which he could give to help them, was 
Corban, dedicated, given to God. Look at the picture 
Christ presents. A man who had a responsibility in 
material things, for a father and a mother, escaped his 
responsibility by declaring that that which might have 
helped them was dedicate to the Temple. Oh ! the anger, 
the scorn of Jesus ! He says, " Full well do ye reject the 
commandment of God that ye may keep your tradition." 
The deepest thing any human life knows of a man's re- 
lationship to God his duty to father and mother is to 
be violated in the interests of his duty to God; and this 
is what tradition does ! Thus Jesus declared that me 
are brutalized by tradition. Men mastered by tradition 
become the slaves of these human interpretations, and 
the very springs of compassion are dried up, and all the 
finest parts of the nature are destroyed. Thus religion is 
destroyed, when men are mastered by traditions. 

These things persist. However excellent the intention 
of tradition, however valuable the precept in the hour 
when it was formulated for a local circumstance or con- 
dition ; if that tradition take the place of the law of God ; 
if that opinion of the past interfere between the soul and 
its immediate contact with God; if that expression of 
truth, or order of Church government, or method of wor- 
ship coming from the past, exclude the soul from imme- 
diate fellowship with God, make impossible that hearing 
of the soul that catches the wind that bloweth where it 
listeth, destroy that freedom of life that only comes where 

[ 164 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

the soul has direct access to God; then the tradition 
blights and blasts, however good its first intention may 
have been. 

So finally, looking at the whole scene of the past, again 
being arrested by the earnestness of Christ here, by the 
directness of His word and the almost fierce invective of 
it, and the satire of it; let us remind ourselves that 
Christ's conception of religion as that of the direct obe- 
dience of the soul to the direct law of God, is the only 
one which can ensure to the soul its full realization of 
its own life. It is only in proportion as we individually 
find our way into that relationship which our Lord came 
to make possible as Saviour, and for evermore interpret 
through the Spirit, that life can be fulfilled. 

This conception of life is at once difficult and easy. It 
is difficult. It seems to us so much simpler to live by^ 
rule than by principle, so much easier to find human 
sanction than to discover the will of God, so much easier 
to take an order from priest, or pope, or council, than to 
discover the will of God. There are moments of stress 
and strain when almost every man, while not likely to 
become a Romanist, wishes he could persuade himself to 
be one! If we only could make ourselves believe that 
the word spoken to us by another were the infallible 
word! But we cannot! It is against that pernicious 
tendency that Christ flung Himself. We must deal with 
God directly, immediately. The moment we admit any 
kind of tradition, or the exercise of authority that is 
based upon tradition, to come between the soul and God, 
we are impoverishing the soul, rendering it anaemic, weak, 
sickly. This conception of life is difficult. 

But it is also easy, because when once the soul dare 
break through the trammels, and become utterly careless 
of human opinion, and walk with God, it finds a path of 
reason, a path of power, a path of joy. I repeat, when 
once a soul dare break through the trammels. That is 
the point of difficulty. We are so much in the power of 

I I6 5 I 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 1-23] 

tradition that there are some who dare not stay away 
from a service because people might imagine they were ir- 
religious ! I believe there are a great many services most 
regularly held, that Jesus Christ would never attend! 
j What we need to-day, if I know the temper of my own 
I time, and the spirit of my own age, more than anything 
else is a return to that fine independence of soul which is 
created by loyalty to the Saviour and King, that brings 
men and women back to God, bursting the bonds and 
trammels of tradition. 

In the moment of the soul's yielding to Him, will come 
the great hour in which the world will see the Kingdom 
of God, and the glory of its King. Let us become free- 
men by becoming His bondslaves. Let us know the de- 
struction of every yoke of bondage, by wearing the one 
yoke that He places upon us. Let us practise our bond- 
age, and so realize our freedom. 



[166] 



XV 
" He hath done all things well." MARK 7 : 37. 

Mark 7:24-8:26. 

IN this paragraph we have the story of the last things 
in the public ministry of Jesus, prior to the confession of 
Peter at Csesarea Philippi, and the new teaching and 
method which followed that confession. 

The story contained in this paragraph may be divided 
into two parts. The first gives the account of a Gentile 
ministry of Jesus which was new, and must have been 
startling to His disciples, and to others. He travelled 
north, away from the earlier scene of His labour, so far 
as Tyre, and there He healed the daughter of the Syro- 
phoenician woman. Then, proceeding still further north, 
and bearing to the northeast, He came to Sidon, travelling 
in a southerly direction through Decapolis, the country 
of the Ten Cities, all the while in Gentile territory, exer- 
cising a niinistry among these Gentiles similar to that 
which He had been exercising among the Hebrew people. 
All this is contained in chapter seven, from verse twenty- 
four to the end of the ninth verse of chapter eight. 

The second part of the paragraph, commencing at the 
tenth verse of chapter eight, and ending at the twenty- 
sixth verse, takes us back again into a hostile atmosphere. 
As He returned across the sea to Dalmanutha, He was 
immediately met by Pharisees and Sadducees demanding 
a sign. Then, once more crossing the sea in company of 
His disciples, He warned them, and dealt with their blind- 
ness. The brief story ends with the account of their 
arrival on the other side on the northeastern shore of 
the lake again in Gentile territory, and the opening of 
the eyes of the blind man. 

The text, " He hath done all things well," is resolutely 

[ 167 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7 : 248 : 26] 

borrowed from the context. The words were spoken by 
the Gentiles, and had special reference to the healing 
ministry which Jesus had been exercising in Decapolis, of 
which Mark 'gives no account, but which Matthew re- 
cords quite clearly, and to this wonderful miracle, the 
opening of the ears of the deaf man, and the straightening 
out of his twisted tongue. It was in the presence of these 
evidences of His power that these Gentiles said, " He 
hath done all things well." 

If, however, I admit that I resolutely borrow the text 
from its context, let me hasten to add it is not ruthlessly 
so taken; for accepting the conclusion of these Gentiles, 
I propose simply to make a wider application of it ; to let 
this declaration cover the whole of these events, and so 
form a fitting conclusion to that survey of the public 
ministry of our Lord which at this point ceases. By its 
use in this way, I desire to fasten attention upon Him. 

In these events we see Him in His relation to human- 
ity in its varied needs. We will take that outlook, ignor- 
ing the racial division which we have already recognized 
as between the Gentile and the Jew; simply looking at 
Him as He stands confronting these varied phases and 
illustrations of human need. Such a meditation will 
constrain us at the conclusion to return to the text and 
say, " He hath done all things well." 

We know these stories, and are indeed very familiar 
with them. We glance at them once again, desiring, as 
we move in front of the pictures they present in imagina- 
tion, specially to observe the need represented. 

The first picture is that of the Syrophcenician woman. 
Out of the mass of detail that we have here in Mark and 
in Matthew, let us attempt to gather the central value. 
The revelation of need supremely represented here is that 
of the sorrow of a mother. Any careful reading of the 
story must bring something of pathos into the voice, as 
the account is read of how the woman besought Him that 
He would cast the demon out of her little daughter, 

I l68 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7:248:26] 

Leave the Lord out of view for the moment, and all the 
difficulties which gather about the story, and see that one 
woman in agony about her child. Admit the disabilities 
under which she laboured, which these evangelists are 
both careful to point out, Mark speaking of her as a 
Greek, which simply means a Gentile, and not a Greek 
only, but a Syrophcenician. Matthew does not speak of 
her as a Gentile, neither adds the fact that she was Syro- 
phcenician ; but, taking the more general term, he at once 
says a Canaanitish woman. Humanity is revealed as we 
look at the woman, and the elemental superiority to 
racial disadvantage is seen in the agony of the mother- 
heart. Oh yes, she was a Greek, and not a Hebrew, but 
she was a mother ! She was a Syrophcenician, a Canaan- 
itish woman, one of the accursed race, but she had a 
heart, and it was a mother's heart! There, flashing out 
on the canvas, is this revelation of a touch of humanity 
that is independent of advantage, and superior to dis- 
advantage, mightier than racial differences ; and in the 
wail of the woman we have the cry of the heart of a 
mother. 

The next picture that Mark gives, is that of a man 
deaf, and having an impediment in his speech. This is a 
picture of personal disability. The whole point of the 
picture, however, as it occurs here in the Gospel, is not 
that of the man's personal disability. It is rather that 
of the fact that this man in this Gentile region was 
brought to Jesus by his friends. It is never safe to base 
too much upon the argument of silence, but at least it is 
an interesting fact to note that the man made no appeal to 
Christ. He did not come to Christ on his own initiative. 
His friends brought him, and besought Jesus that He 
would touch him. So while the man stands central in the 
picture, in some senses, I look again, and in the sympathy 
of these men for their friend, men outside the company of 
Israel, outside that racial relationship which was religious 
in its function, I see something human. I am again im- 

[ 169 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 248 : 26] 

pressed by the elemental superiority over racial disad- 
vantage. Oh, yes, these men were Gentiles, but they were 
men. Oh! yes, these people also probably were of the 
Canaanitish race, but they had sympathy in their heart ; 
witness their effort to bring their friend to Jesus. 

The next picture is one full of life, colour, and move- 
ment. It is that of a great multitude, at least four thou- 
sand people, gathered together; and it is a picture of 
these people hungry. Do not spiritualize the word too 
soon. There are spiritual values undoubtedly in these 
miracles of feeding, but let us begin on the true level 
a literal hunger, a physical hunger, a need for food. The 
hunger of these people was the outcome of their attrac- 
tion to Jesus, and their determination to stay by Him. 
Mark the words of Christ, " because they continue with 
Me now three days, and have nothing to eat." Here was 
a situation of real need, arising within the material and 
the physical. These people were hungry, and it was the 
hunger of health, and thus ought to be met and satisfied, 
lest journeying back, they faint. This was an experience 
of physical weakness ! 

The next is a very different picture. It is that of a 
deputation, an official deputation, almost certainly, of the 
Pharisees and Sadducees. Mark says " Pharisees " only, 
but comparing the account with Matthew's Gospel, which 
is necessary for the understanding of some subsequent 
things, we find the Sadducees came with them, demanding 
a sign from Him. Who were these men who came to 
Jesus? The religious leaders of the hour, the men who 
were religious teachers in Jerusalem, the spiritual rulers 
of the people, men whose office it was to interpret to the 
people the law of God, to reveal to the people the way 
and the will of God, 

They were in conflict; with each other, these Sadducees 
and Pharisees. The Pharisees stood for the spiritual 
ideal of religion. While they trammelled that ideal by 
tradition, and hindered its working, nevertheless they 

[ 170 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7:248:26] 

stood for spiritual things ; or if we may borrow, for the 
sake of illustration, a somewhat questionable word, they 
stood for the supernatural in religion. On the other 
hand, the Sadducees were the rationalists, who denied 
angels, spirits, resurrection, everything in the nature of 
the supernatural. The Sadducees were men who believed 
in a religion that was entirely ethical, and who never 
admitted the relation of the ethical to the spiritual. The 
representatives of these Opposing parties came together 
to Christ to prefer the same request. The thing they 
asked was a sign from heaven. 

What is the supreme revelation of this picture? It is 
that of spiritual inferiority in spite of advantage. That 
statement is only forceful as it is immediately put back 
into contrast with what we saw concerning the Syro- 
phoenician woman. In the case of the woman we saw the 
elemental need of humanity superior to all social and 
racial disadvantage. In these men we see deterioration,; 
and failure, and spiritual inferiority, in spite of religious 
advantages. Here were men asking for a sign, who had 
seen His signs ; men who had listened to His words, and 
followed Him from Judaea and from Galilee; men who 
had watched the working of His power in the marvels 
that He had wrought, had seen Him healing disease, 
casting out demons, raising from the dead ; and infinitely 
more wonderful than all, banishing the power of sin, for- 
giving it, and demonstrating His right and authority to 
forgive in the results that followed. They had seen Him 
dealing with every form of human malady, material, 
mental, moral. Yet these men said : " Show us a sign." 

Once again I pass on, and the next picture is that of 
the disciples, alone with Jesus in the boat, for I think the 
warning and the conversation took place as they crossed 
over the sea to Bethsaida. This is a picture of the mis- 
understanding of the loyal-hearted. It is a picture of 
men who loved the Lord, and were loyal to the Lord, and 
as He Himself with infinite grace did say upon, a later 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK ' 

[Mark 7 : 248 : 26] 

occasion, men who abode with Him in His temptations; 
but they had not understood Him. As they crossed over 
the sea, Jesus warned this little group of His disciples, 
His apostles, "Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees." 
They immediately connected His reference to leaven with 
material bread. They said, " We have no bread." Now 
what they really meant by that I cannot tell. It may be 
some one can tell me! I have been trying to find out 
how they connected the word of Jesus with bread. If ,1 
judge by the Lord's answer it is as if they thought He 
was rebuking them for carelessness ; for in effect He said, 
Do you not yet see that I am able to provide for that 
physical need ? Why should you trouble about that ? Did 
I not feed five thousand and four thousand ? 

Yet I am still in some difficulty. What did they im- 
agine He meant by the leaven of the Pharisees ? Did they 
imagine that the Pharisees were going to take their meal 
and put leaven into it ? Or was there in their mind some 
lurking suspicion that when He said, "Beware of the 
leaven of the Pharisees," He was giving them a new cere- 
monial addition to the law ? I do not know. Speculation 
is unprofitable! I cannot see the connection between 
what He said and what they thought. The fact remains 
that, when Jesus uttered that which He evidently felt 
was a greatly-needed spiritual warning, His disciples, His 
loyal-hearted ones, those who loved Him, thought about 
bread. 

There is one other picture. Arrived at Bethsaida again, 
they brought to Him a man suffering personal disability, 
a blind man. Once again the central value of the story is 
that it is a revelation of the sympathy of His friends, 
for they brought Him to Jesus, 

Now let us look again at these stories. What did Jesus 
do with that woman in whom there was manifested the 
touch of true humanity, the agony of the mother's heart? 
In considering what He did for her, first look at the 
result. That may not be a proper line of consideration, 

[ 172 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MAR 

[Mark 7:248:26] 

yet I think it is. The result was what the mother found 
when she got back home. She found the child laid upon 
the bed, and the demon gone out. To know what He did, 
we must see that child as the mother left her, contorted, 
twisted, and then lying on the bed, quiet, restful. That is 
what He did for her. To look at the result first is to be 
better qualified to see the process. Is not that the solu- 
tion of many of the things of this life? I think so. I 
think when at last we really see the result, we shall not 
be so perplexed about some of the processes. 

From the standpoint of the result, let us observe His 
method, and observe it most carefully. It did look hard. 
It did seem severe. First, He was silent. He did not 
answer her. Then He said to her, " Let the children first 
be filled; for it is not meet to take the children's bread 
and to cast it to the dogs." But did He really say this? 
Listen to Him again, and notice that He said to her, 
" Let the children first be filled." That in itself was sug- 
gestion that others might be fed after the children were 
fed. 

Then we have not a word conveying the exact equiva- 
lent in our language to a word in the Greek here. He did 
not say, " It is not meet to take the children's bread and 
cast it to the dogs." To put it into colloquial English, He 
said, " It is not good to take the children's bread and cast 
to the doggies." There is a difference here. There are 
dogs and dogs; and there certainly were dogs and dogs 
in Palestine. There were dogs fierce and wild, marauding 
beasts ; but there were also the dogs of the household, the 
diminutive dogs, that had their place in the household, 
that had their place in the dwelling. This word the Mas- 
ter used was one of these diminutives; and there is so 
much in diminutives ! No one can use them without there 
being tenderness in the voice. I claim that tenderness for 
Jesus here. He said, " It is not meet to take the children's 
bread and cast it to the doggies." There is at least some- 
thing in that tenderness. Ah ! to us it may seem harsh to 

[ 173 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7 : 248 : 26] 

refer to her even in that way; but mark what He did 
for the woman. Put the apparent severity of His method 
by the side of what He did. He set her free from the 
trammels of a false view of privilege. When she first 
called to Him she called to Him as the Jewish Messiah. 
" O Lord, Thou Son of David, my daughter is grievously 
vexed with a demon." She was asking some pity from 
a Hebrew Messiah, she herself being, a Gentile, and He 
answered upon that ground. If she appeal to Him as 
Hebrew Messiah He will say Nay. So she was brought 
to cry to Him out of her elemental humanity. " Lord, 
help me . . . for even the doggies eat of the crumbs 
which fall from their masters' table." Then He said, 
" For this saying go thy way; the demon is gone out of 
thy daughter." Thus, whereas He said the apparently 
severe thing, He admitted her immediately to the privi- 
lege of a child. There is a word of Paul in his Galatian 
letter, having a profounder application than I am now 
going to make of it, but in some ways the dealing of our 
Lord with this woman is a wonderful commentary on this 
word of Paul ; " For in Christ Jesus neither circum- 
cision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith 
working through love." That is what happened in the 
case of the woman; faith working through love. Christ 
had told her that it was not good to give the children's 
bread to the little dogs ; and faith wrought through love, 
and He treated her, not as a dog to whom the crumbs 
were to be given, but as a child admitted into all the 
privileges of the family. 

Thus our Lord showed that in .Him all racial barriers, 
were broken down, all racial privilege was as nothing; 
that where the soul in its elemental human agony ap- 
proached Him in faith, He answered. It was a fore- 
shadowing of the Acts of the Apostles; of what Peter 
and others had to learn afterwards. 

But look at Him again. I will take the second and last 
pictures, and put them together, because they are so much 

[ 174 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7:248:26] 

alike in certain ways. He was dealing with two men, a 
dumb man and a blind man. Now it is noticeable and 
all students of these stories are arrested by it that our 
Lord was adopting new methods in His miracles, or 
seemed to be doing so. He took the dumb man apart 
from the crowd, put His fingers into his ears, and 
touched him with His own spittle, sighed, and said, 
Ephphatha, and the man's ears were opened. Even more 
remarkable was the case of the blind man, where His 
working of the wonder seemed to be gradual ; first of all 
the anointing with a touch, then asking him, " Seest 
thou aught ? " and after the answer of the man, " I see 
men, for I behold them as trees, walking," the touch of 
the hands, and full recovery. In these two cases we see 
a process of healing. 

Do not let us imagine for a moment that in these 
methods of Jesus we have any revelation either of weak- 
ening power on His part for that has been suggested- 
or of the adoption of new methods and the banishment 
of the old, for this also has been suggested. 

In these two stories we have wonderful illustrations of 
a perpetual fact in the method of Jesus with human need ; 
the fact that He adapts His method to the peculiar cir- 
cumstances of need of the one with whom He is dealing. 
I am quite convinced if we could perfectly know these 
men we should discover the reason for the method. In 
each case Christ adapted Himself to the need of the 
man. This was also finely illustrated in the case of the 
woman. 

In all these stories Jesus approached human need full 
of resources. There was no necessity, as far as He was 
concerned, to heal by any kind of means; no necessity 
to keep that woman waiting for a moment for the heal- 
ing of her child; but there was profound necessity for 
everything He did in the case of the people who came 
to Him. If at your leisure you will go through the Gos- 
pel stories, and the cases in which Jesus dealt with need 

L 175 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7:24 8:26] 

I am not now referring to the spiritual needs, but to the 
needs met by these very miracles you will discover, per- 
haps to your amazement, and certainly to your profit, that 
He never did anything the same way twice. There was 
infinite variety in all His dealings with men. He never 
healed more than one blind man in the same way. He 
never cast out the demon from more than one man in 
the same way. There was always a difference, and in 
the difference is a wonderful revelation of the variety of 
the experiences of human need, and consequently a won- 
derful revelation of our Lord's adaptability to that va- 
riety of experience. 

All of which is at once a revelation of the Lord, and an 
indication of the true line of Christian service. If we are 
really going to deal with men in the name of Christ and 
humanity, we cannot deal with all men in the same way. 
Inasmuch as the material miracles of Jesus are all para- 
bles of spiritual value in Christian service, as I watch the 
Lord I understand that when I talk to one man of his 
spiritual need, and try to help him; and then to another 
man of his spiritual need, and try to help him; if I ap- 
proach the two men in succession, having arranged every- 
thing as to my method of dealing with them, the prob- 
ability is that I shall not help them at all. The Lord 
never did a thing twice in the same way, He was not 
changeable therefore, but changeless; absolutely true to 
the underlying principle that every human life is lonely, 
separate, peculiar, and must be separately dealt with. 
Christ never deals with men en masse. He deals with 
men one by one. 

It is an old proverb, and a foolish one, that God made 
Oliver Cromwell, and broke the mould. I join issue with 
what is inferred when men say that God made Oliver 
Cromwell and broke the mould, or God made John Wesley 
and broke the mould. The inference is that He does not 
always break the mould when He makes a man ; that the 
vast majority of people are run through the same mould. 

[ 176 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 7:248:26] 

Nothing of the kind ! There is neither man nor woman 
but stands separate, alone, in the dignity of individuality, 
and who can say with Jesus, " To this end have I been 
born, and to this end am I come into the world/' It 
is sad that so few find out the greatness of individual- 
ity, and consequently fail to discover the meaning of in- 
dividuality and personality. 

The Lord provided for the hungry multitude because 
they had been three days with Him. There is another 
important principle here. Jesus did not feed them in or- 
der to persuade them to listen to His teaching. When a 
tea-meeting is necessary, to get people to listen to the 
Gospel there will be failure. That is. not the method of 
Christ. To build an Institute in connection with a 
Church, and provide all kinds of entertainment for the 
young people, in order that they may come to the Bible- 
classes, is to be foredoomed to failure. 

In the case of the Pharisees and Sadducees who de- 
manded a sign, the Lord refused what they asked; first 
because their motive was wrong ; and secondly because 
no sign would have convinced them. They had already 
had the signs, and were wilfully blind. 

His treatment of the disciples those disciples to whom 
the Lord always spoke with sympathy was that He 
definitely and sternly rebuked them in a series of indig- 
nant questions. Yet observe also that He led them on 
until they did understand what He meant. 

I gather up the impressions made upon my soul, as I 
have watched the Lord in these stories. The first is that 
of His perfect understanding of every case as it came 
before Him. 

The second is that of His quick sympathy, the sensi- 
tiveness of His soul, that immediately responded, what- 
ever the need by which He stood confronted. 

Yet again I am impressed by His sustained loyalty to 
principle. He never deviated by a hair's-breadth from 
the pathway of His loyalty to the Kingdom of God. 

[ 177 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 7:248:26] 

I am impressed finally by the very sternness of His 
rebuke of the disciples who failed. 

Ah! but there are two little phrases in the course of 
this passage that are very revealing, far more revealing 
than we know. When He was about to open the ears of; 
the man, "He sighed" In the presence of the demand) ' 
for a sign by the Pharisees and Sadducees, "He sighed 
deeply in His spirit." Thus twice I hear a sigh coming 
up from His soul. Behold, " a Man of sorrows, and ac- 
quainted with grief ! " Behold a Man exercising a min- 
istry full of healing power and elemental light ; but never 
forget that this service was costly. The principle of the 
Cross ultimately to be revealed supremely on Calvary, ran 
through all,' making Him what He was to the men of 
His own age, making Him what He is to the men of to- 
day. 



[178] 



XVI 

"And He said unto them, verily I say unto you, there 
are some here of them that stand by, which shall in no 
wise taste of death, till they see the Kingdom of God 
come with power." MARK 9:1. 

Mark 8: 27-9: 13. 

THE stories which we grouped in our last meditation 
gave a graphic revelation of the conditions obtaining at 
the end of the second period of the ministry of the Serv- 
ant of God, which was practically also the end of His 
more formal and public propaganda. The multitudes 
were interested, and were prepared to receive His gifts. 
They were prepared, moreover, to crown Him and fol- 
low Him in the establishing of a material kingdom, in 
which He would supply their needs. The rulers on the 
other hand, were definitely and desperately hostile to 
Him. The disciples were dull of spiritual apprehension, 
needing to be warned against the leaven of the Pharisees 
and Sadducees. At this time in the ministry of our Lord 
He might fittingly have employed the words of the great 
Servant of Jehovah, as found in the prophecy of Isaiah : 

" Who hath believed our message ? and to whom hath 
the arm i of Jehovah been revealed? For He grew up 
before Him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a 
dry ground : He hath no form nor comeliness ; and when 
we see Him, there is no beauty that we should desire 
Him. He was despised, and rejected of men; a Man of 
sorrows, and acquainted with grief: and as One from 
Whom men hide their face He was despised, and we 
esteemed Him not." 

The paragraph now under consideration tells the story 
of a crisis in the ministry of our Lord, and of a new be- 
ginning. In the teaching ministry of Jesus there were 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 27 9 : 13] 

two distinct stages. The burden of His early teaching 
was that of declaring His Messiahship, and of bringing 
men to understand that He was the Messiah, in fulfilment 
of prophecy. The second matter of importance in the 
teaching ministry of our Lord was that He should show 
men that Messiah must go by the way of suffering and 
death, to His crowning. Men who were familiar with 
the ancient prophecies knew full well that the two aspects 
had been suggested. At the time, however, they were so 
strangely puzzled by this fact, that there were those who 
declared that there would be two Messiahs, one, a suffer- 
ing Messiah, and the other, one who should come in glory, 
and establish a Kingdom. 

In this paragraph we are at the parting of the ways, at 
the hour of crisis, when He ended the first phase of 
teaching, and began to devote Himself, within the nar- 
rower circle of His disciples, to the second stage. This 
particular verse has been selected as text because I be- 
lieve it to be central to the whole paragraph. With slight 
variation the statement which our Lord made upon this 
occasion is found in exactly the same contextual relation 
in Matthew, Mark, and Luke. 

The statement opens chapter nine in Mark's Gospel; 
and of its placing there, Dr. Morison says : 

" It was in a mood of mental somnolence that Hugo de 
Sancto Caro concluded the eighth chapter with the thirty- 
eighth verse, and carried forward into a new chapter the 
verse before us." 

Here is one illustration of the unfortunate division of 
our Bible into chapters. By its system of paragraphing 
the Revised Version attempts to remedy the blunder, and 
yet the supreme mistake was a chapter division at all, at 
this point. Observe the sequence of events. Jesus jour- 
neyed north until Csesarea Philippi was reached; and 
there at some one point, as Mark says, somewhere among 
those villages, came the sudden halt, and the challenge to 

[ 180 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

His disciples : " Who do men say that I am? " The an- 
swers were given, and then He challenged that narrower 
circle of His own, "Who say ye that I am?" Then 
came the hour toward which the Lord had been moving, 
the victory for which He had been working, the hour of 
illumination, when one man.. Peter, made his great con- 
fession, " Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God." 
That confession was immediately answered by our Lord 
with another confession, " Thou art Peter, and upon this 
rock I will build My Church; and the gates of Hades 
shall not prevail against it." Mark does not record this, 
but Matthew in his Gospel, which is supremely that of 
the Kingdom, tells the story of that word of Jesus. 

Immediately following these confessions of Peter and 
of Jesus, a new note in the teaching of our Lord was 
sounded. He "began ... to show unto His disci- 
ples, how that He must . . . suffer " ; and the use of 
the word began there, and the emphasis I place upon it, 
are warranted. Never before had He talked of His com- 
ing Cross or suffering. Never before had He spoken of 
the resurrection which should crown the Cross. Never 
before had He spoken of the second advent. All this 
teaching began then. The supreme note of the teaching 
was that of the Cross. 

This gave rise to the fear, born of love, in the heart of 
Peter that made him say, " Be it far from Thee, Lord " ; 
and called forth the sudden, startling, stern answer of 
the Lord to the man whom He had commended for his 
confession : " Get thee behind Me, Satan : thou art a 
stumbling-block unto Me : for thou mindest not the things 
of God, but the things of men." Then followed the 
teaching of the disciples and the multitudes in the pres- 
ence of the Cross, His insistence upon the necessity for 
the Cross; and at the end of that whole incident, the 
words : " I say unto you, There are some here that stand 
by, who shall in no wise taste of death, till they see the 
Kingdom of God come with power." 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 8:279:13] 

Then there were six days of silence, followed by the 
transfiguration mount; and after that the descent from 
the mount, and the conversation by the way. 

Thus the text selected is seen as central. It gathers 
up and emphasizes that teaching of Jesus; first that the 
Kingdom is to come in power note the confession about 
the Church but supremely that the Kingdom can only 
come in power by the way of the Cross. " There are 
some here of them that stand by " a special reference in 
His mind undoubtedly to His own apostles, although oth- 
ers would be included " who shall in no wise taste of 
death, till they see the Kingdom of God come " not in 
perfection, not in finality, but " in power/' This was a 
reference undoubtedly to the fact that those who had 
said they were afraid, and shrank from the Cross, should 
yet come to understand that the Kingdom comes in 
power only by way of the Cross. 

We are at once reminded of a paragraph in Paul's first 
letter to the Corinthians, which has the closest spiritual 
relation to this word of Jesus (i Cor. 1 : 18-25). From 
the paragraph we select these phrases: "The word of 
the Cross . . . is the power of God." "Christ cruci- 
fied . . . the power of God." " Verily I say unto 
you, There are some here of them that stand by, who 
shall in no wise taste of death, till they see the Kingdom 
of God come with power/' 

Our Lord was declaring, not that these men who were 
round about Him could ever see the Kingdom come in its 
perfection in the present life. He was declaring to them, 
startled, amazed^ mystified as they were by the strange 
new thing He was saying, that by that very process from 
which they were shrinking, and naturally so, the King- 
dom of God would come with power. 

Now this is still a stumbling-block, not to the Jew 
alone, but to many others; still foolishness, not to the 
Greek only, but to many others. This view of the way 
through which the Kingdom comes continues to baffle 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

the philosophy of the age and the world. These are " the 
things of God," to which the " things of men " are op- 
posed. This is God's way to victory. Men cannot under- 
stand it even yet. Still too often His disciples mind the 
things of men rather than the things of God. 

In order that this meaning and value of our text may 
be apprehended, let us consider the ideas of the text in 
the light of its context; first, the idea of the Kingdom; 
secondly, the idea of the Kingdom .coming in power ; con- 
cluding with an inquiry as to how these men really saw 
it come in power. 

The Kingdom idea runs throughout the whole of this 
story. 

We are inclined to think, or we sometimes speak as 
though we were, that our Lord at this point departed 
from what evidently had been the master passion of His 
ministry, that namely, of the establishing of the Kingdom 
of God in the world. We seem to imagine that this refer- 
ence to the Church, and to the Cross, and to a second 
advent were all removed from the theme of the King- 
dom. It is of supreme importance that we recognize that 
they are closely related to the purpose of the Kingdom 
of God. When our Lord challenged these men, " Who 
do men say that the Son of man is ? " it was a Kingdom 
passion that moved Him. With singular daring, and 
arresting intention, He made human opinion concerning 
Himself the supreme thing in His ministry. He did not 
ask what men thought of the things He had done. He 
did not ask what men thought of the things He had said. 
He asked, "Who do men say that I am? " 

In view of all that followed, in view indeed of all that 
had preceded, wherein we have seen Him moving forward 
with singular authority and dignity, we immediately rec- 
ognize that He was seeking to discover whether men 
would recognize Him as supreme. When the answers 
came He was not satisfied until He asked the inner circle, 
"Who say ye that I am? " and one man had confessed 

[183] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

Him supreme. That is the real value of the confession. 
Thou art not John the Baptist, Elijah, Jeremiah, a 
prophet ; Thou art not one looking for Another ; Thou art 
the Other for whom all have looked; the last and final 
One, to the brightness of Whose coming, longing eyes 
have long been lifted, Messiah, anointed King, and Priest. 
It was for that confession the Lord was seeking. His 
question was the question of the King. All prophetic 
references to Messiah looked upon Messiah as King, 
through Whom should come the establishment of the 
Divine Kingdom. This is the real meaning of the word. 
Christ is but the Greek form of Messiah, or anointed One. 
Messiah is not a name ; Christ is not a name. When we 
speak of the One Whomi we worship as Christ, let us 
remember that is a title, and not a name; marking the 
eternal Son of God for one mission and one work. It 
is the title of an office, the office of supremacy, of King- 
ship, of the One Whose business it is to ransom men, 
and realize the Kingdom of God. 

All this is patent also if we listen to the confession of 
Jesus. "Upon this rock I will build My ecclesia, My 
church." " My ecclesia." This was a word in common 
use at that time, used of the Hebrew nation as constitut- 
ing a theocracy, and used in every Greek city with re- 
gard to the governing body in the city. It is a word 
saturated with the ideas of authority and kingship. 

When our Lord said, " Upon this rock I will build My 
ecclesia," He really inferred, Upon this rock I will build 
My Kingdom. The reference is to the Kingdom realized, 
the functions and the purpose of the Kingdom revealed 
through the instrument to be known as His Ecclesia, His 
Church. The master passion in the heart of Jesus here, 
as always, was that of the Kingdom, and its establish- 
ment. 

So also, the function of the Church is essentially re- 
vealed : " Upon this rock I will build My Church ; and the 
gates of Hades shall not prevail against it," The Church 

[ 184 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

is a conquering Kingdom, bringing all kingdoms into sub- 
jugation to itself. "And I will give unto thee the keys 
of the Kingdom " ; by the Church the moral standards of 
life are erected and revealed to all kingdoms, until coming 
into harmony with it, they become the one Kingdom of 
our God and of His Christ. The supreme idea is that of 
the Kingdom. 

The Kingdom throughout all this period, was not seen 
in power, but in weakness ; an ideal, but not realized ; 
a vision, but not a victory. In the answers that they gave 
to Him, reporting the things said concerning Him, is a 
revelation of the failure of the Kingdom ideal. The vast 
multitudes of men had not seen the Kingdom, and al- 
though here was one soul illuminated, so that he con- 
fessed Him Messiah, in his halting a moment afterwards 
was a revelation that the Kingdom seen, was not yet with 
power. In the "must" of the new unveiling of Jesus, 
when He said that He must go to Jerusalem, was a reve- 
lation of the Kingdom in weakness, for notice with what 
carefulness He named the opposition that confronted 
Him in Jerusalem: elders, chief priests, scribes. That 
was no careless grouping, but the naming of all the au- 
thorities within the city; elders, the civic rulers; chief 
priests, the religious rulers; scribes, the moral rulers. All 
the authority within the city civil, religious, moral was 
massed against Him. The Kingdom was in weakness; 
and as He Who represented it, in Whom it was brought, 
Who had come for its revelation and establishment, 
moved to the centre of national life, to Jerusalem, He 
came into the realm of hostility and suffering, and He 
must suffer, and be killed. The Kingdom in weakness, is 
the picture presented to us here. 

Yet once s more glancing over the picture from another 
standpoint, the way of the coming of the Kingdom in 
power is revealed. First, this is seen in the declaration 
of the Lord Himself. As I hear Him speak and interpret 
the thing He said in the light of subsequent events, I 

[ 185 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

know that there is a deeper meaning in the " must " of 
Jesus. When He said the Son of man must go to Jeru- 
salem and suffer, He was not declaring that He was 
hemmed in by circumstances ; He was not declaring that 
He was the victim of forces that were against Him. 
Partially, yes, we may have admitted it; but there is a 
deeper note. The "must" of Jesus is something pro- 
founder than that. 

In the next book to the Gospel stories, the book of the 
Acts, I find the first recorded address of this very man, 
Peter, who made his confession of Christ, and then 
shrank from the Cross and was so sternly rebuked. In 
that first address delivered on the day of Pentecost, I 
find an account of the Cross, strangely full of light. 
Speaking to these men in Jerusalem, within a few min- 
utes or hours after the illumination of Pentecost had 
come to him, Peter thus spoke of the Cross : " Him, being 
delivered up by the determinate counsel and foreknowl- 
edge of God, ye by the hand of lawless men did crucify 
and slay." Now mark the words of Peter. That to 
which he referred in the second place was that which 
has been first in our consideration. Ye rulers of Israel 
did crucify and slay by the hands of men without the 
law ; that is by Gentile hands, ye crucified Him, and slew 
Him. Yes! but Peter had now seen something more 
than that in the Cross, and so he declared that He was 
" delivered up by the determinate counsel and foreknowl- 
edge of God." In the " must" of Jesus there was recog- 
nition not of the compulsion of circumstances, but of the 
compulsion of the will of His God, and of His coopera- 
tion with God. Into the " must " of Jesus there is gath- 
ered the strange and mystic light which reveals Him even 
at this juncture, not as One going as a Victim to be 
murdered, but as the one Priest, proceeding as a Victor 
over all circumstances including the death to which He 
went, in order that He might accomplish a purpose, and 
build a Kingdom, and realize the will of God. 

[ 186 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8:279:13] 

That value of the " must " is borne out by the fact that 
He interpreted His death by His resurrection. When 
they presently descended from the mount of transfigura- 
tion, they inquired what this resurrection from the dead 
should mean. That was the arresting thing to them. 
Strangely enough they never seemed to grasp its signifi- 
cance, or to have been able to believe in it, as something 
to come immediately. Even after He had answered their 
inquiry, they were inclined to think of resurrection as 
Martha did. When Jesus said to her, " Thy brother shall 
rise again," she said, " I know that he shall rise again in 
the resurrection at the last day." By which she meant, 
Do not try to comfort me with a far-off resurrection; I 
want him now ! I think these disciples had the same 
attitude toward the resurrection. They believed in it as 
a far-off event. 

We must never forget this fact, that there is no in- 
stance in these New Testament records of Jesus referring 
to His Cross, but that at the same time He also referred 
to His resurrection. The Son of man must go up to 
Jerusalem, and suffer, and be killed, and the third day 
rise again. That is not the language of a man who says : 
I am beaten by circumstances ; but I must be loyal to a 
principle ; I must go on, though I die. No ! It was the 
calm, strong, amazing language of One Who saw death 
interpreted by resurrection; of One Who must suffer and 
die and be raised again. In the mystic language of our 
Lord, even though as yet we have not come to the full 
realization of it, we begin to hear the thunder of His 
power, and find the Kingdom coming in power. 

Then in all the teaching that followed His stern re- 
buke of Peter; the statement He made to the multitudes 
as to the necessity for following Him by the way of the 
Cross if they would be in cooperation with Him in the 
building of the Kingdom; and the final and resultant 
words concerning His second advent in the glory with 
His Father and with the angels in all these things, we 

[ 187 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 8:279: 13] 

catch the tones of power, and see that our Lord knew 
and declared that the Kingdom would only become dy- 
namic by the way of the Cross. 

Then followed that wonderful event of the transfigura- 
tion. The disciples saw the Lord transfigured. It would 
be better, perhaps, if we changed the word " transfigura- 
tion," anglicizing the Greek word; and read it thus, They 
saw the Lord metamorphosed. "Transfiguration" is a 
perfectly accurate word, only we are apt to think of it as 
though they saw Him with light falling on Him. On the 
contrary, He Himself was metamorphosed, changed com- 
pletely in some strange mystery of glorification and real- 
ization. 

The disciples saw Moses and Elijah talking with Him. 
Mark does not tell us this ; but another of the evangelists. 
They heard Him talking with them of the exodus that 
He was about to accomplish; that is, of this going to 
Jerusalem, and dying, and rising again. Then the disci- 
ples said, " Rabbi, it is good for us to be here : and let us 
make three tabernacles ; one for Thee, and one for Moses, 
and one for Elijah." We have been forever criticizing 
them, and trying to say what they meant when they said 
that; all the while forgetting that the evangelist tells us 
that they did not know what they were doing; and did not 
know what to say, so they said that ! 

But now observe most carefully that they heard a voice, 
which said to them, " This is My beloved Son : hear ye 
Him." There had been six days of silence, because He 
had brought them face to face with the Cross, and they 
had shrunk from it. I think this was quite natural. Who 
could understand this strange mystery that One could 
build a Kingdom by dying, that One could gain a victory 
by being defeated, that One could come to crowning by 
the way of the Cross? Who could understand? We 
hardly yet believe it ! It was revolutionary ! 

This is surely what they were thinking on the mount. 
Lord, , not that Cross to which Thou art going; let us 

[ 188 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

stay here! Let us build three tabernacles here. Let us 
stay in this light, in this glory, in this holy conversation. 
Yet the conversation was of the exodus ; and if they had 
stayed there, the exodus had never been accomplished? 
The Divine voice rebuked them: "This is My beloved 
Son: hear ye Him." The supreme and sacramental glory 
of the mount of transfiguration was not "that of its flash- 
ing splendour, but of the conversation concerning the 
Cross, and the ratification of that conversation and pur- 
pose by the Divine voice. 

These men saw the Kingdom come in power in His 
dying, in His rising, and in that immediate spiritual com- 
ing again, which took place in their experience on the 
day of Pentecost. , . 

They saw the Kingdom coming in power in His dying. 
Grant their terror, their sense of defeat; and yet re- 
member what they saw. During these days they saw 
things that they hardly saw at the time; but they knew 
afterwards that they had seen them. Impressions were 
made upon their souls, the value of which was not im- 
mediate, but which came after. In all these last and 
tragic events they saw the unconquered King. In every 
incident from that moment of foretelling, to the final act 
and fact of death, they saw Him moving with authority, 
with power, with dignity. Take this illustration. One of 
their own number, Judas, was plotting and planning with 
the priests for the arrest of his Lord; and in the dark 
and terrific business we are told that the priests said to 
Judas, "Not during the feast." Judas took the thirty 
pieces of silver, the bargain being made, and went with 
the money, oh! ghastly thing! into the very presence of 
Jesus, charged by the priests not to betray Him until the 
feast was over. While Judas was plotting with the 
priests, Jesus was talking to His disciples, and He said : 
"After two days the passover cometh, and the Son of 
man is delivered up to be crucified." When Judas came 
into the presence of Jesus, after a little while Jesus 

[ 189 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

looked at him and said, " That thou doest, do quickly " ; 
and he went out, and betrayed Him at the feast. Not the 
priests arranged the hour of His dying, but Jesus Him- 
self. 

This same activity in power runs all through. They 
saw Him in the garden, in the intervals of their sleeping, 
heard His words as He came back to them through the 
hours of His agony. They were all kingly words. They 
saw that strange thing happen in the garden, which we 
hurry over in our reading too carelessly. When the 
guard came to arrest Him, led by Judas, Jesus said, 
" Whom seek ye? " They replied, " Jesus of Nazareth." 
He said, " I am " ; and those soldiers fell backward in 
His presence. Why? I am not going to answer the 
question. I have no details, but I pray you, mark it. 
These disciples saw this strange sight. Something hap- 
pened that made these men fall back ; and then something 
more wonderful happened, for they bound Him and took 
Him away. Through the trial they watched Him, some 
of them, and saw Him kingly, saw Him in the midst of 
the mock trial solemnly affirm His Messiahship, His 
Kingship; kingly to the end, until in the final act He 
said, " Father, into Thy hands I commend My Spirit." 
As we listen we remember words He uttered long before, 
" Be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after that 
have no more that they can do." The men about the 
Cross had killed His body, but His spirit was com- 
mended to God, and He died as a King. We remember 
once again words that He uttered : " No one taketh My 
life away from Me, but I lay it down of Myself. I have 
power to lay it down^ and I have power to take it again." 
These are the things of the Kingdom in power, strange 
things, mystic things, things that raise questions, things 
the full value of which the heart of man challenges, and 
wonders whether they can be so. These are the things of 
power; the strange mystery of a kingly dying in agony 
and pain, and yet in triumph. So they saw the King- 

[190] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 8:279:13] 

dom of God coming in power; not in finality, but in 
power. 

Then upon the resurrection I need not dwell. About 
that resurrection Paul said He "was declared the Son 
of God with power ... by the resurrection of the 
dead " ; and Peter declared : " He begat us again unto a 
living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the 
dead." In those resurrection days, in the commissions 
He uttered, and in other appearances, He made them see 
the Kingdom, no longer as an ideal outside them, but as 
a power operating within them; until as He had told them 
in the upper room, He came again, in the coming of the 
Paraclete. 

He so came, and these men began to preach, and they 
saw the Kingdom without weakness, hi strength prevail- 
ing amongst the men listening, who had been hostile. 
Then they knew that this coming of the Kingdom in 
power, was by the way of the Cross. 

These men saw the Kingdom of God come, not in per- 
fection. That has been our mistake in reading our text, 
as we have interpreted it by the transfiguration mount. 
Not in perfection, and not finally; but in power; with 
mastery and force mastering the things against it, and 
proceeding toward its final glory. 

Thus, and thus only the Kingdom still comes in power; 
only by the way of the Cross ; and as the Cross is borne 
by those who name the Name. It is not easy to believe, 
and it is less easy to practice. Do we not, even within 
the Christian Church, often need to hear the rebuke of 
Jesus as He says to us : " Thou mindest not the things 
of God but the things of men " ? We are seeking to es- 
tablish the Kingdom by the methods of men, by their 
policies, and their programmes, and their machinery. 
The Kingdom of God can never be so established. The 
Kingdom of God only comes in power by the way of the 
Cross. 
There is one terribly solemn suggestion in this text. 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 8 : 279 : 13] 

Our Lord was speaking in the presence of the multitudes, 
yet surely with special reference to His own, and He did 
not say, All shall see the Kingdom of God come in power. 
He said, " Some here . . . shall in no wise taste of 
death/' Judas never saw the Kingdom in power. There 
is an attitude of heart toward the Lord that cuts off from 
seeing the Kingdom come in power; and even though we 
may not become our own executioners in the literal sense 
in which Judas did, we may live our life, and yet never 
see anything of the power in operation. If we know 
what it is to come so near to Him as to be able in very 
deed, to share His sufferings, then through us the King- 
dom may come in power. 



I 192 ] 



XVII 

"And He answereth them and saith, O faithless genera- 
tion, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I 
bear with yout " MARK g:ig. 

Mark 9: 14-29. 

THIS cry came welling up from the heart of Jesus. 
In itj pain and indignation merge ; and the cause of each 
is revealed. There is evident pain in the plaintive in- 
quiry, " How long shall I be with you ? " In it the same 
note is discernible as in that old-time song of the vine- 
yard, in which Isaiah declared that God concerning His 
people, asked with equal plaintiveness, " What could have 
been done more to My vineyard, that I have not done 
in it?" After about three years of public ministry, our 
Lord broke out into this question, "How long shall I 
be with you?" The plaintive inquiry was immediately 
followed by another, which is vibrant with the sense 
of wrong and indignation, How long shall I tolerate you? 
The question suggests most solemnly, that there is a 
limit to His patience. 

The cause of everything is revealed in the opening 
exclamation, " O faithless generation." He spoke of the 
whole age in which His ministry was being exercised. 
The word was not one of rebuke to His disciples alone; 
though they were included. The word was not a rebuke 
only for the man who brought his boy; he also was 
numbered with those of the generation. The word was 
not one of rebuke for the scribes alone ; though of them 
it was true. The whole atmosphere in the midst of 
which the Lord exercised His ministry, the very spirit of 
the age, was that of faithlessness, unbelief ; " O faithless 
generation." 

t 193 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

(Mark 9 : 14-29] 

The words of this text are central to the paragraph. 
Before them, massed in brief sentences, we have a picture 
of the things that Jesus found in the valley as He left the 
mount of transfiguration. He found disputing scribes, a 
distracted father, a demon-possessed boy, and defeated 
disciples. After the exclamation of the text we have the 
story of what He did with all these. He silenced the 
scribes, He comforted the father, He healed the boy, He 
instructed the disciples. So, passing into this atmosphere 
of unbelief, there welled up out of His heart these words, 
O faithless generation, how long will it be necessary for 
Me to be with you, ere you will understand or consent to 
believe? Nay, how long will it be possible for Me to 
remain in such an atmosphere, and carry on My ministry; 
how long can I bear with you, and where shall the limit 
be set to this intolerable unbelief? How long shall I 
tolerate you ? 

All this was the immediate sequel of the transfigura- 
tion. Here is one of the points of singular agreement 
between these Gospel writers. Matthew, Mark, and 
Luke tell the story of these things as immediately follow- 
ing upon the transfiguration scene and experiences. In 
the reading of each Gospel, we descend swiftly and 
abruptly as it seems, from the height of glory and won- 
derful radiance, to the depth of degradation. We have 
stood with Him upon the holy mount, and have seen Him 
transfigured; and the glory has been too bright for the 
feebleness of a sinner's sight ; so bright that even the 
three disciples were dazed, and said things that they them- 
selves did not understand, so bright that we have never 
yet been able perfectly to understand the thing that hap- 
pened on that mountain. Then in the valley we come 
face to face with one of the supreme illustrations of 
degradation that the New Testament affords, and the 
revelation is the more striking the more carefully we con- 
sider it. On the holy mount the voice of God had spoken 
concerning Jesus, and it had said, "This is My beloved 

[ 194 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark g : 14-29] 

Son." On the mountain height we saw the Only-begotten 
Son of God in glory. Descending to the valley, we hear 
the father say to Jesus, This is my child, my only child; 
literally, This is my only-begotten son. On the mount 
of glory, the Only-begotten Son of the Father; in the 
valley, the only-begotten son of a man, demon-possessed. 
The Lord is seen passing down from the glory, into that 
atmosphere of unbelief, and meeting that boy. It is in 
that way we must look at the valley scene. 

Therefore we pause to consider the mountain in the 
background; that we may more clearly and accurately ob- 
serve the valley in the foreground; and both, in order 
that we may discover the relation between the mountain 
and the valley. 

Going back to the paragraph which gives the account 
of the transfiguration, we look at that mountain scene 
again in comradeship with those three men; yet also in 
the illumination of the Holy Spirit Who came to them 
afterwards, and enabled them to tell the story of the 
mount. Peter in his Letter declared that the holy mount 
had meant to them the fulfilment and ratification of an- 
cient prophecies, for there they had seen the operation of 
the coming power of God through Christ. Omitting the 
sacred title of Christ, and the supreme title, Lord, I here 
resolutely use the name of His humanity, the name given 
to Him by Divine command, and by His mother's love, 
the name by which He had been known, and necessarily 
familiar through boyhood and young manhood, the name 
by which these disciples, ere there broke upon them the 
sense of His glory, had perpetually called Him, Jesus! 
There on the mountain height, the perfected spirit of 
Jesus having gained complete mastery over all tempta- 
tion, physical, spiritual, and vocational, changed the 
tenement 'of the body, and fitted it for the super-earthly 
life. Until we have understood that clearly, we have 
never seen the glory of the holy mount. The happening 
upon the mount was part of the private life of Jesus, 

[ 195 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

rather than the public ministry. He had withdrawn Him- 
\self from the place of the crowds to Csesarea Philippi, 
there to challenge His disciples as to the result of His 
mission. We must dismiss that old legend or opinion 
that Jesus was transfigured on Mount Tabor, which was 
not in this neighbourhood, and upon the crown of which 
even at that time, a city was built. He was certainly 
transfigured on Mount Hermon, that is on one of the 
heights of that mountain a little farther to the north than 
Caesarea Philippi, in a place of loneliness. He had es- 
caped from the crowds, He had even at last left at the 
foot of the mountain nine of His disciples, taking only 
three with Him. We are impressed by the privacy of 
the transfiguration scene. I think personally that so far 
as the real value of what happened then is concerned, no 
disciple need have been present. It was something lonely 
and peculiar in the life of Jesus. There was value in the 
fact that they were there, for them in the after-time, and 
perhaps for them also at the moment. I do not share 
the general view that these men were taken there because 
they were the chief disciples and the best. More prob- 
ably they were taken because they were the weakest of 
the twelve. Remember it is not the strongest saint who 
is taken to the place of special vision. The strongest 
saint can do without the vision. It is much easier to go 
to the mount, and see the glory, than to stay down in the 
valley, amid that crowd of scribes. 

Part of what these men were privileged to see, for 
they did not see everything clearly, that glory falling 
there upon Jesus irradiating Him, was not the shining 
forth of Deity, for Deity has no shining forth that is 
spectacular, or that can be apprehended by the eyes of 
sense. The only way in which the glory of Deity can 
ever be seen by men, is as it is veiled, hidden within 
humanity. The glory of the Deity of our Lord was not 
manifested there, but along the quiet ways, and in the 
compassionate ministries, in all the little things of life. 

[ 196 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

What then happened upon the mount? In that hour 
of the transfiguration, Jesus of Nazareth came to the 
full and ultimate perfecting of His human nature. In 
that hour we see the true finality of human life, so far 
as this world is concerned, as within the original plan of 
God. To illustrate in the simplest way. Had Adam 
never wandered from the pathway of the Divine com- 
mand, or sinned, or fallen, he had never died; but having 
come to the end of probationary life, and completed his- 
course, he would have been metamorphosed, changed, in 
this same manner, and prepared for the super-earthly life 
that lies beyond; that life about which we know so little, 
and which in anxious moments sometimes we doubt al- 
together, but which surely exists, infinite in its mystery. 
Jesus at this hour came to that point of the perfecting of 
His human personality. By an infinite mystery God 
created a new Man in the creation of Jesus. By the 
mystic and awful purity of the Divine Conception He 
was sinless in His birth. Through all the years of youth 
and manhood up to this moment He had faced all the 
temptations to which man must be subject, mastering 
them, being victorious over them; physical temptation, 
spiritual temptation, and the last and subtlest of all, vo- 
cational temptation. The last breath of that temptation 
had come to Him when Peter had said, God have mercy 
on Thee, not this way of the Cross! With stern and 
resolute heroism Jesus had said, Get thee hence, Satan, 
thou art an offence unto Me. That was the last victory 
over vocational temptation. 

Then, immediately passing to the mount, His life per- 
fect, complete ; every temptation having been met, and 
mastered ; the whole citadel of His manhood held through 
all the prior period of years, inviolate; He was trans- 
figured before them. The spirit of the Man, Jesus, al- 
ways supreme, now that life was completed and rounded 
out, changed the tenement of His body, and fitted it for 
the super-earthly life. There ended the human life of 

J 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

Jesus, in so far as the life of Jesus was a revelation of 
a Divine purpose, of a Divine ideal, a pattern of human- 
ity in itself. 

What did He look like that day? How little we know. 
The descriptions are all graphic, and most suggestive. 
Of the men who wrote, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, 
neither was an eye-witness. They received their impres- 
sions from others, and confined their attempts at descrip- 
tion to His features and garments. Luke simply says that 
the fashion of His countenance was altered. Matthew 
says, " His face did shine as the sun." As to His -gar- 
ments Matthew says they became white as the light ; 
Mark says they were glistering and white, so that no fuller 
on earth could make a like whiteness ; and Luke says they 
were white and dazzling. The metamorphosis of the 
Person of Jesus was so wonderful, that in subsequent 
days, the writers of the story could only gain from eye- 
witnesses these descriptions: that the fashion of His 
countenance was changed, His face did shine as the sun; 
and that the strange and mystic glory of the Presence 
saturated His garments with light and glory so that they 
were dazzling and glistering. There is nothing to be 
added to it; it remains a mystery. Here, however, is the 
fact of the Man coming to the fulfilment of His human 
life. 

Observe in the next place, that in that hour of the 
ultimate victory of Jesus as within His own personality, 
the supreme interest of His heart was revealed; for in 
that hour of His perfecting He was admitted to the 
company of the spirits of just men made perfect. Moses 
and Elijah were seen there holding conversation with 
Him. Having passed into the condition for the super- 
earthly life, in His manhood He entered into fellowship 
with those who had gone before Him. What then was 
the supreme interest of His heart? In that hour when 
He came to a marvellous perfecting; when once in the 
history of the human race, there had been revealed God's 

i 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

meaning in humanity when it is sinless ; the supreme in- 
terest of His heart was o the exodus that He was about 
to accomplish. His heart even, then in its selflessness 
was weaned from the lure of the life of glory which 
He had gained^ and was, in an infinite compassion 
given bade to the valley, the world, and the dark- 
ness. In the moment of His own supreme victory, 
He saw the earth subjugated, mastered by evil, suffering 
as the result of that mastery; or as one of these men 
upon the mount, John himself did afterwards write in his 
Epistle, the whole world was lying in the evil one, be- 
leaguered, imprisoned, oppressed, ruined. He talked 
with Moses and Elijah of the exodus. Himself, of that 
race, but separate from it by His own perfection, did in 
that hour of His ultimate crowning, assume responsibility 
for that race, and talk of the fact that He would break 
a way through, break down the prison gates, cut the 
bars of iron asunder, divide the sea, lead the exodus. He 
talked of His coming Cross and resurrection. The su- 
preme and master passion of the heart of the perfected 
Man was for the perfecting of the men who suffered, and 
the bringing back of the Kingdom to God, its rightful 
King. 

In that hour the voice of God was heard, and it must 
be interpreted by the whole atmosphere of the occasion. 
"This is My beloved Son," is the ratification of the 
perfection of His life. He, the Son, perfected by faith, 
was at once the File-Leader and Vindicator of the faith- 
ful ; and to this witness was borne in that transfiguration 
light and glory. Then the command to the disciples, 
" Hear Him," was in order to their perfecting by faith. 
All authority to teach had been given to Him. He had 
been speaking of the exodus. " Hear Him " said the 
Divine voice. These men had been afraid to hear Him 
six days before, when He spoke of this very Cross; de- 
clined to discuss that which was now the subject of His 
Conversation with Moses and Elijah. Thus they were 

E 199 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

brought back to that very point, and commanded to hear 

Him. 

From that mountain height they descended to the val- 
ley; and the cry that escaped His heart in the presence 
of all that He saw was this : " O faithless generation, how 
long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with 
you?" 

Look then a little more particularly at what He saw 
of unbelief. The supreme interest of this valley; scene 
is that of unbelief, revealed in different phases. There 
were the scribes, wilful and persistent unbelief; there 
was the father, unwilling unbelief; there was the boy, 
irresponsible unbelief ; and there were the disciples, un- 
conscious unbelief. The whole atmosphere was an un- 
believing atmosphere. 

The scribes questioned the disciples, the force of the 
word really being that they disputed with them. It was a 
most mean and paltry business, so far as these scribes 
were concerned. Then Jesus asked a question, "Why 
question ye with them ? " and the father of the boy went 
on to tell Him the story of his boy. That was the sub- 
ject of their question, of their disputing. The disciples 
were defeated. Here was an evidence of inability. Jesus 
being away, these people gathered round the disciples, 
laughed at them and mocked them, questioned them and 
disputed with them. Here was an evidence that their 
own unbelief was warranted! The very last scene be^- 
f ore our Lord moved toward Qesarea Philippi was one 
with these men, who had demanded a sign, which He had 
declined to give. Now Jesus being away, these nine 
disciples were left, and they were failing. Our Lord 
had already given sign after sign, had they had the eyes 
to see, the hearts to understand, or the wills to believe; 
but they were not willing to do so. Our Lord came back 
into that atmosphere of critical, wilful, persistent un- 
belief. 

The father, aware of the efforts of the disciples and 

[ 200 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

their failure,, said to Jesus, " If Thou canst do anything, 
have compassion on us, and help us "; and uttered that 
last cry, very beautiful and heroic> " I believe ; help Thou 
mine unbelief"; all which nevertheless revealed his un- 
belief. He did not want not to believe; he would rather 
have believed ; but he did not believe. He made a ven- 
ture; he had the will to believe; but he did not believe. 
Our Lord came into that atmosphere. 

Then the boy, with his irresponsible unbelief. It is 
admitted that the boy did not believe in Jesus; he could 
not, for he was under the dominion of a demon. There 
was incapacity for the exercise of faith. A boy, an in- 
strument of faith and vision and hope; spoiled, blighted, 
blasted, ruined; unable to believe. No blame attached 
to the boy, but the fact is nevertheless a tragic one. 
Spoiled humanity ! The highest function of humanity is 
belief, that activity of spirit that proceeds upon the path- 
way of reason, until it comes to some great promontory, 
and then spreads its wings, and upon the basis of its 
earlier journeying, takes eternity into its grasp. 

Then there was the unbelief of the disciples. Six days 
had passed, and they had been six days of practical si- 
lence between these men and* Jesus. If we are to thor- 
oughly understand this scene, we must go back to the 
things that preceded them. Six days before, these men 
had passed under a cloud, when our Lord began to speak 
of the necessity for His suffering, His dying, His rising ; 
His coming passion and exodus. They were not volition- 
ally rebellious against Him, but they were unable to ac- 
cept His teaching; and their inability had cut the nerve 
of their power. Be it remembered these men had cast 
out demons; when He sent forth the twelve, they came 
back rejoicing because they had cast out demons. Here, 
however, something had happened; something had come 
in between them and their power. They were still loyal 
to Him, remaining in the valley at His command ; waiting 
there, desiring still to carry on His enterprise ; but in the 

[ 201 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

presence of this boy they were paralyzed, helpless. What 
had happened? All unconsciously to themselves at that 
moment when faith had failed them, and they had not 
followed Him even though they had not understood Him, 
there had been the paralyzing of their power. That is 
what our Lord meant when He told them afterwards that 
the reason of their failure was that of their little faith, as 
Matthew tells us ; and the full secret of success was that 
of prayer, as Mark declares. 

Once more, and finally, as we watch, our Lord in that 
valley of unbelief, so cold, so chill, so disappointing, that 
even out of His heart there sprang that wail, " O faith- 
less generation, how long shall I be with you ? How long 
shall I tolerate you?" let us observe most carefully that 
all that He did followed upon the experiences of the 
mount. The choice there made, was not to enter upon 
the ultimate realization of His own human life. Through 
that victory in His life He turned back to the race of men 
to share their burdens and carry their sorrows and their 
sins, and make Himself, O wondrous Man! responsible 
for all the causes of their human suffering and their pain. 
When we watch Him descending from the mount of 
transfiguration, let us remember that it was a new de- 
scent, within the measure of His humanity, as wonderful 
as the first descent. Read again the great chapter of the 
Self-emptying of the Son of God in Philippians; that 
wonderful chapter in which we see Him in His eternal 
right, in the form of God. Then we read, He did not 
think this equality with God a prize to be snatched at, and 
held, for the purpose of Self-aggrandizement, but emptied 
Himself. The supreme and ultimate wonder of this fact 
is a glory which blinds us whenever we try to look upon 
it, this Self-emptying of Deity in some awful mystery 
that we cannot fathom. Now behold Him again on the 
transfiguration mount. He emptied Himself of all the 
rights of His humanity, and set His face toward the 
shadows and the darkness of the valley. All the activity 

[ 202 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

in the valley was inspired and energized, not by the 
victory of the mount, but by the Self -emptying of the 
mount; not by the fact that He did there come to the 
ultimate in His humanity, but by the fact that having 
come to the ultimate He took that humanity, perfected, 
completed, transfigured, glorified, and bore it down again 
to the level of the valley, and to the deeps into which 
humanity had fallen. Now we begin to understand His 
power. 

He will first silence the questioning scribes by a ques- 
tion. "What question ye with them?" said He to the 
scribes, and they said no more. He then gave these men 
another opportunity to believe. First He wrought the 
wonder. If the hour ever come when He can no longer 
tolerate a generation, when He can no longer bear, we 
may rest assured it will be in the hour which is so dire 
and dark and awful, that God Himself can do nothing 
more! There is the possibility! Do not look at it in 
some wide area. Let Us take it to our own souls. There 
is the awful tragic possibility in our life that wilful un- 
belief can be so blind, so persistent, and so rebellious that 
at last Christ will have to say, No longer ! But He will 
never do it until He has given us the ultimate opportunity. 
These scribes were laughing at the disciples, and criti- 
cizing them because they were feeble, calling in question 
the power of the Lord. Into their midst He came down, 
and worked the wonder. It was another opportunity for 
them. 

Is there anything more beautiful than His dealing with 
the father ? How He called forth his faith when he was 
in an agony. In a method of speech that was almost 
rude perhaps which method we miss in translation he 
said to Jesus, " If Thou canst do anything, have com- 
passion." 'Brought into the presence of the Master of 
the disciples who had failed, he doubted if He could do 
anything. Jesus looked back into his eyes and said, " If 
thou canst ! All things are possible to him that believeth." 

[ 203 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9: 14-29] 

Bear in mind, that man had certainly heard the words of 
our text, " O unbelieving generation, how long shall I be 
with you? How long shall I tolerate you? " Now when 
the man said, " If Thou canst," Jesus said, " If thou 
canst! All things are possible." Then the man, never 
more beautiful than now no hypocrite this, no man pre- 
tending to believe, said, "I believe." That was the 
dawning of faith. He was not sure ; so he added, " Help 
Thou mine unbelief." That is the grandest faith pos- 
sible, the finest exercise of faith. Whereas faith is al- 
ways crying, Lord, I believe; behind are the lurking 
questionings and the wondering doubts; and instead of 
letting faith master us, we cry out, Lord, help our un- 
belief ! So surely as a soul is learning the lesson of this 
story, so rapidly results shall follow. The Lord honours 
the will to believe. The man believed in the best way 
possible ; and the Lord immediately responded. He won 
an honest faith that day, and the man was compelled thus 
to tell all the truth about his mind and soul. " Lord, I 
believe; help Thou mine unbelief." Immediately, the 
Master turned to his boy, and cast the demon out. 

We have seen the tragedy of a boy made for faith, 
unable to believe, demon-possessed. Now see the things 
that happened. He cast the demon out; and the boy lay 
there, pale, pinched, looking dead. Then Jesus took him 
by the hand, and lifted him up, and he arose. I think 
that boy believed in Jesus afterwards. The Lord gave 
him back his boyhood, his youth, his hope, his capacity 
for dreams, visions and faith ; and I think to the end of 
time, that boy's faith was centred upon the One Who 
had given him his chance. 

Then He patiently instructed His disciples, told them, 
as Matthew records, that the reason they failed was be- 
cause of their little faith. The faith that faltered at 
Caesarea Philippi was paralyzed in the valley, until He 
came back to them ; and so He declared that, " This kind 
can come out by nothing, save by prayer"; prayer be- 

[ 204 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 14-29] 

ing used there, in its finest and truest sense ; prayer is the 
activity of faith; prayer is that resting of the soul in 
Jesus, which rests at last in the will of God, and prompts 
the power of God. So these men were recalled to faith, 
and instructed as to its true exercise. 

" O faithless generation, how long shall I be with you ? 
How long shall I bear with you ? " In that inquiry we 
hear the pain of Jesus. Unbelief gives Him, sorrow be- 
cause it harms man. Is not His pain most poignant in 
the presence of the little faith of His own ? Not those 
disputing scribes outside the Christian Church to-day, 
who are striving to prove our incapacities, and laugh at 
us for our failure; but we who are inside with such little 
faith that we seem to work no miracles, and do no spiri- 
tual wonders; we grieve His heart most of all. 

Then I should be untrue to the one thing that is search- 
ing my own soul, unless I gave attention to the last ques- 
tion, terrible, bitter, "How long shall I tolerate you?" 
There are necessary limits to His bearing with unbelief. 
Sometimes it seems as though He were asking that ques- 
tion about me; and about the Church! Then let us to- 
gether say to Him: Lord, we believe. Help Thou our 
unbelief ! 



[ 205 ] 



XVIII 



<e 



Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with 
another." MARK 9 : 5ob. 

Mark 9: 30-50. 

IN our last meditation we considered the events which 
followed immediately upon the experiences of the holy 
mount. In the valley we saw the demonized boy, the 
distracted father, the defeated disciples, and the disput- 
ing scribes; and our Lord's dealing with all. He cast out 
the demon, gave the boy back to his father, instructed 
His disciples as to the secret of their failure, and si- 
lenced the disputing scribes. 

The first paragraph in our present meditation tells what 
immediately followed. Jesus and His disciples left the 
neighbourhood of Gsesarea Philippi. He led them 
through Galilee, evidently along by-paths, and the less 
frequented roads, for the express purpose of giving them 
further teaching concerning all that lay before Him of 
suffering, death, and resurrection. They listened to Him, 
but did not understand, and were evidently afraid to ask 
Him. 

The measure of their failure is illustrated in the story 
which follows. It is evident therefrom that in the inter- 
vals of His teaching they had been disputing among them- 
selves as to their respective greatness. This is one in- 
stance of many in the Gospel stories, recording the doings 
of these last days in the mission of Christ, revealing the 
unutterably sad fact, that when their Lord attempted to 
draw these men into sympathy with Himself, as He 
walked the via dolorosa His face steadfastly set toward 
Jerusalem, His passion baptism, and the consummation of 
His mission they broke in sooner or later upon His 

[206] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

{Mark 9:30-50] 

conversation, either by asking a similar question, or by 
their own disputes concerning which should be counted 
the greatest. One can almost imagine that the fact that 
Peter, James, and John had been with Him on the holy 
mount, had given rise to the dispute. It may be that 
when they came back to the nine who liad been left in 
the valley, they assumed some air of spiritual superiority, 
because they had been with Him on the mount. Be this 
as it may, we are told that they disputed amongst them- 
selves which should be the greater; and at last, when 
they came to Capernaum, the Lord Himself raised the 
subject. All that follows in this paragraph is related 
with this subject, and all finds culmination in the text: 
" Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with an- 
other." In it then, we have His final words in this rela- 
tion. 

In order that we may better understand their value, we 
must take time to set this story clearly before our minds j 
beginning with the Lord's inquiry when they came to 
Capernaum. In the early days of His Galilean minis- 
try He made Capernaum the base of His operations, and 
there is every reason to believe that the house where He 
sojourned was that of Simon Peter. When they were in 
the house He asked them, " What were ye reasoning on 
the way ? " They were silent, and did not answer Him, 
for they had disputed one with another in the way who 
was the greatest. Immediately that He asked the ques- 
tion, they knew that their disputing had been unworthy, 
and so they were silent. Then, accepting the shame that 
was evidenced in their silence, the Lord proceeded to 
teach them, and first of all stated the whole fact as to re- 
spective greatness within the ranks of His disciples, and 
in His Kingdom in this word : " If any man would be first 
he shall be last of all, and minister of all." This was not 
a suggestion on our Lord's part that if a man were am- 
bitious he should be relegated to some place of obscurity, 
but it was a revelation of the true secret of greatness in 

[ 207 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9:30-50] 

His Kingdom. Not the man who masters others, but the 
man whom every one masters, and is thereby compelled 
to serve, is the greatest within the Kingdom. 

Having so said 2 He gave them the beautiful illustration 
that we all so much admire. He took a little child and 
put him in the midst of them; and then taking him in His 
arms He continued His conversation. He took a little 
child not specially prepared for the occasion, not a 
catechumen who was prepared for the hour but an 
ordinary boy, perchance the boy of Simon Peter, and then 
continued, "Whosoever shall receive one of such little 
children in My name, receiveth Me: and whosoever re- 
ceiveth Me, receiveth not Me," but God, " Him that sent 
Me." 

In the Revised Version at this point, correctly, there 
is a new paragraph. The new paragraph, however, does 
not mean that the subject is changed. " John said unto 
Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in Thy 
and we forbade him, because he followed not us." 
John was not making a boast in something he had done. 
He confessed to failure. John, in many regards the 
most wonderful of the apostles, the man of keenest in- 
sight, quickest intuition, recognized here immediately that 
he had been doing something wrong. If indeed it be true 
that to receive a little child, an ordinary everyday child, 
is to receive Christ, and to receive God, said John within 
himself, What did I do when I forbade that man who in 
the Name was casting out a demon? Verily the light, had 
broken in upon him. 

Our Lord first answered the confession of John: " For- 
bid him not: for there is no man who shall do a mighty 
work in My name, and be able quickly to speak evil of 
Me. For he that is not against us is for us. For who- 
soever shall give you a cup of water to drink, because ye 
are Christ's, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise 
lose his reward." Then, resuming the discourse where it 
had been interrupted, He said, "And whosoever shall 

[208] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 30-50] 

cause one of these little ones that believe on Me to stum- 
ble, it were better for him if a great millstone were 
hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea." 
Continuing in most solemn and searching teaching, He 
enforced this principle, until at last He reached the words, 
" Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace one with 
another." 

In the light of the context then, let us consider this 
injunction, observing the two things : " Have salt in your- 
selves," and "Be at peace one with another." The in- 
struction is the revelation of a sequence. First then, the 
salt that produces peace; and secondly, the peace that is 
produced by salt. 

We recognize at once, that we are in the presence of 
one of the paragraphs of the New Testament which has 
caused difficulty and perplexity to expositors. This is 
specially so with regard to the previous verse to our text : 
" For every one shall be salted with fire. Salt is good ; 
but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye 
season it?" The injunction, "Have salt in yourselves" 
grows out of this declaration and this inquiry. We may 
get nearer the heart of our Lord's meaning as we allow 
the text to be interpreted by the things already said, even 
though at first it seems as though there was little connec- 
tion. " Have salt in yourselves." A little while before 
He said, " Every one shall be salted with fire." That 
was not a new beginning, but something that followed 
upon words such as these, "unquenchable fire," "Ge- 
henna." 

The explanation of the meaning of our Lord's use of 
the figure of salt may be derived from the previous state- 
ment, " Every one shall be salted with fire." The term 
" fire " interprets the term " salt " for this particular oc- 
casion. There are other occasions where the term " salt " 
may be used with another signification, though in the last 
analysis I should hardly be prepared to admit that ; for I 
believe at its heart it is always allied to the meaning it 

[ 209 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9 : 30-50] 

has here. Fire destroys the perishable, and perfects that 
which is imperishable. Our Lord in the previous teach- 
ing had referred to Gehenna. Let us remember that He 
was speaking in the hearing of men to whom that con- 
noted one particular idea. They knew perfectly well that 
He was using a most drastic figure of speech, one that 
was terrific in its suggestiveness. The valley of Gehenna, 
a gorge outside Jerusalem, was historic. In the valley of 
Tophet, Solomon had first erected an altar to the wor- 
ship of Moloch. At a later and more depraved period in 
the history of the kingdom of Jiidah, Ahaz and Manas- 
seh had offered human sacrifices to Moloch in that very 
valley, until the reformation period came under king 
Josiah. One thing which Josiah did in the course of his 
reformation was to defile the valley where Moloch had 
been worshipped, casting refuse there, making it from 
that time through all the successive years the place where 
all the evil things of the city were cast out for destruc- 
tion. The purpose of Gehenna then, was the purification 
of the life of the city. Those smouldering fires, destroy- 
ing vulgarity and obscenity, were in themselves witnesses 
of the necessity for the sanitation of Jerusalem. 

This was a drastic figure, and our Lord was not the 
first who made use of it. When this began cannot be 
said, but Tophet, Gehenna, was the perpetual figure em- 
ployed for the place of punishment beyond this life, the 
strange and mysterious realm in the universe of God, 
made necessary for the purification of that universe ; hell 
itself, with all the old meaning of the word delivered 
from its base and corrupt materialism; hell, as Jesus said, 
where "their worm dieth not, and the fire is not 
quenched." That was the reference, first of all to a place 
geographical and actual, as a civic necessity, and sec- 
ondly and consequently, to a place and state moral and 
spiritual, and as equally a necessity in the Divine econ- 
omy. In other words^ fire as our Lord used it here, was 
the symbol of the principle that makes no peace with evil. 

[ 210 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9:30-50] 

The fire of Gehenna is the holiness of God. Said Jesus 
at last to these disciples, Have that fire burning within 
yourselves, and so be at peace one with another. " Every, 
one shall be salted with fire." Fire destroys the perish- 
able, but perfects that which is imperishable. 

Change the figure to salt, and see how near we are to 
the thought. Salt prevents corruption and preserves 
soundness. Behind the word " soundness " is the thought 
of sanitation, and involved in the word " sanitation " is 
the conditon of health; and at the heart of the word 
" health " is the principle of holiness. Salt prevents dis- 
integration, and corruption, and preserves soundness and 
health. Salt is also of the fire nature ; a subtle, penetra- 
tive, permeative flame that searches out every element of 
destruction, and holds it in check, and annihilates it ; in 
order that there may be opportunity for the growth and 
development and enlargement of that which makes for 
health. " Have salt in yourselves." 

To come nearer to the Lord's meaning when He laid 
this charge upon His disciples, we must recognize that 
the moral and spiritual values are revealed in the previous 
teaching. There is first that which is relative, and then 
that which lies behind it and is personal, apart from 
which the relative is impossible of realization. 

Notice first the relative teaching. "Whosoever shall 
cause one of these little ones that believe on Me to stum- 
ble, it were better for him if a great' millstone were 
hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea." 
Christ was here cabling for such passion for service in 
order to the perfecting of others, that sudden and violent 
extinction is counted preferable to causing a little one to 
stumble. He was holding up before the eyes of His* 
astonished disciples an ideal, that seemed for the moment 
to have very little application to their disputing by the 
way. I think as He talked, the boy was still in His arms, 
and that though spiritually here He may have come to 
the consideration of the life of the little ones who had but 

[211] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9 : 30-50] 

recently believed in Him, He was not far away from 
the child, nor the child from Him. With that ordinary 
boy, suddenly arrested, apprehended, caught up in His 
arms, He said : Rather than make this little child stumble, 
it were better for a man if a great millstone were hanged 
about his neck, and he were cast into the sea. 

Then He immediately passed from that description of 
relative passion for service to the individual condition 
that makes it possible. He declared in effect that such 
passion is generated by the personal intolerance of evil 
which prefers maiming, to deflection from the way of 
truth. The hand, the actual deed; the foot, the approach 
or direction toward evil; the eye, the sight or desire that 
inspires the approach, and issues in the deed ; all must be 
dealt with. Our Lord here calls for such passion for 
purity within the soul, that if necessary it shall be main- 
tained by maiming and mutilation. The supreme thought 
running through all the teaching is that of the necessity 
for purity, at all costs. " Have salt in yourselves " ; let 
there be burning within you the very fire which makes 
conflict with sin and with evil. It is as though the Lord 
had said : Unless this awful fire of Divine holiness burn 
within you as a passion that destroys within your lives all 
evil things, there will be /no escape from the ultimate 
Gehenna, in which that fire is forever consuming. It is 
as though our Lord had said to those first disciples : The 
only way to escape the ultimate Gehenna of fire, is for 
that fire to burn within you, of your own volition, thus 
purifying the soul. It is Christ's call to resolute and 
sacrificial purity. When the writer of the letter to the 
Hebrews wrote "Ye have not yet resisted unto blood, 
striving against sin," he did not mean a resistance that 
makes the blood flow through blows implanted by an 
enemy. The reference was surely to Gethseniane, when 
"His sweat became as it were great drops of blood"; 
the mental pressure and agony being so terrific that all 
the functions of nature were arrested and revolutionized. 

[ 212 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9 : 30-50] 

Salt! Not some light sentimental word is this, suggest- 
ing an application that is merely invigorating and re- 
freshing in some moral sense ; but the salt that is fire, of 
the very fire of hell itself against sin; so that the right 
hand, the right foot, must be cut off, the right eye be 
gouged out, in order that the soul may be clean and pure. 

Peace among ourselves then is not something that may 
be arranged for, by taking counsel with one another, in 
order that we may abandon some conviction that we hold 
dear. Strong lasting peace, that knows no ultimate dis- 
turbance, must be based upon a purity that is produced 
by salt which is fire; "first pure, then peaceable." Our 
Lord by this apparently strange teaching, flashed back 
upon the disputing by the way 'the light of the Divine 
estimation of it, and revealed the fact that all such dis- 
puting sprang out of the toleration of evil within the 
soul in some form or another; and that wherever those 
who name His name, and profess to follow Him, and 
are walking after Him, dispute among themselves as to 
greatness, they are revealing some malady far deeper 
than the symptom would suggest to the casual observer. 
They are revealing the fact that down beneath the dispu- 
tation is disease, spiritual and moral, which cannot be 
treated with rose-water, and needs the fire of salt, terrific 
in its burning, and destructive of all that is capable of 
destruction; fire which destroys the perishable, but thank 
God, gives the soundness of health every opportunity. 

Now, glancing back from this word of Jesus to the 
original cause of the story, to the fact of their disputing, 
and then to John's confession, and all that it meant, we 
gather what the peace is, which salt produces. I shall 
make two suggestions only. 

The action of such salt first produces the transmutation 
of ambition. Wherever there is the action of this salt 
there is the death of the absorbing passion for greatness, 
and the birth of the edifying passion for service. Mark 
the difference between these things. The passion for 

[ 213 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
{Mark 9 : 30-50] 

personal greatness is always a disrupting element any- 
where and everywhere, in all human life and society. 
Wherever that passion burns there is the destruction of 
peace, and of a true order. These men were troubled 
about who was the greatest. In the place of that absorb- 
ing passion for greatness was born, what for lack of a 
more striking word I have described as the edifying, pas- 
sion for service. He who would be greatest, let him be 
least of all, minister of all. When this salt is in the 
jifej, when this fire burns within the soul, it indeed 

" Burns up the dross of base desire, 
And makes the mountains flow." 

Wherever this salt is active in the life, there is born a 
passion not for the exercise of authority, but for the 
rendering of service. Surely no one can read this care- 
fully without being ashamed. No congregation of Chris- 
tian souls can consider these ideals, and this teaching 
of Jesus, without coming to the almost appalling recogni- 
tion of the fact of how little we know of this experi- 
mentally. Yet, thank God there have been and still are 
multitudes of those in whom this salt burns, producing 
God's own purity ; and in every such case they are those 
whose one mastering eagerness is to serve; and where 
there is eagerness to serve, then the little one is received; 
and where there is eagerness to serve, disputes about 
greatness finally end. Where there is eagerness to serve 
there is peace. 

But not only does this salt produce the transmutation 
of ambition. It produces also the enlargement of fellow- 
ship. Everywhere this salt operates, there is the death of 
the sense of the dignity of official privilege. Now this 
was, the trouble in the case of John. John told the Lord 
and the grace of his heart is revealed in the fact that 
he made confession that " We saw one," not attempting 
to cast out demons, but doing it. "We saw one casting 
put demons " ; not by any of the incantations of the 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 9:30-50] 

heathen, but " in Thy name ; and we forbade him, because 
he followed not us"! He was irregular, he was not in 
the true order, he was not in the appointed succession, 
he was outside! Oh! the devilishness of it I am not 
going to withdraw that word the devilishness of this 
sense of official privilege and dignity. Quick and sharp 
and stern, like a crack of thunder following a blaze of 
lightning, came the Lord's wordj " Forbid him not : for 
there is no man which shall do a mighty work in My 
name, and be able quickly to speak evil of Me. For he 
that is not against us is for us." Yet I wonder if I have 
misinterpreted the tone and temper of Jesus by suggesting 
that He spoke in any such harsh accents ! I do not know, 
for it seems to me after all that if this were a word of 
thunder, behind the thunder was all the refreshment and 
coolness and beauty of a high conception of fellowship. 
" He followed not us." No, but "he . . . is for us." 
Jesus here used the plural, putting the twelve back into 
fellowship with Himself; He is for us, not against us. 

Wherever this salt burns in the life, there is not only 
the enlargement of fellowship that results from the death 
of the sense of the dignity of official privilege; there is 
also the birth of the recognition of the supremacy of the 
name. " He that receiveth one such little child in My 
name." That is what arrested John, and made him say, 
" Teacher, we saw one casting out demons in Thy name; 
and we forbade him." So our Lord immediately re- 
sponded, taking up exactly the same thought as He said, 
" No man can do a mighty work in My name, and be able 
quickly to speak evil of Me." Presently He said an- 
other thing, which we have rather lost by our translation. 
" Whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink, in 
the name that ye are Christ's." That is quite literal. We 
have translated actually as to sense, "Because ye are 
Christ's"; but we have lost something of the impact. 
" Shall give you a cup of cold water to drink in the 
name that ye are Christ's, Verily I say unto you ! " 

215 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 9 : 30-50] 

The dignity and the supremacy of the name was 
yealed. That man does not follow Me, but if he, in the 
name, cast out a demon, then that man is included in the 
fellowship. So the borders of fellowship are flung back, 
and the company of the comrades of the Crusade is en- 
larged; but we shall never be willing to admit that, until 
this salt, this fire, permeates the life and purifies it. 

In conclusion note again the command. "Have salt 
in yourselves " ; that is the personal note. " Be at peace 
one with another"; that is the relative note. The first 
is superlative, the second is sequential. If we would 
have true peace one with another, our first business must 
be to obey the earlier injunction, "Have salt in your- 
selves." 

Yet look back once more to the statement and question 
preceding the text, which gives a wider view of the 
meaning of the experience, on which we can only enter 
as We go back to the narrowness of the injunction. What 
then is this statement and this inquiry? " Salt is good; 
but if the salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will ye 
season it?" This is a larger word, having a wider ap- 
plication. This is a word that is true to the music of that 
which Jesus had already said in His manifesto, on an 
earlier occasion. " Ye are the salt of the earth." In that 
word of Jesus all the world was taken into account. 
Then immediately we are reminded that men having salt 
in themselves, exert an influence of salt in the world; and 
only as we have salt in ourselves and are at peace one 
with another can we exert the influence of salt in the 
world, or become peacemakers. 

What do we know of this salt, which is a fire, and 
oftentimes a pain and an agony, burning with a passion 
for .purity that will make no terms with evil in our lives? 
It is only upon, the basis of- such purity, resulting from 
such action of the fire of salt and the salt of fire, that we 
can ever be at peace. 

[216] 



XIX 

" From the beginning of the creation, male and female 
made He them. For this cause shall a man leave his 
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and the 
two shall become one flesh: so that they are no more 
two, but one flesh. . . . Suffer the little children to 
come unto me; forbid them not: for to such belongeth 
the Kingdom of God." MARK 10:6-8, and 14. 

Mark 10: 1-16. 

IN this paragraph we have two stories. The first is 
that of the coming to Jesus of certain Pharisees, who 
questioned Him on the subject of divorce; and of the 
answers He gave them. The second is that of the bring- 
ing of children to Him; and of the manner of His re- 
ception of them. 

Both Matthew and Mark put these stories thus in close 
relation to each other as to the time of their taking place. 
This is interesting, in that the teaching of Jesus in the 
two events constitutes a revelation of the Christian ideal 
of the family. 

Before attempting to consider that ideal as revealed in 
the paragraphs there are two things which we ought to 
do. First we should note, with some care, the hour in 
the life of our Lord in which these things happened. 
Secondly, we must disentangle the essential from the 
accidental, in these stories. 

As to the first. Between that teaching of His disciples 
in the house in Capernaum, and the things recorded in 
these paragraphs, much had transpired in the ministry of 
Jesus, which Mark passes over in silence. Jesus had 
probably twice visited Jerusalem in the interval. He had 
sent out the seventy upon their mission. After they re- 

[ 217 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

turned, He had Himself been in Persea, accompanied by 
His apostles. Here we see Him leaving Galilee for 
Judaea, for the last time prior to His crucifixion. He 
was now definitely and finally on His way to the Cross. 
This was the beginning of the last journey. The bearing 
of this on our subject is that we see the Servant of God 
bent on redeeming work, but insisting on that ethic of 
life which is founded on the binding nature of the Divine 
thought and purpose for humanity, and revealing its true 
value to society. His face was set toward the Cross ; His 
heart was filled with the passion for redeeming men ; but 
not for a moment did He lower the standard of Divine 
requirements. 

As to the second of these preliminary matters. We 
must disentangle the accidental from the essential. The 
whole question of divorce was accidental. The disciples' 
mistake about the children was accidental. The essen- 
tial things in these stories were ; first our Lord's teaching 
on the subject of marriage ; and secondly, our Lord's in- 
clusive declaration of truth concerning all children. 
When I use the word " accidental," I do not mean that 
these things are unimportant. They were things occur- 
ring by the way. Incidental things, perhaps, would be a 
more accurate description. Here, as ever, our Lord 
brought to bear upon these things, accidental or inci- 
dental, the light of essential and eternal truth. The dis- 
tinction is important, because when the accidental things 
are once set in the light of the essential, we see them in 
their true value and proportion. 

To those then, which we have described as accidental, 
we will return in conclusion, giving ourselves first to the 
essential things. 

Here then we find Christ's revelation of the true ideal 
of the family, as He dealt first of all with the nature of 
marriage, and secondly with the inclusive truth about 
children. 

His teaching concerning the nature of marriage is 

[ 218 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

found in these words: " From the beginning of the crea- 
tion, male and female made He them. For this cause 
shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall cleave 
to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh: so that 
they are no more two, but one flesh." This is essential 
truth, and in the light of it He immediately dealt with 
the accidental: "What therefore God hath joined to- 
gether, let not man put asunder." 

The inclusive truth about the children is contained in 
the words : " Of such is the Kingdom of God." That in- 
clusive and essential truth being recognized, all the acci- 
dental things are dealt with by the preliminary words, 
" Suffer the little children to come unto Me ; forbid them 
not." So He corrected the accidental mistake of the 
disciples, in the light of essential truth concerning chil- 
dren. 

First then, our Lord's teaching here concerning the 
nature of marriage. The words were carefully chosen. 
Here, as so constantly in the teaching of our Lord, He 
said nothing new ; but took these men of His day back to 
their own sacred Writings, and quoted from them. In 
these words then, we have a threefold revelation of the 
truth concerning marriage, according to the Biblical reve- 
lation, according to Christ's teaching; and consequently, 
according to the Christian standard. He first declared 
the fundamental truth, " From the beginning of the cre- 
ation, male and female made He them." He then uttered 
the experimental truth concerning marriage, " For this 
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and shall 
cleave unto his wife." Finally, He spoke words which 
we may speak of as constituting the functional truth con- 
cerning marriage, " The two shall become one flesh." 

In answer to the questions of the Pharisees, our Lord 
directed their thinking from their own view, or from 
their interpretation of the law of Moses, back to the 
original intention. There was arresting dignity and au- 
thority in the method of Jesus. Moses allowed a bill of 

[ 219 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

divorcement to be written, said they. Said Jesus, This 
he did for the hardness of your heart; and immediately 
sweeping back, behind their interpretation, and even be- 
hind the word of Moses himself, and the whole Hebrew 
economy, He took them to original and fundamental 
things, Divine intentions, and purposes, " From the be- 
ginning of the creation." Before that state of society in 
which they were then living; before that word of* Moses 
which was born of the hardness of man's heart; before 
that sterner word of Moses which was embodied within 
the Decalogue; before all the habits of the men of the 
past; He took them back to the very beginning of things : 
" From the beginning of the creation." 

We turn back with Him to the beginning, and to the 
story of the beginning with which these men were fa- 
miliar, and from which story He quoted for their sakes. 
"And God said, Let Us make man in Our image, after 
Our likeness : and let them have dominion. ... And 
God created man in His own. image, in the image of God 
created He him: male and female created He them." 

Such is the declaration of the Hebrew Scriptures, from 
which Jesus made His selection and quotation. 

Quite apart from this accidental subject of divorce, 
tragic as it was in the hour in which the question was put 
to Jesus, tragic as it is to-day, let us consider the subject 
of marriage. Mark with great care what Jesus did. He 
emphasized the teaching of the old economy on this one 
point. That teaching is that man is a unity, and not 
a unit; that man is dual, but not two; that the full ideal 
of humanity is the union of fatherhood and motherhood ; 
that spiritually and in the last analysis, humanity is not 
represented in man, or in woman, but in their union. 
Man is in the Divine likeness and the Divine image 
partially; woman is in the Divine likeness and the 
Divine image partially. Not in man is a full and 
perfect representation of the Divine likeness and the Di- 
vine image ; not in woman is a full and perfect represen- 

[ 220 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10: 1-16] 

tation of the Divine likeness and the Divine image. In 
each there are elements of the Divine likeness and the 
Divine image; but in the mystic union is the full un- 
veiling of the truth concerning God. God is not Father 
alone, He is Mother also. In the essential mystery of the 
Divine Being, there are not only all those quantities and 
qualities which we associate with man; there are those 
quantities and qualities which we associate with woman. 
Consequently, thinking in each case upon the very highest 
level, in the union of man and woman there is the ex- 
pression of truth concerning God as there cannot be in 
the loneliness of the one, or the isolation of the other. 
When to-day questions are asked about divorce, men do 
not usually begin here; but this is where Christ began. 
If the question of divorce is to be discussed, said Jesus 
in effect, let us get back to the beginning of things, and 
see what God meant in the creation of humanity. From 
the beginning of the creation He created them male and 
female. 

In the complexity of modern circumstances this is not 
always possible of realization. The words of Jesus as 
recorded by Matthew in this very connection are signifi- 
cant. Do not let us forget, moreover, that Jesus said ere 
He uttered them : " Not all men can receive this saying, 
but they to whom it is given." Knowing the difficulty, 
I quote the words of Jesus: "There are eunuchs which 
were so born from their mother's womb: and there are 
eunuchs that were made eunuchs by men: and there are 
eunuchs that made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom 
of heaven's sake." In that verse Christ recognized the 
fact that in the complexity of human conditions into the 
midst of which He came, there might be celibacy through 
natural causes, or through force of circumstances; or 
there might be voluntary celibacy in the interest of the 
Kingdom of God, which is high and holy. Nevertheless in 
the original purpose of God, humanity is completed in 
man and in woman. When I hear of woman's sphere, 

[ 221 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

I am always inclined to remind those who speak*of it, 
that she has no sphere ! I will immediately add to that, 
neither has man a sphere! The sphere of Divine ex- 
pression is the unity of man and woman, in which she is 
a hemisphere, and he a hemisphere. " Male and female 
created He them/' That is the eternal purpose under- 
lying the Divine thought and conception. 

Our Lord then proceeded again to quote: "For this 
cause shall a man leave his father and his mother, and 
shall cleave unto his wife." "For this cause." For 
what cause ? We go back again to Genesis, from which 
Jesus was quoting : "And the man said, This is now bone 
of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; she shall be called 
Woman, because she was taken out of Man. Therefore 
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall 
cleave unto his wife/' Let us also turn to the apostolic 
exposition, as it is found in the Ephesian letter: "Even 
so ought husbands also to love their own wives as their 
own bodies. He that loveth his own wife loveth himself ; 
for no man ever hateth his own flesh, but nourisheth and 
cherisheth it. ... For this cause shall a man leave his 
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and the 
two shall become one flesh." 

By this teaching of the context of the words which 
Jesus quoted, and by the teaching of the apostolic inter- 
pretation of our Lord's meaning, we find that the cause 
is that of the fundamental unity. Involved, is the great 
spiritual declaration, that when God created man, He 
created male and female, and the two aspects of Deity 
are to be represented in the two. They make the unity 
of humanity. Because then the woman is the complement 
of the man ; that part of him, apart from which he lacks, 
and is imperfect as an instrument ; he shall, leave father 
and mother and cleave to his wife. The holy apostle in 
the paragraph in Ephesians. says exactly the same thing; 
the cause is that of fundamental unity. 

What then is the experience in itself ? Mark the super- 

[ 222 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

lativeness of the ancient word endorsed by Jesus, and en- 
dorsed by apostolic interpretation. He shall leave the 
nearest and the dearest he has ever known, father and 
mother, for the nearer and the dearer than they. In other 
words, the experience upon which marriage is to be based 
according to this Divine ideal, is that of supreme recip- 
rocal, affection. I have simply put into other words that 
master utterance of Joseph Cook of Boston, in which he 
declared that the only true foundation for marriage is 
that of a supreme affection between two. The basis of 
experience in marriage is the outgoing of love to love 
consummating a union which is indissoluble. Behind 
such outgoing of love to love, is the fundamental Divine 
conception and fact of creation^ " Male and female cre- 
ated He them." 

Finally our Lord quoted the words, " The two shall be- 
come one flesh." In that unity of the flesh there is the 
sacramental symbol of the spiritual unity which, if it be 
non-existent, marriage is a disaster, a sham, and the oc- 
casion of all misery. 

Observe the sanctity of this ideal. The Roman and 
Greek Churches count marriage a sacrament. I wonder 
whether they are not right. The Roman Church calls it 
a sacrament, the Greek Church calls it a mystery. I pray 
you remember that Paul also called it "a mystery." 
What is a sacrament? That may raise a great contro- 
versial question, and there is nothing further from my 
mind than a desire for controversy ; but if indeed a sacra- 
ment be an outward and visible sign of an inward and 
spiritual grace, then I affirm that marriage is supreme 
among the sacraments. 

Marriage is a condition of Divine expression and ac- 
tivity, therefore where its fundamental significances are 
forgotten, and its fundamental laws are disobeyed, it be- 
comes the most tragic of all experiences. Any nation 
which forgets the Divine ordinance of marriage, and 
what it means, ,will become a ruin, in spite of all its 

I 223 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

strength in other things ! It is for the Church of God to 
come back to Christ's teaching on this subject, under- 
stand it, and stand by it, in face of obloquy if need be. 
By so doing she will act in the interest of the race. 

While Jesus was talking thus to His disciples, people 
outside were bringing children to Him. 

Without dealing with the story, which is so familiar, 
let us listen to the final words which Jesus uttered about 
these children : " Of such is the Kingdom of God." 

Carefully observe in the first place that this is an in- 
clusive statement, the reference being to children as chil- 
dren, quite apart from privilege or disability. The state- 
ment of Christ in the case of a child is not made more 
true, if the child has been privileged. The statement of 
Christ in the case of a child is not made less true, if the 
child has suffered disability. That was a promiscuous 
gathering; those crowds that came after Jesus every- 
where were made up of all sorts and conditions of peo- 
ple; and they brought their children. They were not 
carefully selected children, but those of the common folk. 
Of these children He said, "To such belongeth the King- 
dom of God." 

Mark then the statement^ " To such belongeth the King- 
dom of God." They were all included, and our Lord 
further emphasized that declaration by expository words : 
"Forbid them not"; and "Whosoever shall not receive 
the Kingdom of God as a little child, he shall in no wise 
enter therein." Our Lord thus declared, not only that 
all the children are included in His Kingdom; but that, 
in order to be included, all older people must become 
children. John Ruskin once said that what man needs is 
not so much to graduate, as to backslide ; not to go for- 
ward into new cleverness, but to backslide into the sim- 
plicity of childhood. Our Lord was thus declaring es- 
sential truth. 

As I look in wonder and amazement, being influenced 
as were the apostles by the thought that children must 

[ 224 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

not go to Him, because He was engaged on such im- 
portant business that He could not be interrupted, I see 
that He gathered them to Himself, and said, These are 
in the Kingdom, and if you, apostles, disciples, desire to 
enter, you must join the children. 

All this has many applications. I want to make one. 
These children, find them where we will, in the tenement 
house or in your own home, are all spiritual, they are of 
God in the deepest fact of their being. We have had 
fathers of our flesh who disciplined us. Shall we not 
much rather obey the Father of spirits? God is the 
Father of spirits. In an almost amazing and tremendous 
mystery, God has united Himself to humanity in the 
propagation of the race, so that wherever children are 
conceived and begotten, God cooperates arid creates 
eternal spirits. 

When of these little children He said, "To such be- 
longeth the Kingdom," He did not mean that they were 
perfect, but that they were potential, and plastic ; each 
one separate, no two alike. Out of the ancient Scrip- 
tures comes back to us the old word so often misunder- 
stood : " Train up a child in his own way, and even when 
he is old he will not depart from it." Not, Train up a 
child in the way it should go, but in the way God meant 
it should go; in its own way, according to its personal 
capacity and lonely dignity. There is no boy nor girl^ in 
privileged home or in slumdom, but in that boy, that girl, 
are resident individual, lonely, magnificent capacities, 
which belong alone to that boy or girl. I sometimes think 
in these days when the passion for collectivism is so 
great, a perfectly accurate passion,- we need to return 
to the emphasis of this individual note, lest we become 
merely a nation of numbers. Let us remember that if 
God gives a little child its essential spirit life, in that life 
there are potentialities that are peculiar to it. 

Let us also remember, a little child is plastic^ capable 
of realization. 

I 225 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10:1-16] 

" A child's face is the window of its soul, 
That yet untrammelled by the world's control, 
Like some still pool upon a summer's day, 
Ruffles to every wind that blows that way. 

" And it is like a yet wide open door, 
That every year Life shuts a little more, 
It stands wide-thrown, and to and fro pass free 
Of its fresh thoughts the white-robed company. 

" And it is like a harp that silent stands, 
Waiting the touch of any passing hands 
That chance to pluck the clear obedient strings, 
Giving the hidden melodies their wings. 

"A little pool that ruffles to the winds, 
An open door where each one entry finds, 
A stringed harp to answer song or hymn, 
So is a child's face to his every whim." 

That is the Kingdom of God, the plastic possibility. 
Oh ! the tragedy of it, if that child should live in a home 
where the winds .that sweep, are such as nip and blast and 
destroy, where the guests that enter through the door, are 
such as harm and defile; where the hand that sweeps is 
such as does not make music but destroys it. I pray 
you, look on the sanctity of this ideal, for where it is 
realized, home is heaven, and the nursery is God's work- 
shop. 

We may now return to the accidental or incidental 
things. First as to the question of divorce. Where the 
ideal of marriage which our Lord revealed, is realized, 
divorce is unthinkable and unnameable. The question as 
it was asked, revealed the laxity of the age in which Jesus 
lived. He was asked to decide .between rival schools on 
this subject which then existed ; the school of Shammai, 
the strict, and the school of Hillel, the liberal. The latter 
was the most popular at the moment. Hillel had advo- 
cated divorce for trifling causes. When these men asked 

[ 226 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

their question, there was in the background of their think- 
ing, the dark and sinister figure of Herod. In answer 
Christ first appealed to Moses, and gave interpretation of 
his permission. Then He gave His inclusive answer, 
"What God hath joined together, let not man put 
asunder." Presently, when they were alone, the dis- 
ciples were so perplexed, that they asked Him further 
concerning the matter, and He gave them His answer, 
recorded in Mark, which answer must be interpreted by 
His manifesto. There is one, and only one reason for 
divorce. There,, I affirm again, the Church of God must 
stand, for the glory of God, and in the interest of hu- 
manity. 

As to the incidental things in the second story. What 
is more natural than that those who are of the Kingdom, 
should find their way to the King? Mark the mistake of 
the. disciples. We may think we should never make that 
mistake. I think that we are in danger of making it even 
yet. We still too often relegate work among children in 
our corporate thinking within the Church, to some sec- 
ondary place. We still imagine that our Lord has busi- 
ness on hand too important, to give very much time and 
attention to children. 

This is one of the very few occasions upon which our 
Gospel story tells us that Jesus was angry. " He was 
moved with indignation." When next we recite these 
words that constitute the magna charta of childhood, 
" Suffer the children to come unto Me," never let us 
forget that if they are tremulous with the tenderness of 
His love, they are vibrant with the thunder of His wrath 
against the men who hindered the children in their com- 
ing. 

It is as though our Lord said, If you will only let these 
children alone, they will come ; if they do not come, it will 
not be their fault, it will be yours ! I maintain that this 
is true. If the children do not find their way to Christ,; 
it is always our fault, either that we did not reveal Him 

[ 227 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10 : 1-16] 

at all; or that revealing Him, we libelled Him. Oh! let 
the children see Him, and they will be after Him. 
" Suffer them ; forbid them not ! " 

Then He took them in His arms, and put His hands 
upon them, and blessed them. From the hour in which 
He did this, Christianity has become preeminently the re- 
ligion of the child. There the Church must keep them; 
for the satisfying of His heart, and for her own well- 
being. Dr. Noah K. Davis of Virginia University some 
time ago said this remarkable thing, which I leave you 
to challenge, to agree with, or to correct. " Classical lit- 
erature knows nothing of children. Christian literature 
is full of children." 

Oh ! the glory of the Christian family where this ideal 
of marriage is realized and where this truth concerning 
children is accepted. May God multiply such families. 



XX 

" Why callest thou Me good? None is good save one, 
God" MARK 10:18. 

Mark 10: 17-31. 

THE selection of the text is intended as an indication 
of the purpose of the meditation. It is that of fastening 
attention upon the Lord Himself, rather than upon the 
young ruler. Of course we must see him also, and in- 
deed, observe the whole movement of this story; but we 
shall do that in order to consider as carefully as possible 
these arresting and remarkable words of Jesus. 

It is almost certain that this incident occurred imme- 
diately after those in which the Lord revealed the true 
ideal of marriage and uttered the word of inclusive truth 
concerning the children. As we saw in our last medita- 
tion, Matthew and Mark place these two incidents in 
close connection. Luke omits the story of the enquiry of 
the Pharisees, also the teaching of Jesus on the subject of 
marriage in -that particular connection. Matthew, Mark, 
and Luke place this story of the young ruler in imme- 
diate connection with the reception of the children by our 
Lord. This connection is at least interesting and sugges- 
tive, as it may help us to understand what this young 
man heard Jesus say, and saw Him do, which made him 
come to Christ in the way he did. 

His coming was due to a noble impulse, resulting from 
a true passion, and a deep sense of lack. Witness his 
quest, as expressed in his enquiry, " Good Teacher, what 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" Witness 
also his manner. He, a young ruler, wealthy withal, did 
nevertheless in the presence of the Galilean peasant, kneel 
and address Him with profound respect; and by that 
very attitude and speech he showed the fineness of his 
natural spirit. 

[ 229 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10:17-31] 

The words of our text constitute the first part of the 
answer of Jesus to the question : " Good Teacher, what 
shall I do that I may inherit age-abiding life?" This 
answer has caused very much trouble to expositors. The 
words have created serious difficulty in the minds of 
some who, believing in the Deity of our Lord, have un- 
derstood them as constituting a repudiation of personal 
goodness on His part. On the other hand, there have 
been those who, at once accepting that interpretation and 
meaning of the words, have used them as evidence that 
our Lord laid no claim to Deity. In his weird article in 
the " Encyclopaedia Biblica," dealing with the person of 
Jesus Christ, Schmiedel admitted the authenticity of five 
fragments of the four Gospels, because in those frag- 
ments Jesus seemed to renounce all which we now asso- 
ciate with His name. Among the five, this was one of 
the passages that Schmiedel allowed to remain as genu- 
ine. Let us at once admit that if Jesus did here mean to 
repudiate goodness, the deduction is inevitable, that He 
also repudiated Deity. 

Let us then consider His statement, endeavouring to 
discover what our Lord really meant, when He spoke to 
the young ruler; and that, not merely for the purpose of 
intellectual illumination, but in order that we may con- 
sider in the second place, the bearing of the statement on 
this great quest for eternal life. 

First, then, the statement itself. " Why callest thou 
Me good? None is good save one, God." The plain mean- 
ing of the passage is that which we first attempt to 
gather. There are three records of the event in the 
Gospels. Matthew's record of the first words of Jesus 
differs from those found in Mark and Luke. Jesus is re- 
corded in Matthew's account as having. said to the young 
man, " Why askest thou Me concerning that which is 
good? One there is that is good." The words in Mark 
and Luke are identical. 

These two statements are not alike, and they do not 

[ 230 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[.Mark 10 : 17-31] 

mean the same thing. The statement as found in 
Matthew : " Why askest thou Me concerning 1 that which 
is good ? One there is Who is good " ; is not the same as, 
" Why callest thou Me good? There is one that is good, 
even God." The change in Matthew's record in the Re- 
vised Version is unquestionably justified, and we need not 
now enter into the discussion as to the reason of the 
change. This fact, however, does not call in question 
the record of Mark or Luke; neither does it mean that 
Matthew is inaccurate. Here, as so often in the case of 
these Gospel narratives, the two are needed in order to 
understand all that Jesus said. Matthew recorded one 
part of our Lord's reply to the man, Mark and Luke 
another part of that same reply. As to the order of state- 
ment, I shall assume that He first said that which is 
found in the text, and then added that which is recorded 
in Matthew, granting that the reverse may be equally 
correct, and that it would make no material alteration to 
the deduction which I propose to make, whichever order 
were followed. 

Hear then the answer of Jesus on this wise ; first the 
words recorded in my text, and then the words recorded 
in Matthew. Said the young man : " Good Teacher, what 
shall I do that I may inherit eternal life ? " Said Jesus, 
"Why callest thou Me good? None is good save one, 
even God. Why askest thou Me concerning that which 
is good? One there is Who is good." It will immedi- 
ately be seen that there is no contradiction, and indeed, 
Matthew's addition makes the other question the more 
emphatic. First, "Why dost thou call Me good?"; sec- 
ondly, and therefore, "Why dost thou ask Me concern- 
ing goodness ? " and. each of the questions ending with 
the affirmation that, " One only is good, that is, God." 

When we read this word of Jesus we are driven to one 
of two conclusions. In that word our Lord either re- 
pudiated goodness and Godhead; or else He claimed 
goodness and Godhead. Simply take the words of Jesus, 

[ 231 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10: 17-31] 

and listen to them with the fearlessness of a child, and 
there can be no escape from this alternative. To the 
young man He said, "Why callest thou Me good? One 
is good, even God." Did He mean that He was not God ? 
Then He meant that He was not good. Did He mean 
that He was good? Then He meant that He was God. 
There is no escape from the alternative, and it is a ques- 
tion of vital importance, as to which He really meant. 

I unhesitatingly accept the second interpretation; first 
of all calling to bear upon the enquiry, the witness of 
the rest of the record of the life and teaching of Jesus. 
If there is one thing more noticeable than another in the 
revelation of this Person in the four Gospels, it is His 
quiet, insistent, and unhesitating claim to sinlessness. 
From the beginning to the end, never did there pass His 
lips, so far as may be gathered from the recorded words, 
a single sentence in which He seemed to admit sin. He 
did most definitely and positively challenge those who 
were His critics, " Which of you convicteth Me of sin ? " 
He did most continuously and insistently claim that in 
His own life He was not merely attempting to please 
God, but that He actually pleased God; as in such sen- 
tences as these, "I do always the things that are pleasing 
to Him," " My meat is to do the will of Him that sent 
Me/' " I can of Myself do nothing," " As the Father gave 
Me commandment, even so I do," " My teaching is not 
Mine, but His that sent Me." Quietly, without apparent 
argument, and yet with persistent definiteness, He claimed 
sinlessness. To my mind it is unbelievable that upon one 
occasion He should make a contrary declaration. If the 
writings recording all the rest of the years, and all the 
witness of His life, attest His sinlessness, we are driven 
to the conclusion, that He was not repudiating goodness ; 
but in the form of an enquiry, arresting the attention of 
a man, He fastened it upon the fact of His goodness. 

We must carefully consider the witness of the context, 
as to what Jesus meant. Here are two lines for us tp 

-I 2 3 2 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10: 17-31] 

follow: first, the things that followed in His dealing with 
this man will help us to understand what He meant by the 
first thing He said to him; and secondly, the things that 
followed in His exposition of the incident to His puzzled 
disciples subsequently, will help us to understand what 
He meant by these words. 

First then, the things that followed in His dealing with 
the man. Immediately after the words of Jesus, the 
measurement of certain standards of life was placed upon 
him. Jesus employed the second table of the Decalogue. 
There were two tables. On one, four commandments 
were engraved; and on the othe^ six. Our Lord made 
no reference at all to the first four. In abbreviated form 
He used the six, not in the order in which they are found 
in the Decalogue, but nevertheless including the whole. 
" Do not kill. Do not commit adultery. Do not steal. 
Do not bear false witness. Do not defraud," thus adopt- 
ing an inclusive statement of the last commandment, 
" Honour thy father and mother." The standard of 
measurement which Jesus placed upon this man for the 
moment, was that of human inter-relationships, the laws 
which govern the life of man as to his relationships with 
his fellow-men. 

The answer of the young man was immediate, "All 
these things have I observed from my youth." This was 
no empty boast; but the plain statement of honest truth. 
He was modest and upright, when measured by that 
standard. Let us emphasize for a moment the standard 
which Jesus did not employ at first, the standard which 
measures a man's relationship to God. Call back to mind 
these first four commandments in their spiritual intention. 
The first commands that to men there shall be one God, 
and that He shall be as God : " No other gods before Me," 
which does not mean having precedence, but, Before My 
face, in sight, in view anywhere. It is the command for 
the realization by man, of God directly, immediately ; that 
God shall be to him as God. In the second command man 

t 233 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10: 17-31] 

is forbidden to help himself, in the worship of the true 
God, by creating anything which he supposes is in the 
likeness of the true God. The second command sweeps out 
from between the soul of man and God, all intermediaries 
of every kind. While the first command calls man into 
direct relationship with God; the second insists upon it 
that he shall not aid himself to direct communication, by 
putting anything between his own soul and God. The 
third command indicates that which will be the necessary 
outcome of obedience to the first two; the hallowing of 
the Name. The name of God is to be held as sacred. 
Finally and inclusively, the result of such hallowing of 
the name is revealed in the hallowing of time. The fourth 
commandment is not one that deals with the Sabbath 
only; it deals with seven days out of seven days; the 
requirement, On six days thou shalt work, is as definite 
as the commandment, On the seventh day thou shalt rest. 
It is the hallowing of time in work and worship; work 
and worship alike being related to Him. 

Our Lord did not at first apply that test to the young 
man. When he said to Him: "All these things have I ob- 
served from my youth, Jesus looking upon him, loved 
him, and said unto him, One thing thou lackest ; go, sell 
whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt 
have treasure in heaven: and come, follow Me." 

With all care, consider that word of Jesus. Jesus 
called that young man to an abandonment so complete, 
that obedience must be the equivalent of worship. We so 
often quote these tender and gracious words of Jesus, 
and what wonder that we do! Yet we are in danger of 
quoting them as though they were simple and gentle; 
whereas they are imperial, kingly, absolute, autocratic. 
If Jesus Christ were not a good man, and were not more 
than man, when He asked the young ruler to do that, 
He asked him to break the second commandment of the 
first four. If He be not a good man, and if He be not 
more than man 2 then when He asks any man to submit 

[ 234 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 17-31] 

himself so completely to His authority, and to His will, 
He is asking 1 that man to break the law of God. This 
is always true. It is true of all men. By the rights of 
my manhood, by the rights of my soul, by the rights of 
that spirit-life which is of God, I will submit my soul, 
my spirit, my will, to no man, if he be man alone. I will 
call no man master; I will call no man father in that 
spiritual sense ; I will consent to submit my judgment to 
none. Yet Christ said to this young ruler, " Follow Me." 
It was an imperial, autocratic demand that he should 
yield the whole of his manhood to Himself. 

What then is this? Christ is seen putting Himself in 
the place of God to the soul of a man. There are devout 
souls to-day, who say that they cannot say to Christ, 
" My God," but that they can say, He is in the place of 
God to my soul. I am prepared to begin there ; only I 
would remind you that to put any one in the place of God 
to the soul, who is not God, is to put the soul in the direst 
peril possible. In that moment Jesus did put Himself in 
the place of God to the soul of that man. Sell all that 
thou hast, all that binds thee to the old masteries and 
sanctions of life, and come to Me, with the endowments 
of thy glorious manhood. Jesus, beholding him, loved 
him, saw the splendour of his manhood, and said, 
Wouldst thou find that for which thou art asking, life? 
Follow the good, which is to follow God; and to do it, 
follow Me. 

Let us next look at the exposition He gave of the in- 
cident to His disciples, and "we shall have further ratifi- 
cation of this interpretation. "Jesus looked round 
about," and He said, "How hardly," that is, "With 
what difficulty shall they that have riches enter into the 
Kingdom of God ! " They were amazed. Then He said : 
" Children, how difficult is it for them that trust in riches 
to enter into the Kingdom of God! It is easier for a 
camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man 
to enter into the Kingdom of God." 

[ 235 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 17-31] 

From these sentences let us simply take the thrice re- 
peated phrase, " Enter into the Kingdom of God." That 
was the subject under consideration. It is as though He 
had said to His disciples : What was that man's difficulty ? 
What did he refuse to do ? He refused to enter into the 
Kingdom of God, when he refused to follow Me. Jesus 
had set before him, as the door into the Kingdom, Him- 
self, the God of the Kingdom ; and when a man will not 
respond to the call of God, he refuses to enter into the 
Kingdom of God. 

" Then who can be saved? " said they. Mark His re- 
sponse. With God all things are possible ; with man it is 
impossible. I know the danger oftentimes of attempting 
to build a doctrine upon a preposition, but there is vast 
significance in this preposition. Jesus did not say, All 
things are possible to God, as though He had meant, God 
can do anything. He said, All things are possible with 
God, as though He meant that a man with God can do the 
impossible thing. It is not that God is able to do im- 
possible things, but that man is able to do impossible 
things with God. With men it is impossible. That young 
ruler, coming from men, judging life by their ideals, re- 
sponding to their ordinary sanctions of life, went away 
sorrowful; he could not enter in. But, it is as though 
Christ had said: I stood before him, and if he had .but 
obeyed Me, followed Me, then with Me he would have 
entered into My Kingdom. With God, he would have 
been enabled to do the impossible thing, and enter into 
My Kingdom. 

The light then broke anew upon Peter as he said, " Lo, 
we have left all, and have followed Thee " ; and Christ 
said in effect : That is perfectly true ; you have left all to 
follow Me ; and having left all to follow Me, you have 
by that process entered into the Kingdom of God, wherein 
you have found far more wealth than you left behind 
when you entered in. There is here a suggestive line of 
teaching which is often challenged. Do men who give up 

[ 236 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10:17-31] 

wealth, and brothers and sisters, for Christ, receive a 
hundredfold in this time ? Yes ! How little we know of 
giving up for Christ, how very little! Yet the measure 
in which we have known anything of it is the measure in 
which we have known what it is to possess all things 
through Christ. One house gone; but a hundred doors 
are open! One brother in the flesh lost; but a thousand 
brethren in the spirit, whose love is deeper and whose 
kinship is prof ounder, gained. If this is not the final line 
of application, I believe it is a true one. No man who 
really enters into the Kingdom, abandoning everything 
for Christ's sake, but finds within the Kingdom things far 
more precious and wonderful, in the actualities of present 
experience, than those he has left. 

What then, in the light of this whole story, is the bear- 
ing of the statement of Jesus on the quest for eternal 
life?. There is a quest for eternal life far more wide- 
spread than we sometimes imagine. We remember the 
words of the preacher in the book of Ecclesiastes, " He 
hath set eternity in their heart." What a significant dec- 
laration, and yet how true! "He hath set eternity in 
their heart/' It is true of all the sons of men. The 
passion for eternal life is present in all human hearts. It 
may find a thousand means of expression, some of them 
entirely and absolutely unworthy ; but it is there. May I 
describe it as the panting necessity of the human soul; 
the great underlying consciousness that the soul belongs 
not to the limited and the localized and the near and the 
dust, but to the vast and the eternal. " He hath set eter- 
nity in their heart." When that passion rises to its 
noblest form of expression, it employs the very words 
of this young man, " What shall I do that I may inherit 
eternal life?" Mark him well, a man of fine, natural 
temperament, a man of wealth and position, and yet con- 
scious when he came to Christ of the very thing Jesus 
Christ expressed to him in another form and guise, that 
he lacked something. Life, eternal life, is a quality 

[ 237 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10:17-31] 

rather than a quantity, is infinitely more than life with- 
out end. It takes in the whole sum of things, and knows 
within itself that it is master of them all; and the pas- 
sion for that is everywhere present in the human heart. 

But observe another thing. The quest for eternal life 
when it is followed upon the level of human life alone, 
and without relation to the larger things, is always hope- 
less and helpless. If I have quoted from the preacher, 
the declaration " He hath set eternity in their heart," let 
me complete the quotation. It is a wail of despair : " He 
hath set eternity in their heart, yet so that man cannot 
find out the work that God hath done from the beginning 
even to the end." There, in a sentence, is at once the 
passion and the paralysis of the human heart; eternity 
within the heart, creating a desire to know whence we 
are, and to interpret the strange mysteries of life; and 
yet, as the preacher, with his pessimistic soul said, God 
has put eternity in the heart, but so that men cannot find 
it, so that men cannot be at rest. Even in the noblest, 
that consciousness abides. This young man knew his 
lack. 

Now take the teaching of Jesus in the whole story, and 
put it in relationship with that quest. What is eternal 
life? I leave the story that I may use the words of Jesus 
in another connection. "This is life eternal, that they 
should know Thee, the only true God." How can they ? 
" And Him Whom Thou didst send, even Jesus Christ." 
Our Lord's declaration is that eternal life consists in the 
proper relation of the soul to God; that a man lives the 
age-abiding life, when he lives in right relationship with 
God. In that self-same word, moreover, our Lord re- 
vealed the fact that the way of God's approach to the 
man who is seeking eternal life is through His Son Whom 
He had sent. Come the Son wheresoever He may; He, 
the Only Son of the Father, confronts the human soul, 
standing before that soul in the place of God ; and God 
contracted, focussed, veiled for unveiling, hidden for 

[238] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10:17-31] 

revelation, is brought within the compass of the finite 
mind, that men through the revelation, may encompass 
that which is infinite. The philosophy becomes the grace 
of God, as we see Jesus confronting the young ruler, and 
Saying : " Follow Me " ; and, sweep out everything that 
hinders that following! 

The experience of the soul finding and following is the 
experience of life; so that in the midst of death, man 
begins to live; in the midst of dirges he begins to sing; 
and while all the mists and the darkness are round about 
him, he sees the light, and is able to say: 

" I stand upon the mount of God, 

With sunlight in my soul ; 
I hear the storms in vales beneath, 
I hear the thunders roll ; 

" But I am calm with Thee, my God, 

Beneath these glorious skies; 
And to the height on which I stand 
Nor storms, nor clouds can rise." 

That is eternal life ; and it is found when the soul comes 
to God through Jesus Christ. 



[ 239 ] 



XXI 



tt 



For the Son of man also came not to be ministered 
Unto, but to minister, and to give His life a ransom for 
many." MARK 10 : 45. 

Mark 10: 32-52. 

OF the revelation of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Gos- 
pel according to Mark this verse constitutes the central 
statement. Like a perfect gem it flashes with radiant 
glory and beauty, but unlike a gem, it does not reflect 
light. Its wondrous lustre is that of the truth it declares ; 
its light is within itself. One of our poets has reminded 
us that 

" Full many a gem of rarest ray serene 
The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear." 

But the gems in these dark unfathomed caves bring no 
light there. This verse flashes from within, in the dark- 
est abyss of human sin and need. 

Nevertheless in our study of it we find that its internal 
light is interpreted by its setting. Its final setting is the 
whole of this Gospel. All the story of Jesus, the Servant 
of God, from His introduction in the briefest words, to 
the last picture of Him passing back into the heavens, 
and from that exalted height working with His own; 
all the light is focussed in the text, and enables us to 
study its meaning. Its immediate setting is the whole of 
the paragraph, verses thirty-two to fifty-two. 

After the solemn hour in which, dealing with the young 
ruler, Jesus definitely placed Himself in the place of God 
to the life of man, He resumed His journey to Jerusalem. 
Here Mark, with brevity and yet with remarkable clear- 
ness, gives a description of that journey as it was thus 
resumed. First Jesus went resolutely forward, alone; 

[ 240 1 



.THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

then following Him at some distance, were the twelve 
apostles, amazed; and then beyond them, came the 
crowds, afraid. The solemn atmosphere takes possession 
of the soul as the brief description is carefully read. We 
see the Lord, the Man of sorrows and acquainted with 
grief, none being able to understand Him, none of the 
twelve in close companionship with Him, as He resolutely 
trod the via dolor osa which was to find its consummation 
in His passion. We see the twelve men, loyal-hearted, 
but stupefied, amazed at the more recent tones of His 
teaching, at the things He had now been saying and do- 
ing. Finally we see the crowds with that mystic sense, 
so often found in a crowd if there is anything strange, 
weird, supernatural in the atmosphere, afraid, filled with 
awe, and filled with reverence. 

After a while He gathered the twelve about Him in 
secrecy from the crowd, telling them in greater detail 
even than before, the story of all that to which He was 
going. While they were in that atmosphere, James and 
John preferred their request, and with infinite grace and 
tenderness He replied, though all the rest of the twelve 
were angry with the two, for the request they had pre- 
ferred. The Lord then rebuked the ten with great pa- 
tience, making that rebuke the occasion of uttering these 
central words : " The Son of man also came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life a 
ransom for many." Then they passed on to, and through, 
Jericho, and as they went, Bartimseus was given his sight. 

Let us consider the statement, first in itself; and sec- 
ondly, in the light of these incidents. 

First, the statement in itself. The music is so perfect, 
so final, that it carries its own message. Its notes are 
revolutionary and hope-begetting. It is revolutionary; 
the Son of man, Messiah, anointed to Kingship and to 
mastery, and to government, the One upon Whose shoul- 
ders the final government must rest; came not to be 
served, but to serve. Two millenniums have fun their 

[ 241 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10: 32-52] 

course, and the world has not yet understood that. Even 
the Church has hardly begun to apprehend the profound 
significance of the startling declaration. Yet again, the 
note is hope-begetting. " To give His life a ransom for 
many." Behind the great and gracious word, lurk the 
dark shadows of slaveries, oppressions, and tyrannies, all 
the things that blight and blast humanity. The Son of 
man came to give His life a ransom for the many. The 
finest possible exposition of the text is that of silent med- 
itation. I propose emphasis only, rather than anything in 
the nature of detailed interpretation. 

I lay emphasis first upon the Person speaking, and then 
upon the declaration made. " The Son of man." That 
was our Lord's favourite description of Himself. It is 
at least worthy of notice that in the Gospel records no one 
spoke of Him as the Son of man save upon one occasion ; 
and that was when He had so often used it that His 
enemies said, "Who is this Son of Man?" Remember 
also its Messianic suggestiveness to the men who heard it. 
All its associations were Messianic to the religious men 
of His own age. When they heard Him speak of Him- 
self, not as " a Son of man," but " the Son of man," they 
would immediately associate the title with their apocalyp- 
tic and prophetic writings, and know that by the assump- 
tion of the title He was at least suggesting His Messianic 
mission. The very fact that " Son of man " was the title 
of the Messiah, and that the Lord evidently loved it, and 
constantly used it, fastens attention upon the human note. 
Messiah ! Yea, verily, but Son of man ; Lord and Mas- 
ter of all the universe, but kin to all those who are to be 
ruled ; and over whom He will reign ; infinitely removed 
from man in His authority which is final and perfect, 
and from which there can be no appeal; but in all points 
tempted like as we are; a Man of sorrows acquainted 
with grief, knowing our hungers, our wearinesses, and, 
our tears ; the Son of man ! 

Remember in the next place, when our Lord used that 

[ 242 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

title here, that it was a declaration in close connection 
with that He had but recently said to the young ruler. 
To that man, He had suggested essential things concern- 
ing Himself, had put Himself in front of him as in the 
very place of God, commanding him to a following which 
included unequivocal and unrestrained surrender. Now, 
He referred to Himself by a title which suggested the 
method of manifestation of the essential truth. There is 
no contradiction. He had not ceased to speak as within 
the realm of His absolute authority as Son of God, but 
mark the statement: "The Son of man came"; and the 
employment of the verb in that connection suggested ex- 
istence ere He came, and dignities and glories and mys- 
teries which men could not understand, as all being cen- 
tred in His person. He came ; and He came for a pur- 
pose ; and the purpose existed before the coming. 

" Through the veil 

Of His flesh divine, 

Shines forth the light, 

That were else too bright, 
For the feebleness of a sinner's sight." 

So we listen to a voice that came out of the eternities, 
deep calling unto deep; the voice of " the Son of Man." 
Now with equal brevity and for emphasis only, let us 
hear the declaration, He " came not to be ministered 
unto." I prefer a much simpler rendering, "not to be 
served." He came as the Self -emptied One, as to am- 
bition, and as to His own well-being. According to this 
declaration in the heart of Jesus, reverently using the 
merely human name for the moment, there was no am- 
bition for Himself; there was no carefulness as to His 
own well-being. Not to be ministered unto, not to com- 
pel men to gather about Him, to serve Him, and lift Him, 
and honour Him ; not to secure His own immunity from 
suffering or sorrow, or to make sure of His own joy and 
His own pleasure. But "to serve." Self-emptied, He 

[ 243 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10: 32-52] 

was God-centred; and that first as to ambition. When 
our Lord said that He came not to be ministered unto but 
to minister, He did not refer to the fact that He came to 
serve men, but that He came to serve God. He came not 
to be ministered unto, having no ambition of His own, 
no care for His own well-being; but He came with one 
ambition; ambition for the glory of God, and the good 
pleasure of God, and the accomplishment of the purposes 
of God. 

So we have this wonderful unveiling of a Person in 
human history, self-less as to ambitions, with no care for 
His own personal well-being; and God-centred, having 
one supreme, burning, overmastering passion, condition- 
ing all thought and speech and action, that God's name 
should be glorified, that His Kingdom should come; not 
to be ministered unto, but to minister; not to be served, 
but to serve. 

Had the great statement ended at that point, we should 
have stood in awe in the presence of this Self-emptying 
of Jesus, but we should have heard no Gospel. In the 
final words of the declaration we hear the Gospel, and 
the music of the evangel breaks upon the soul. This is 
not something additional; but the unveiling of the inner 
heart of that self-same Servant of God: "To give His 
life a ransom for many " is to seek the glory of God, in 
the well-being of man. God is revealed through Jesus, 
as One Whose glory is realized in man's ransom, redemp- 
tion, healing, restoration. 

Let us attempt to look at this great statement again in 
the light of its setting. Here general impressions will 
help us better than detailed examination, especially in 
view of our familiarity with the stories contained in this 
whole paragraph. "The Son of man came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life a 
ransom for many." In the first part of the paragraph we 
see the pathway of His service, as He told His disciples 
that He must go to Jerusalem and suffer, and be killed, 

[ 244 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

but rise again. Then as James and John came to Him 
with special request, and the ten were about Him, we see 
the comrades of His service, and mark His method with 
them. Finally, in that which at first blush seems to be 
separated from the great line of thought, but which is 
really closely connected with it, we have an incident of 
His service immediately following, as the cry of the blind 
beggar broke upon His ears. 

With regard to the first paragraph revealing the path- 
way of service, note its definiteness, the particular care 
with which Jesus at this point attempted to arrest the 
thought of His disciples, and fasten that thought upon 
the actuality of the sufferings to which He was going, 
and the triumph which should result therefrom. Taking 
the paragraph as a whole, let us attempt to see what 
Christ said as to the pathway of His service. First, He 
declared that the pathway of His service was advance on 
His part to the place where all that was opposed to God, 
and so destructive of man, was for the moment cen- 
tralized Jerusalem. Those familiar with the history of 
the time, will remember the three great world-powers 
then existing; the power of a military despotism and 
government as centred in Rome; the power of decadent 
intellectualism and commercial prosperity as centred in 
Greece ; and the power of a degenerate religion as centred 
in Jerusalem. Jerusalem was the very centre of these 
forces in certain senses, having to do with that which is 
fundamental to human life, religion. This Son of man 
set His face toward Jerusalem, the place where all that 
was opposed to God was at the moment centralized, and 
consequently the place where everything that was de- 
structive of humanity was centralized. He had often 
been in the city before. How He loved it ! He must go 
again; knowing that all the world forces were there, and 
waiting with the one definite and specific intention of 
silencing His voice, and destroying Him. 

Notice in the second place, and here is the mystery 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

He went to that place to gather the whole onslaught of 
those evil forces upon Himself. He went deliberately, as 
God, to feel its opposition utterly and finally. He went 
deliberately, as Man, to bend to its destruction. The 
forces were those in opposition to the way and the will 
of God. The forces consequently were those that made 
for the destruction of humanity. As God, He went to 
gather them into His own personality; historically and 
visibly as Man, He went, that upon Him the destruction 
might fall. 

Yet once more ; the pathway of service was not merely 
that He advanced to the place where opposition was 
centralized, was not merely in order that He might gather 
its onslaught upon Himself ; the pathway of His service 
was one which He trod in powers which were invulner- 
able, and which all opposition could not overcome. Con- 
sequently, He went not merely to the Cross, but to the 
crowning; not merely to death, but to resurrection; not 
merely to the clouds and darkness which were about the 
Throne, but to cooperation with the righteousness and 
judgment which are the foundation thereof. He could 
say to this little group of men that on the third day He 
would rise again. His pathway to the passion was one 
trodden in the strength of invulnerable powers ; the power 
of perfect acceptance of the will of God, the power of 
complete cooperation with the activities of God; the 
power that was the more powerful, in that it depended 
upon none other power than itself. 

So we see this Son of man moving toward the scene 
of the things that blight and spoil humanity, because they 
are against God. We see Him moving thereto, in order 
that He may gather all the onslaught into the experiences 
of His own soul ; but we look into His eyes and there is a 
light that tells of victory. All moral forces were against 
Him. There was no escape ; He must be beaten, He must 
be crushed, He must be killed! No! There are moral 
values sustaining His soul, and spiritual forces renewing 

[246] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

Him. When they have killed the body they have nothing 
more that they can do ; and He will be the Leader of those 
moral values and spiritual forces out into new power and 
life. This was the pathway of the service of the Son of 
man. 

Then look quite briefly at this old and familiar, and yet 
beautiful picture of the comrades of His service. It is 
significant that they are divided into two groups, the two, 
James and John; and the ten. Look .at the two, and 
listen to what they said that day. I separate myself im- 
mediately and resolutely from all expositors who dis- 
credit them. I do not believe that this was the cry of 
men hungry for personal ambition. " Teacher, we would 
that Thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall ask." 
And Jesus said, " What would ye that I should do for 
you ? " They said this, " Grant unto us that we may sit, 
one on Thy right hand, and one on Thy left hand, in Thy 
glory." Before we criticize them, let us remember the 
atmosphere. " In Thy glory ! " But He was going to 
be spit upon. He was going to be scourged, He was going 
to be mocked, He was going to be killed! Yes, they 
knew it all ; but they knew Him, and that He was coming 
into His glory, and they wanted to be associated with 
Him in the power of that glory. Oh! great men were 
these; not wholly intelligent, ignorant of the very things 
to which He was going, the processes through which He 
must pass ; not knowing the bitterness of the cup, or the 
abysmal agony of the baptism; but believing that some- 
how He must come into His glory. 

Then notice His grace. He admitted them to the fel- 
lowship of His sufferings. He told them, in effect, that 
positions of honour did not at all matter. He said He 
could not give these spiritual positions to any except to 
those for whom they were prepared; but because these 
men had seen His glory, even though they were ignorant, 
and could not understand ; because faith had risen in that 
dark hour of foretelling to ask for association with Him, 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

He said: Yes, you shall drink of My cup, you shall be 
baptized of My baptism ! 

We had better leave that story where the Gospel leaves 
it. If we cannot, then we join the ten, and the ten were 
angry with the two ! The rebukes of Jesus were reserved 
for the ten; and even there, they were very gracious and 
beautiful. He called the ten and said to them, You do 
not understand this matter, you do not understand 
these men. "Ye know that they who are accounted 
to rule over the Gentiles lord it over them." The 
request of these men is not for the kind of authority 
of service which expresses itself in sacrifice ! Then He 
left the ten and the two; and the last word was this: 
The Son of man did not come to gain a kingly crown in 
the way men usually seek to do so. The Son of man did 
not come to raise His voice and clamour amid men, as to 
who is to be the principal power in the world. The Son 
of man came to divest Himself of dignities, and strip 
Himself of royalties and bind upon Himself the yoke of 
slavery and service, that He might lift others, and so win 
the ultimate throne of empire by the love and loyalty of 
those whom He thus lifts. He said in effect, to the ten 
and the two, to the twelve, and to all their successors 
through the ages ; if you would know anything of author- 
ity and power with Me, you must come this way with Me. 

Then came the incident of the healing of Bartimseus, 
the incident taking place in that very atmosphere and 
connection. First we hear the beggar crying out for help, 
and see him rebuked by the disciples. We will not be 
angry with them, but will try and understand them. Un- 
less I misinterpret this story altogether, the disciples were 
saying within their own souls, We do not quite under- 
stand what Jesus is trying to teach us, but these are big 
things. His mind is occupied with supreme things. We 
cannot attend to that man. A blind beggar must not be 
allowed to interrupt Him now ! But Jesus stood still, and 
said, Call him ! Then He healed him ! 

[248] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 10 : 32-52] 

The great is always operative in the little, and all the 
vastness of Christ in His outlook and intention as re- 
vealed supremely in His declaration of the text, is illus- 
trated in the fact that on the way to Jerusalem He could 
stay to answer the cry of one blind beggar. I go further, 
and say this. To have refused would have been to deny 
His teaching about service. Nay! to have refused the 
cry of a man in his agony would have been to deny His 
Cross, for not lightly did He heal. " Himself took our 
infirmities, and bare our diseases"; and behind the 
strength that went Out as a healing power, there was ever 
the unfathomable mystery of His atonement. 

The King is coming into His Kingdom ! Oh, yes ! the 
heathen are saying to us to-day, Where is your God? 
There never was a darker hour 4 judged by human stand- 
ards, in the history of the world, than that hour when 
they nailed the Prince of life and glory to the Roman 
gibbet on Calvary. Have we the vision of James and 
John ? Do we still rest in the confidence that the King 
is coming into His glory ; that 

"... After last, returns the First, 
Though a wide compass round be fetched ; 
That what began best, can't end worst " ; 

that though, in the march of the movements of the ages, 
humanity must suffer long, and the innocent with the 
guilty; though we seem to see 

Truth for ever on the scaffold, Wrong for ever on the 

throne, 
Yet that scaffold sways the future, and, behind the dim 

unknown, 
Standeth God within the shadow, keeping watch above 

His own ? " 

It behooves men who are of the Christian faith to rise to 
the heights and to take large outlooks. The King is com- 
ing into His Kingdom ! 

[ 349 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 10: 32-52] 

" The darkness is deepest before the dawn ; 
When the pain is sorest the child is born." 

That is the Christian attitude. 

Fellowship in the greatness of His Kingdom is condi-- 
tional upon fellowship in His cup, in His baptism, in 
sacrifice. How little do we know of this experimentally, 
how little have we ever known ! Where can we begin to 
have real fellowship with our King? The first blind 
beggar we meet is our opportunity. The first local, and 
apparently unimportant case of necessity that cries out, 
is our chance. If Jesus should have passed that blind 
beggar and refused to help him, because His thoughts 
were so great, He would have cut the nerve of His com- 
ing passion. He could not pass that man by, because He 
was mastered by the passion that took Him to the Cross. 
So God help us to go forth, seeing the coming of His 
glory, sharing the travail of His soul, and doing it with 
the next who asks our help. 



[ 250 } 



XXII 

"And on the morrow, when they were come out from 
Bethany, He hungered. And seeing a fig tree afar off 
having leaves, He came, if haply He might find anything 
thereon: and when He came to it, He found nothing but 
leaves; for it was not the season of figs. And He an- 
swered and said unto it, No man eat fruit from thee 
henceforward forever. And His disciples heard it. . . . 
And as they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig 
tree withered away from the roots." MARK 11:12-14, 
20. 

Mark 11: 1-25. 

THIS is admittedly a strange story, strange that is, in 
the sense of being unusual. Any one reading this Gospel 
for the first time^ who was really and intelligently inter- 
ested in it as a record of the life and work of Jesus, 
would inevitably be arrested and surprised. Moreover 
there are elements in it which have persistently caused 
difficulties to expositors, and that quite naturally. Curs- 
ing and destruction were not the usual methods of JesUs. 
Let it be at once said that therein is one of the chief 
values of the story. When Isaiah was denouncing the 
politicians 6f his day for their secret intrigues, and fore- 
telling the Divine judgment which must fall upon the 
nation, amongst other things he said : " Jehovah will rise 
up as in Mount Perazim, He will be wroth as in the val- 
ley of Gibeon; that He may do His work, His strange 
work, and bring to pass His act, His strange act." When 
in the Divine economy judgment becomes punishment, 
chastisement, and necessarily so; it is nevertheless God's 
strange work, His strange act. So this action of Jesus 
was undoubtedly strange ; yet it is clearly central to this 
particular paragraph. 

Before proceeding to a consideration of the story in its 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark n : 1-25] 

relation to the larger whole of the paragraph ; and so to its 
true value and teaching; there are one or two things to 
observe about the story in itself. 

This is the only account of an exercise of power, on 
the part of our Lord, which was wholly destructive. 
There is the story of His destruction of the swine, but 
that act was linked to the deliverance of a man. Here 
however is a story, and the only one, of our Lord defi- 
nitely destroying. 

There is no more warrant for criticizing our Lord for 
destroying a tree for the purpose of teaching, than there 
is for objecting to a Christmas tree for our children, or 
the plucking of the petals from a flower in a lesson on 
botany. 

But further, there is no ground for supposing that our 
Lord did this. I recognize the difficulty of the passage, 
and suggest that sometimes the simplest and most obvious 
meaning is the true. Upon this fig tree there ought to 
have been no leaves. There was such a thing as " the first 
ripe fig before the summer"; but whenever that ap- 
peared, it appeared before the time of leaves. I turn over 
the page in the Gospel, and find that our Lord Himself 
used the figure later: "Now from the fig tree learn her 
parable: when her branch is now become tender, and 
putteth forth its leaves^ ye know that the summer is 
nigh" (13:28). This happened undoubtedly in the 
earliest spring time, before the summer was nigh, before 
the time of leaves. But seeing that there were leaves, 
there should have been that first ripe fruit. The Lord 
came and found that there was no fruit. The tree was 
precocious, and its precocity in leaves demonstrated the 
fact that there was no possibility of fruit. It was a tree 
that had failed in itself, and so became a perfectly just 
illustration of that which our Lord desired at the mo- 
ment to teach. Beyond that I shall not go, as to the con- 
troversial aspects of the story. 

First, it is well that we should remember the time in 

[ 252 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark n : 1-25] 

the ministry of our Lord at which this occurred. Here 
begins the story of the last week in His earthly life. In 
this paragraph we have in view three days of that last 
week. On the first day He entered into the city in 
triumph, looked at the Temple, and retired at eventide to 
Bethany. On the second day He journeyed in the morn- 
ing back again to the city with His own disciples, and on 
that journey destroyed the fig tree; then having entered 
into the city and Temple, He cleansed the Temple, and 
at eventide left the city. On the third day He returned 
to Jerusalem, and on the way the disciples saw the fig 
tree withered from the roots, and our present study halts 
with our Lord's instruction to them in the presence of 
the withered tree. 

Let us bear in mind that this last visit to Jerusalem 
was official, solemn, condemnatory. Necessarily when 
we come to this passion week in the life of our Lord, we 
are almost overwhelmed by such thoughts as those which 
are suggested by the words of John, " He came unto His 
own, and they that were His own received Him not." 
We think of it as the hour of His rejection, as the hour in 
which the men of His own nation and people finally said, 
" We will not have this Man to reign over us." All that 
is true ; but it is equally true that this was not merely the 
hour when His nation rejected Him; it was the hour 
when He finally rejected that nation. With great sol- 
emnity and gravity of manner and method, He arraigned 
the rulers before Him, compelling them to find verdicts 
concerning themselves, and pass sentences upon them- 
selves ; until in solemn denunciation He actually came to 
the hour in which He said, and mark the words now 
most carefully : " The Kingdom of God shall be taken 
away from you, and shall be given to a nation bringing 
forth the fruits thereof." It was the last, solemn, and 
awful word of Jesus. We shall come next to the account 
of how He dealt with the rulers ; but hi this story we are 
in the presence of preliminary things. 

[ 253 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark II : 1-25] 

First there was our Lord's definite provocation o 
demonstration. That also was an unusual method. How 
often we read that He hid Himself, or escaped from the 
multitudes. Multitudes thronged and pressed Him wher- 
ever He went, attracted by His teaching and the wonders 
He wrought. He was never hostile to these crowds ; and 
yet He was always turning from them, escaping or sift- 
ing them, making it still more difficult, as it would seem, 
for them to come to Him. He had never definitely pro- 
voked anything in the nature of demonstration, but there 
can be no escape from the conviction that this was ex- 
actly what He did at this time. Crowds were there; He 
might have passed, as He had passed upon other occa- 
sions, almost unnoticed into Jerusalem; quietly and 
meekly walking in the midst of His own. Here He made 
definite arrangements, the actual carrying out of which 
must inevitably draw attention to Him, and centre it upon 
Hun. So we see Him, in what we sometimes speak of, 
and in some senses correctly, as the triumphal entry, 
drawing attention to Himself, compelling the whole city 
to know the hour of His arrival 

Then we have this symbolic miracle, wrought in the 
presence of His own in the hours of the early morning, 
when by a word He destroyed the fruitless tree ; and im- 
mediately following it, the instruction to His disciples, 
when on the following morning Peter drew His attention 
to the withered tree, and our Lord replied, " Have faith 
in God," and proceeded with His teaching. 

The whole movement here is national ; and to the para- 
graph, this destruction of the fig tree is central and sym- 
bolic, as I have no doubt our Lord intended it to be. 

"Without giving attention to the details of these stories, 
that are all so familiar, let us glance at the contextual 
revelations of the whole scene, in the centre of which this 
miracle of destruction occurs; in order that we may 
gather for ourselves the central teaching of this act of 
Jesus. 

[ 254 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark II : 1-25] 

We see Him first coming into the city as King. This 
again is something 1 new, almost unusual in this Gospel. 
He has been presented to us here as the Servant of God, 
stripped of His royalties, divested of His dignities, the 
whole truth concerning His mission crystallized into that 
wonderful declaration which we have considered, " The 
Son of man came not to be served, but to serve." Here 
we are introduced to this same Person, still the Servant 
of God, but the Servant of God in such a way as 
to draw attention to Himself as King, and acting 
with a definite authority. As the crowds declared, 
He came in the name of the Lord, the Representa- 
tive o.f Jehovah, the Representative of the God of 
this people. He came now in national aspect, doing 
that which He had done individually in the case of the 
young ruler, putting Himself in the place of God toward 
these men and toward this nation, drawing attention to 
Himself by the method of His advent, until there came 
from those Galilean crowds that quotation of their own 
ancient psalm, in which they declared the supreme truth, 
" Hosanna ; Blessed is He that cometh in the name of 
the Lord." 

Here He was seen, the Servant of Jehovah, coming to 
establish His Kingdom ; the Kingdom described by Him- 
self when He said IJe came not to be ministered unto, but 
to minister; the Kingdom of service, in which positions 
of greatness were those won by lowliness of service ren- 
dered ; the Kingdom which was to be founded upon that 
to which He did in mystery refer, the giving of His own 
life as a ransom. 

So we see Him coming nigh, coming in the majesty of 
meekness, stripped of all those things which men usually 
associate with royalty ; riding upon an ass. We are often 
told that this was a royal thing to do ; but let it be remem- 
bered that there was a clear distinction between animals 
upon which kings rode, even in the East, and the animal 
usually described as " a beast of burden " upon which our 

t 255 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark u : 1-25] 

Lord rode as He came into the city. I suggest one 
method by which the meekness, the lowliness, the poverty, 
the absurdity, of this entrance may be understood. In 
imagination think, not as a Hebrew, but as a Roman ; and 
think of the triumphal entry of a Roman emperor into 
his city; and then look at this pageant of poverty, lacking 
all the things usually associated with royalty and great- 
ness. A procession of poverty, the scattering of the 
clothes the people wore, the broken branches of the trees, 
and the shouting of the Galilean mob ! So He rode in the 
dignity of a great meekness, divested of all the things that 
humanity had for so long associated with Kingship, and 
still associates with Kingship. It was a pageant of pov- 
erty. 

He came for investigation. In that first day toward 
eventide, entering into the Temple, Mark records that 
" He . . . looked round about upon all things." It 
was the look of investigation, the look of inquisition, the 
look of One Who had the right so to look, the look of 
the supreme and final authority; it was also the look of 
the heart of an infinite compassion, the look of the eyes 
bedewed with tears. "He . . , looked round about 
upon all things." 

What were the conditions that He found ? I take His 
own word spoken on the next day; the Temple "a den 
of robbers"; its intention violated, and its shelter sought 
by vice masking under the garb of religion; the precincts 
of the Temple invaded by money-changers who, contem- 
porary writers tell us i were so nefarious in their practices, 
that their witness was refused in the courts of law; and 
all in the name of religion ; the Gentile courts desecrated 
by the presence there of animals for sacrifice; these 
things apparently in the interest of religion, the making 
of religion easy; which is always a perilous thing, con- 
trary to Divine intention, and an evidence of a degenerate 
people. 

He found the spiritual and moral rulers antagonistic to 

[256] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark u : 1-25] 

Him, His ideals refused, His interference resented; and 
preeminently and supremely, the death of faith, the true 
principle of national life. That is what I think He meant 
when He said to His disciples, " Have faith in God." He 
was not giving them the secret for destroying fig trees; 
but the secret for so living that they should not be de- 
stroyed as the fig tree had been destroyed. When the 
Son of man came to Jerusalem for His final investiga- 
tion, He found faith missing, He found leaves without 
fruit. 

Now in that atmosphere we turn to this central act of 
judgment, and without any further dealing with the de- 
tails, we enquire the meaning of this act, and what our 
Lord intended to teach His disciples, and His Church for 
all time. 

He meant first to teach that the fruitless must inevi- 
tably be destroyed ; that life is God-given, and always for 
the purpose of fruit-bearing. For simplest illustration I 
turn back to the commencement of my Bible, and find 
that He made trees, each bearing seed after its kind, for 
the production of fruit. It is but a figure, a symbol, but 
it runs down through all Biblical teaching, and especially 
with regard to this ancient people Israel. The national 
life was a God-given and God-sustained life, but its pur- 
pose was the bearing of fruit. We read that great wail of 
the psalmist concerning the vine that was planted and 
broken down, because it failed to bear fruit (Ps. 80). 
We hear in that lament sung by Isaiah in the fifth chapter 
the plaintive cry of Jehovah because His people had 
failed: " He looked that it should bring forth grapes, and 
it brought forth wild grapes;" and of this, the prophet 
gave his own interpretation and explanation : " He looked 
for justice, but behold, oppression; for righteousness, 
but, behold a cry." Because the nation created and sus- 
tained by God, had failed to produce the fruit which was 
the natural outcome of the life which He had thus cre- 
ated and sustained, the decree went forth : " I will tell you 

[ 257 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark n : 1-25] 

what I will do to My vineyard: I will take away the 
hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up; I will break down 
the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down." 

All these things of the past were brought home to this 
little group of disciples by our Lord in the cursing of 
the fig tree. If for any reason fruit is not forthcoming, 
the instrument provided for the bearing of fruit must be 
destroyed. The tree was the symbol, but the nation was 
in His mind. He came after the long centuries, to His 
own, but His own received Him not; and therefore by 
their refusal to receive Him, and JKis Kingdom ; by the 
absence of fruit, the necessity was created for the de- 
struction of the instrument. With the morning the dis- 
ciples saw mark the significant words, and how the sim- 
ple and sacred symbol applies, the tree withered from 
the roots. 

When attention was drawn to this, our Lord gave His 
disciples the interpretation. The central value of that 
interpretation is that faith is the principle of fruitfulness. 
They wondered at His power to destroy, or so it would 
seem from the simple reading of the story. " Rabbi, be- 
hold, the fig tree which Thou cursedst is' withered away ! " 
He immediately replied, " Have faith in God." He gave 
them the secret of making destruction unnecessary; and 
therefore the secret of removing obstacles to the King- 
dom, as He continued, if you have faith, then you shall 
say to a mountain, Be removed, and cast into the sea. 
In the life of the nation, when faith perishes, the prin- 
ciple of life perishes, and the possibility of fruitfulness 
passes away. Even so, for these men to whom He was 
about to commit the great responsibilities of the Kingdom 
of God, taking them from the ancient people, if they 
were not also to perish, here was the supreme and abid- 
ing necessity, " Have faith in God." Fruit was not found 
in the nation, because life had departed; and life had 
departed, because faith in God had departed. 

He then charged them to pray; for prayer is the ex- 

[ 258 ] 



. THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark n : 1-25] 

pression of faith. He showed them also that the prayer 
which is the expression of faith, must be the expression 
of life, mastered by compassion, forgiving, as well as 
seeking for forgiveness. Prayer love-purified, is the true 
exercise of faith. So He brought these men represen- 
tatives of those who were to follow them, the whole 
Church of God, to which this great responsibilty of the 
Kingdom of God was to be committed face to face 
with this central secret of life. Faith in God is the secret 
of the life of fruitfulness. 

The teaching of this story is for all time, and the ap- 
plication is not merely to the Church. It is specifically a 
national teaching. It may be well for us as members of 
the Church of God, and of this nation, to face the simple 
and yet searching lesson which this act of Jesus reveals. 
The life which we live as a nation is a life which God has 
given. All that we are as a nation in all its essential 
greatness, we owe to Him'. By His compassions we have 
come to be what we are; by His deliverances we have 
lived iii peace and in liberty ; by His illumination we have 
proceeded from strength to strength of understanding 
and of experience. It would be a work of supererogation 
to trace the history of this country, but the whole secret 
may be summarized in a verse from the ancient psalms, 
" The opening of Thy Word giveth light." Changing the 
form of rendering in harmony with the real significance 
of the passage: The going forth, or the letting loose of 
Thy word giveth light. If in one rapid act, the history 
of England, and of her most illustrious daughter, the 
United States of America, be reviewed, it will be seen 
that anything that has been noble and upward has been 
the result of the illumination of the people by the going 
forth of the Word of God. From the moment when our 
literature was born in the paraphrases of Csedmon, on 
down through every century, as the light Divine was 
given, so the people have risen. Oh! how slowly; be- 
cause how disobediently we have received the Word. 

[ 259 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark ii: 1-25] 

Yet let us remember that everything in our national life 
that is really great, that has in it the true element of 
beauty and nobility, is the result of God's compassion and 
God's deliverance and God's illumination. Our national 
life, British and American, is verily a Divine creation, and 
has been sustained by God as surely as was that of Israel 
Of old. 

Are we producing fruit after our kind, fruit that is 
true to the life which God Himself has created and sus- 
tained? Surely it is good for us to-day; that in the dark- 
ness we may have faith, that under the clouds we may 
consider, that in the midst of perplexities we may turn 
ourselves back again to the history of our life and its 
true significance, and ask ourselves quite solemnly, 
Does the Son of man, as He comes to us to-day, find 
fruit? 

I thank God that there are other teachings in this same 
symbolical realm in the New Testament. There is the 
parable of the barren fig tree, with its last terrible note : 
If it bear no fruit cut it down. But between the sentence 
of the proprietor, and that consent of the intercessor, 
came intercession and work: " Let it alone this year also, 
till I shall dig about it, and dung it." In the intimate 
teaching by our Lord of His disciples, speaking within 
the Church, He referred to pruning and purging in order 
to the bearing of fruit. In the light of this other teaching 
upon this solemn act of Jesus, I declare that unless we 
are responsive to the life which He has created; unless 
we are responsive to His chastisements, learning to sub- 
mit ourselves to them unreservedly, we also as nations 
shall wither from the roots. 



[ 260 ] 



XXIII 

" This poor widow cast in more than all they that are 
casting into the treasury" MARK 12:4$). 

Mark 11: 27-12. 

THE paragraph from which the text is taken gives a 
condensed account of the events following upon the dis- 
covery by the disciples that the fig tree which Jesus had 
cursed, had withered away from the roots. Matthew 
gives the story of these events with more fulness. We 
shall now only glance at them in their relation to the 
incident in the treasury, which Matthew omits. 

That story gains much from the fact that it constitutes 
a picture of light and beauty, in the midst of a time of 
great darkness in the ministry of our Lord. In this 
hour, when the Son of man was the object of intense 
hostility, and when He was exercising His authority in 
the solemn and awful work of denouncing and rejecting 
a fruitless nation, there appeared one poor lonely widow 
woman, in whom faith in God was active and powerful. 
She stands in striking contrast to the men who were seek- 
ing to destroy the Son of man. 

Let us first glance at this dark background of hostility, 
then observe the nameless woman; and finally consider 
our Lord's attitude toward her. The lines of considera- 
tion are: first, the Son of man and His foes; secondly, 
the woman worshipper; and finally, the Son of man and 
His friend, that one woman. 

Throughout the whole of this survey, the Son of man 
is seen acting in judgment. The word judgment is full, 
gracious, significant. Judgment becomes condemnation 
and punishment, or commendation and reward, accord- 
ing to the attitude of the human soul in the presence of 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark n : 27-12] 

its inexorable exercise. Here, from beginning to end, 
from the moment when Jesus was challenged, first as to 
His authority, to this last scene in the temple, our Lord 
is seen as the Son of man, sitting in judgment, and ex- 
ercising the right thereof. 

First then, let us look at Him in the midst of His foes. 
The stories in this paragraph are all well known. We 
will mass them for the sake of the impression of the Lord 
which they convey in these last days of His earthly min- 
istry. Four questions were asked of Jesus on this day 
when He went back into the city and to the temple, after 
the disciples had discovered the fig tree was withered 
away from the roots. There was first the question of un- 
belief : " By what authority doest Thou these things ? or 
Who gave Thee this authority ? " There was then a 
question of sinister intent, formed, fashioned, and framed 
in order to bring Him within the grasp of His foes : " Is 
it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not ? " There was 
then a question of flippant rationalism; the cynical and 
brutal question of the Sadducees, who, supposing a case, 
enquired who should be the wife of a man in the resur- 
rection. Finally there was a question of pure casuistry, 
the question of a lawyer, about the relative values of 
laws. Throughout the whole scene Jesus is seen, not 
caught, trapped, or beaten; but sitting in judgment, and 
with quiet, calm dignity silencing His opponents; until 
at last it is finally declared, " No man after that durst 
ask Him any question." The whole scene ended with 
our Lord's asking a question^ and uttering a denunciation 
of hypocrisy. 

The first was the question of unbelief asked by the men 
who were in authority in the temple. They recognized 
the things He had done, but raised the question of His 
right to do them. They knew He had wrought things 
that were superlatively wonderful. Probably it is true 
that their enquiry related to the cleansing of the temple 
on the previous day. While they were compelled to 

[262] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 11:27-12] 

admit that His action was something out of the common, 
for which they could not account, that some mysterious 
power had been at work under His control, which made 
money-changers flee, cleansing the temple for a brief 
hour from all its defilement ; they nevertheless raised the 
question of His authority. Our Lord's method with them 
was twofold. He first revealed their unfitness to receive 
an answer, by showing that they had already been dis- 
honest in the case of the ministry of His forerunner; 
and then He answered the very question He had de- 
clined to answer; answered it inferentially, as He gave 
them the parable of the vineyard, and of the sending of 
messengers by the proprietor, until at last the son was 
sent. At the close of the parable they discovered that He 
was speaking of them, and describing their national con- 
dition; and therefore that involved in His answer was an 
answer to their enquiry; His authority was that He was 
the Son of God. 

Then perchance, in some pause, there came to Him 
that iniquitous and unholy coalition of opposing political 
parties in Jerusalem^ of Pharisees and Herodians; the 
Herodians claiming that the Jewish nation at that time 
must be subservient to Rome, for Herod was a vassal 
of Rome; the Pharisees protesting against the yoke of 
Rome being laid upon the shoulders of God's ancient 
people. These two parties were always at war, always at 
strife. They now formed a coalition, and asked a ques- 
tion with sinister intent; so that if He should say it was 
lawful to pay tribute to Csesar, He would abrogate His 
own claim of Messiahship which He had made so patent 
by the provocation of demonstration on His arrival in 
the city but yesterday; or if perchance He should say it 
was not lawful to give tribute to Csesar, then He could 
be arrested for treason against the State. Mark the 
subtlety of the question, and the supremacy and finality 
of the answer as a philosophy of life : " Render unto 
Csesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the 

[263] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 11:27-12] 

things that are God's." It was a condemnation of both 
the parties that stood confronting Him; first of the men 
who were against the domination of Rome, but who were 
not rendering to God the things that were God's, the men 
who were tithing mint and anise and cummin, and neg- 
lecting the weightier things of man's soul; the condem- 
nation also of the Herodians who claimed that it was 
lawful to give tribute to Caesar, and in their deepest 
hearts were with Herod prepared to rebel against Caesar, 
if they might but have escaped from his tyranny. They 
were both silenced. 

Then, perhaps again after some interval, there came 
the Sadducees with the question of their flippant ration- 
alism. The grotesqueness of their illustration constitutes 
its brutality. To read these stories with all naturalness 
is to be impressed by the unholy levity that linked the 
great questions of immortality, the .resurrection, and the 
spiritual life, to such an illustration as they supposed. 
Our Lord answered first by sweeping away the possibility 
they suggested, as He declared that in heaven they neither 
marry, nor are given in marriage. Then immediately 
passing behind the illustration to the Sadducean philoso- 
phy that caused it, which denied the immortality of man 
the fact of resurrection, the existence of the spirit, and 
the very being of angels ; He reminded them that in their 
own scriptures God declared Himself to be the God of 
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and settled the question 
when He said that God " is not the God of the dead, but 
of the living"; and thus in one word, assured men that 
they limit their vision if they forget that those " loved 
long since, and lost a while/' are still living. The Saddu- 
cees had no more to say. 

Then one man amid the crowd, having observed that 
Jesus had well answered these questioners, came to Him 
with his own peculiar question : Which is the greatest of 
the commandments? He did not ask Him to put com- 
mandment into comparison with commandment, but to 

[264] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark u : 27-12] 

reveal the principle of real greatness in law, It was an 
honest question, a sincere question. Our Lord immedi- 
ately replied with nothing of sternness in His answer, 
with nothing of rebuke. Selecting, not from the Deca- 
logue, but from other of the ancient laws of the Hebrew 
people, He showed the central principle of law, the true 
inspiration of the law, and of obedience to it : " Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy 
strength. . . . Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thy- 
self." The man was arrested and amazed. He admitted 
that the answer was final. Then from amid all the hos- 
tility, there came from the lips of Jesus the tender words, 
"Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God." The 
questions of His foes were over. 

Then our Lord propounded one question, and we have 
no account of any answer made to Him. It was a ques- 
tion that suggested thought on their part concerning Him- 
self in view of His Messianic claims. How is it, He 
asked, that David speaking by the Spirit, described his 
son as his Lord? There the question remains Christ's 
one arresting question -waiting for the answer of all 
such as are perplexed in the presence of His personality, 
and demanding at least either that we declare that David 
was mistaken, and that Jesus was of our kith and kin 
alone ; or that we recognize that David, as Jesus said, was 
inspired ; and that while according to the flesh He was of 
the seed of David, according to the deeper mystery of 
His Being, He was the Son of the Eternal God. With 
the question He left them, warning those who , listened, 
against the hypocrisy of the scribes. 

That is a hurried survey, but it will bring us into the 
atmosphere of this last scene in the life of Jesus, in which 
He was present in the temple. How often He had been 
there. Remember the scenes that we have surveyed in 
our study of His life ; those recent happenings, that mar- 
vellous hour when He cleansed the temple; the electric 

[265 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 11:27-12] 

atmosphere of hostility, the awful impulses of hatred 
that were brooding, waiting to arrest and slay Him. 

Now observe the last thing that Jesus did. Passing 
from those inner courts of the temple He came to the 
outer court, known as the court of the women, where the 
great chests stood to receive the offerings for the priests 
and the poor. There He sat down, lingering in temple 
precincts, gazing with longing and love-lit eyes upon the 
desolate wilderness in the midst of which He found Him- 
self, looking for some flower, some fruit, something that 
would satisfy His heart. The last stern and terrific word 
of denunciation uttered, He waited, in the treasury, in 
the place where people were bringing gifts, in which 
though man was constantly forgetting it, there was a 
sacramental symbolism. Where the heart is, there the 
treasure will go. That is not the quotation, I know. But 
the change is implicated. Where the. treasure is, there 
will the heart be also; and, therefore,, where the heart is, 
there the treasure will go. Upon all giving, there rests 
the light of a Divine scrutiny and appraisement. 

So waiting and watching with the Son of man, we see 
what we should not perhaps have noticed, had He not 
drawn the attention of His disciples to it ; a woman 
amid the crowd, a poor, lonely widow,^ dropping into the 
treasury two mites, a farthing. In the light of what hap- 
pened He declared that when she dropped in those two 
mites, she dropped in " all her living." Do not be per- 
suaded to doubt that. There have been many attempts 
made to prove that she did not give all her living, and 
that our Lord did not really mean that. For the mo- 
ment, however, forget that final word, and look at her 
gift; two mites, equal to a farthing; two of the smallest 
current coin. We should never have seen it if attention 
had not been drawn to it. If a list of subscriptions that 
day had been published, these two mites would have been 
included in the final item, of amounts below a certain 
value ! Yet out of the midst of all the gifts, the Son of 

[266 ] 



. THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark n : 27-12] 

man selected these two mites; and lifted them into the 
light of the centuries. 

Looking at those two mites, those little coins, and 
speaking of them in the singular number, as one gift, I 
see here first a gift of faith ; secondly, a gift of sacrifice ; 
thirdly, a gift of spiritual life; and finally a gift law- 
fulfilling. I see one lonely widow woman doing a thing 
out of the passion and inclination of her inner life, un- 
observed so far as she knew by any eyes, in all probabil- 
ity attempting to hide from everybody the thing she did. 
Yet I see this one lonely woman in the midst of that 
crowd that day, standing in contrast to all the men who 
had harassed the Lord. All the hostility massed in the 
questions that we have tried hurriedly to survey is ranked 
on one side; and over against it is the simple act of a 
woman who put two mites into the treasury. 

It was a gift of faith. The temple was the house of 
God to that woman. Her gift was the sacramental sym- 
bol of her loyalty to God. She z as surely as the great law- 
giver of her nation, " endured as seeing Him Who is in- 
visible." We would never have seen those coins, if Jesus 
had not pointed them out, but what are they ? A sacra- 
mental evidence of a woman's belief in God. When He 
cursed the fig tree, and the day came when it withered 
from the roots so that the disciples were amazed by the 
swift withering, He told them the secret of how the na- 
tion might escape a like withering as He said, "Have 
faith in God." He had just been in the temple, and the 
rulers of the temple who were the rulers of the city, had 
challenged Him as to His authority, and thereby had re- 
vealed their lack of faith in God. But behold, one woman 
among the crowds, the sacramental symbol of whose 
faith in God are the two mites which she drops into the 
treasury. 

Again, it was a gift of sacrifice ; " all her living," a 
tremendous dedication. I go back to the scene before it, 
and I see a coalition of Pharisees and Herodians who 

[267] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 11:27-12] 

came to ask Jesus a question about tribute, about the 
things they were to give in recognition of right, authority, 
and benefit received. That is what taxation really is. 
We may object to it and quarrel with it, and may be 
perfectly right in our objection with regard to some of 
its methods. But in the payment of taxes we are making 
our personal gift to the well-being of the State, our ac- 
knowledgment of the benefits of the. government under 
which we live. That matter lay behind this question 
whether they should pay to Rome, or whether they 
should not. They were in the region of gifts. Remember 
also, their question was one of selfishness. It was one of 
expedience, dealing with the whole relation of a man to 
his fellow-men in the State; and the relation of a man 
to his fellow-men was degraded by the question they 
asked. Here, however, was a woman, probably knowing 
little about these Pharisees, or of the discussion of prin- 
ciples, of difference between Herodians and Pharisees, 
but recognizing her immediate relation to her God. Hers 
was a gift of sacrifice. She cast into the treasury " all. 
her living." 

Again, and this is the deeper note: it was a gift of 
spiritual life. It was the result of vision, and it was the 
expression of feeling. There are moments when one wishes 
one could draw aside the veil and know more. We would 
like to know where that woman lived, and how she lived, 
and how she suffered, and what her poverty meant; a 
lonely widow woman in the great metropolis, and she only 
had those two mites that day. They constituted " all her liv- 
ing." What made her find her way through those 
women's courts, and drop the whole of her living 1 into 
the treasury? Vision! She saw finely, and her heart 
responded to what she saw. That act was a demonstra- 
tion of the spiritual life, an argument against rationalism, 
a refusal to accept a Sadducean philosophy-that asked 
men to be content with the dust, and to live in the realm 
of the material. By that act, unknowingly, her whole 

[ 268 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark II : 27-12] 

soul responded with holy love, to the vision; and in the 
dedication of her living was her recognition of the vision 
which her eyes beheld. 

Yet once again, it was a gift law-fulfilling. Hear the 
question: "What commandment is the first of all?" 
Hear the answer of Jesus: "Thou shalt love the Lord 
thy God, . . . thou shalt love thy neighbour." What 
relation had that to the gifts that were placed in the 
treasury in the temple? All gifts placed in those chests 
in the treasury of the temple were divided between the 
priests and the poor. Now, however much the priests 
were degraded, let us never forget that to the simple 
heart of this woman they stood as the representatives of 
God, they stood for relationship to God. And the poor? 
She was of the poorest of the poor, but they were her 
neighbours; and when she dropped her gifts into the 
treasury she was keeping the whole law. She was ex- 
pressing her love to her God, and her love to her neigh- 
bour. So I repeat, that while Jesus waited and watched, 
He saw in that dark and desolate hour, one woman in 
whose life, ail unconsciously, Divine requirements were 
being fulfilled. The sacramental symbol of the beauty 
and glory of her life, in her gift of two mites, contra- 
dicted and corrected the atmosphere which was hostile to 
sacramental symbols. 

Look finally, not at the foes of the Son of man, not at 
the woman worshipping alone, but at the Son of man 
Himself. He had claimed but recently to be the Son sent 
to the vineyard for fruit, when the husbandmen had ill- 
treated and murdered all that had preceded Him ; but He 
knew that their fate would be His, for the husbandmen 
were saying ere He came, " Let us kill Him." 

In His final question there was a further revelation 
concerning Himself. He was David's Lord. Offspring 
of David, yes; but Root of David also; the One from 
Whom David had come, the One Who after the flesh 
had come from David. 

[ 269 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark n : 27-12] 

Here then, are three things to be observed. First let 
us observe His observing. Then let us hear His ap- 
praisement of the things that He saw that day; and re- 
mind ourselves how He was, and is for ever vindicated in 
that appraisement. 

Observe first, His observing. Here Mark is very par- 
ticular: " He sat down over against the treasury, and be- 
held how the multitude cast money into the treasury." 
He did not behold the multitude casting in. He was not 
watching them. He beheld how they did it. In the very 
simple and artless declaration of Mark something is re- 
vealed concerning Him that was peculiar to Him; in 
which He stood, and stands for ever differentiated from 
all others. What was He watching? Oh! not the trick 
of the hand, or the poise of the head, although all these 
things may very often be suggestive. Christ was looking 
deeper. He was looking at the motive behind, the reason 
for the giving, the impulse of the donation, the inspiration 
of the offering. That is what He is always doing. He 
beheld how they gave. 

In the Old Testament, in the dim twilight of that 
earlier dispensation, there is a great psalm. It is the song 
of a woman, Hannah. In the midst of her song, celebrat- 
ing the government of God, she said, " By Him, actions 
are weighed." Here the Lord is seen weighing gifts, and 
when the gift is to be weighed, the important thing is the 
weight He puts in the other side of the balance. He was 
observing how they gave. That is what He always 
watches. The Lord of pity and compassion is watching 
to-day how this nation is giving. We see in our news- 
papers a list of names connected with large amounts. 
Then presently there is that remarkable group at the last, 

"Amounts Under "! All the poetry is in the last 

item, and not in the first. The compassion of the human 
heart is finest and purest among the gifts where there is 
no record of a name. He is still observing how! 

But He was observing, unobserved. We have no hint 

[ 270 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 11:27-12] 

in the Gospel story that the woman knew she was 
watched, or that she was told. She is seen in her 
gift, and her passing. He called His disciples pri- 
vately, and drew their attention to that which had 
happened; but He did not tell her. I do not think 
she ever knew. I think that she lived all her days, 
and never knew, until there came one sweet morning of 
the light that never fades, when He met her on the other 
side; and then she found that He had kissed the poor 
copper of her gift into the gold of the eternities. 

Then note His appraisement of that offering. Draw- 
ing the special attention of His disciples to it, He said 
this to them, " This poor widow cast in more than all." 
It is an amazing thing, this ! He did not say, This poor 
woman hath done splendidly. He did not say, This poor 
woman hath cast in very much. He did not say, She 
hath cast in as much as any one. He did not say, She 
hath cast in as much as the whole of them. He said, 
" More than all " I Presiding over the temple coif ers that 
day, the Lord of the temple took the gifts and sifted them. 
On the one hand He put the gifts of wealth, and the gifts 
of ostentation ; and on the other, two mites " more than 
all " ! That we may not misunderstand it, He gave the 
reason : " They ... of their superfluity " ! Oh ! how 
the thing scorches, how it burns. Superfluity ! 

A little girl, during the war, wrote a letter to the Prince 
of Wales, a sweet letter, which was printed in all the pa- 
pers at the time. She sent, I think it was sevenpence-half- 
penny, and ended her letter by saying, " I am so glad I am 
an English girl, but I am sorry for those German chil- 
dren." That was an unveiling of the glory of the Christian 
heart in a little girl ! I think that day Jesus took the seven- 
pence-halfpenny, and said, More than all! And why? 
Because His standard is quality; and the quality is life. 
When a gift has that quality, that gift is God's currency. 
God can do much more with small amounts that have that 
quality, than with all the gifts that come from superfluity- 

[ 271 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark n : 27-12] 

The gift that is not easy, that comes out of blood, out of 
penury, is current in the spiritual realm, and God can do 
infinitely more with it than with the gifts that come out 
of superfluity. 

The last thing concerns the vindication of our Lord. 
Was He right ? Business men will forgive me if I am 
commercial here. Those two mites, given in that way, so 
that He was able to commend the giving, have produced 
more for the Kingdom of God in two millenniums, than 
all the other gifts that day. Oh! the inspiration of this 
story! How it has helped lonely, poor, and sorrowing 
hearts to give. Running on, and running ever, these two 
mites are rolling up their dividends, and their results are 
great and mighty, inspired by what that lonely woman 
did. May God help us to give to Him in the light of this 
story; and may He grant that the glory of it, and the 
beauty of it may be a transfiguring power upon our giv- 
ing. I do not think a collection is ever taken but that 
somewhere He finds a copper coin, and kisses it into gold. 
Of course this is two-edged. He still writes across many 
a gift, superfluity! 

It is not for me to measure the gifts to God, I cannot; 
but it is for us ever to remember that religion, politics, 
ethics, were all included in that gift, and are always in- 
cluded in our giving. Giving is still a sacramental sym- 
bol. The giving which is true is the outcome of vital re- 
ligion, high politics ; true philosophy, perfect ethics. 



[ 272 ] 



XXIV 
"Watch." MARK 13:37. 

Mark 13. 

THUS in one arresting and ringing word of command, 
the Son of man summarized the duty of His followers, in 
view of a prophecy which He had uttered of a most 
solemn and imperative nature. The interpretation of this 
command to watch must be sought in a consideration of 
the prophecy. Therefore, without any further prelimi- 
nary words, let me indicate the scheme of the meditation, 
and proceed therewith. 

I propose first to survey this prophecy of Jesus ; sec- 
ondly, to attempt to indicate its teaching in its bearing 
upon our present situation; in order that I may finally 
emphasize the command to watch. 

First then let us survey this prophecy of Jesus. It is 
at least a noticeable fact not to be forgotten, that 
Matthew, Mark, and Luke record this Olivet prophecy. 
Moreover, they all place it in the same relation to the 
ministry of Jesus ; at its very close, in that last shadowed 
week. Matthew gives the prophecy with greatest fulness. 
Mark and Luke give the same sections of the prophecy. 

Two matters demand our attention, preliminary even to 
this survey of the prophecy as a whole. They are those 
of the occasion upon which our Lord uttered it, and that 
of its full content. 

Jesus had come to Jerusalem, departing from His usual 
method, and provoking demonstration. Having done so, 
and looked round about upon all things on that first day, 
He passed out to the quietness and the seclusion of 
Bethany. On His way back to Jerusalem in the morning 
He had destroyed the fig tree. Then moving into the 
temple He had cleansed it by the exercise of a most re- 

[ 273 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

markable power, and had then entered into conflict with 
the rulers. This was followed by that last act of judg- 
ment in Jerusalem, when He sat and watched the givers 
in the treasury, and appraised the value of the gift of the 
lonely woman. 

Immediately following these things, His disciples drew 
His attention to the temple itself, as Mark tells, to the 
stones of the building, as Luke declares, to the precious 
stones and the glory and beauty of the building. It was 
a significant action. He had been there with them before. 
Why did they at that moment draw His attention to this 
temple ? Surely, we see in their action the result of their 
own attitude of mind. He had cleansed the temple ; He, 
had denounced the temple; finally uttering its doom, 
" Your house is left unto you desolate." Now they drew 
His attention to the temple itself; and immediately with 
swiftness and inclusiveness, He predicted its complete 
destruction, telling them that not one stone should be left 
upon another that should not be flung down. 

Then leaving the temple and the city, they climbed 
Olivet, until they came to a place which the evangelist 
describes as " over against the temple " ; that is, a place 
on the mountain side from which they could look back on 
the temple. These men, strangely moved by the things 
He had been saying, came to Him with their question. 
Four men are named by Mark as coming to Him. They 
asked Him, " When shall these things be ? What shall be 
the sign of Thy coming, and of the consummation of the 
age ? " The prophecy constitutes our Lord's answer to 
that threefold enquiry. 

To glance at the prophecy as a whole, I return to the 
record in Matthew's Gospel. There we discover that in 
it there are three distinct sections. In answer to their en- 
quiry, our Lord first spoke to these men purely from the 
standpoint of the Hebrew Messiah (Matt. 24:4-44). 
These are predictions that have in them the note of 
things concerning Israel, the Hebrew people, the Messiah 

[ 274 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

of the Hebrew people, and the theocracy of God, accord- 
ing to their ancient economy. At the forty-fifth verse in 
that chapter is a break in the discourse, with this ques- 
tion : " Who then is the faithful and wise servant ? " In 
the next section (24 : 45-25 : 30) there is a new outlook, 
no longer upon the Hebrew nation, but upon the Chris- 
tian Church, and the responsibility of that Church. At 
verse thirty-one in chapter 25 is another beginning : " But 
when the Son of man shall come in His glory." The out- 
look is thence no longer upon the Hebrew nation, no 
longer exclusively upon the Christian Church ; it is world- 
wide, upon the nations. In the central section He never 
spoke of Himself as the Son of man. He closed the first 
section with that descriptive title. He resumed it in the 
third section. 

He was evidently looking with clear eyes while the 
clouds were gathering about Him, and He walked the via 
dolorosa, and knew His death was imminent. His disci- 
ples had asked Him, " When shall these things be ? " this 
casting down of the temple. " What shall be the sign of 
Thy coming, and of the consummation of the age?" 
Here we see the Lord, never more wondrously, look- 
ing quietly on, and viewing the coming centuries from 
the standpoint of His ancient people Israel; from the 
standpoint of His new people, the Church; and at last 
from the standpoint of the nations of the world. 

Looking at one age from the three standpoints, the 
perspective is not always clear. Our Lord was describing, 
not so much the whole course of the age, as the crises, 
the mountain tops. As standing upon some height we 
look out upon the mountains and see one great mountain 
peak before us, and shining in glory behind it another, 
which seems near enough to the first peak to kiss it ; but 
when we have travelled to the first we discover that be- 
tween us and the other 2 there are whole stretches of val- 
leys ; so here, things seem to be near together which are 
really as far apart as the first advent and the second. 

[ 275 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

Therefore, we need most carefully to remember the neces- 
sity for the sense of perspective as we study a prophecy 
like this. 

In the thirteenth chapter of his Gospel, Mark has no 
record of that second section where the outlook is upon 
the Church ; and no record of that final section where all 
the nations are gathered together before the Lord. He 
only gives the first section, but with much more of detail 
than that recorded by Matthew. Let us, therefore, simply 
move through this thirteenth chapter, in order to the dis- 
covery of its movement, in the answer of our Lord to the 
enquiry. 

His answer to the enquiry commenced at verse five; 
and in the paragraph (verses 5-8) is a record of introduc- 
tory warnings, the value of which is not exhausted in the 
following paragraphs, but runs through the whole of what 
our Lord subsequently said. He called His disciples first 
to take heed as to their loyalty to Himself. He definitely 
told them that when they heard of wars and rumours of 
wars they were not to be troubled, for wars and rumours 
of wars were not the sign of the end. He told them 
finally, that whenever they should hear of such things 
they were to know that they were the beginning, the 
birth-pangs of travail, a travail that proceeded toward re- 
birth and new life. 

Having said so much He began to speak immediately 
to the men who were round about Him, giving them 
personal instructions (verses 9-13). In that paragraph 
He told those immediate disciples of a period of persecu- 
tion that was imminent. We know to-day how literally 
that word was fulfilled in their particular history, and 
how in that particular period of persecution, the strength, 
the comfort in all the true sense of that great word 
comfort that sustained them, was that of the presence 
with them of the Holy Spirit. 

Then He proceeded in the next section (verses 14-32) 
to describe the crises, of which there are two. In verses 

[ 276 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

14-23 He first foretold distinctly all that was fulfilled at 
the fall of Jerusalem within a generation. Continuing, 
He said, " But in those days, after that tribulation " ; and 
we may be inclined to think that " those days "of verse 24 
must be close to the end He had already described in 
verses 14-23. As a matter of fact, here we have two 
mountain peaks, but between the first and the second 
there are great valleys. 

Luke makes this fact a little more clear: "And they 
shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led cap- 
tive into all the nations ; and Jerusalem shall be trodden 
down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be 
fulfilled" (Luke 21:24). That little verse covers a pe- 
riod from the fall of Jerusalem until to-day. Jerusalem 
is still trodden down of the Gentiles, because the times of 
the Gentiles have not yet been fulfilled. Yet notice, with 
that illuminative declaration, Luke resumes exactly as 
Mark does. "And there shall be signs in sun and moon 
and stars." To return to Mark, in verses 24-32, He 
speaks of another crisis after the fall of Jerusalem, the 
crisis of His own definite and positive second advent in 
judgment; and all ends with instructions in verses 33-37. 
" Take ye heed " ; and thus we are brought back to the 
key-note, as at the commencement. 

In attempting to gather the teaching of Jesus, notice 
first that the prophecy contains a clear revelation of the 
fact that according to the conception of the Master Him- 
self, the age from the Cross to His personal advent would 
be one of perpetual conflict and turmoil. Our Lord's out- 
look upon this age was not that of one in which there 
should be a gradual cessation of strife between the na- 
tions, by the victory of the preaching of His Gospel, until 
the whole earth should be reduced by that preaching to 
a condition of, peace. I am told that these prophecies 
were compiled after the events. If so, I can only suggest 
that if a man had been compiling these records after the 
events, he could have written far more clearly. Our Lord 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

had no expectation that in this particular age war or tur- 
moil would cease. He distinctly revealed the fact that 
right through the age there would be conflict and turmoil 
to its very end. Indeed He foretold upon this occasion 
in harmony with all the great prophets of the Hebrew 
economy that the consummation of this strange and 
mystic age, the meaning of which was never perfectly 
known by the ancient Hebrew seers, would be in carnage 
and bloodshed, clash and strife. 

Observe in the second place that in this prophecy we 
have the definite declaration that wars and rumours of 
wars are not the sign of the end of the age. They are 
neither the sign that the end of the age is near, nor that 
the end of the age is distant. In order to our peace of 
heart, and to the clarity of our testimony to-day, Chris- 
tian people need to be reminded of the fact that Arma- 
geddon is not yet. Armageddon in principle, is often re- 
peated but not yet in finality. Josiah the king was killed 
at Armageddon. Zechariah the prophet saw Armageddon 
in his own age. Har-Magedon is yet to be ; but wars and 
rumours of wars are not the sign of it. Wars and ru- 
mours of wars are part of that perpetual process in which 
God, overruling the forces of the world, makes the wrath 
of man express itself to His ultimate praise, and girds the 
remainder .upon His thigh, restraining it as within His 
own will. 

Observe in the next place how in this prophecy our 
Lord uttered the most solemn warning against false 
Christs and false prophets, declaring that in hours of 
stress and strain, of wars and rumours of wars, of pesti- 
lences and famines and earthquakes, such would arise. 
From that hour until this, in all the history of the Chris- 
tian Church, it will be seen that times of strong emo- 
tional distress have been times of grave peril concerning 
the person of the Lord Himself, and there have continu- 
ally arisen false Christs and false prophets. The warn- 
ings of our Lord are most clear, that in such times we 

& 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

need to take heed that we are not lured from our loyalty 
to Him by any voice that claims to be His, or by any that 
shall tell us, Lo ! here is Christ, or there is Christ ! 

If this language of our Lord, as recorded by Mark, 
Luke, and Matthew, means anything, we have an explicit 
declaration that the approach of the final manifestation 
will be heralded by supernatural signs, stars falling, sun 
darkening, moon refusing her light, the powers in the 
heavens shaken; and that the Son of man will be clearly 
manifested. 

It was in connection with such foretelling that our 
Lord gave the authoritative assurance that these things 
must be. " Heaven and earth shall pass away ; but My 
words shall not pass away." This is a great text. An 
application of its declaration may be made to the whole 
teaching of Jesus ; but its first application is to this apoca- 
lyptic utterance, this prophetic foretelling, this clear dec- 
laration concerning the end. 

Still further observe that in this prophecy of Jesus 
there is an arresting insistence upon the fact that the 
time is not known. It was here He Himself did say, 
"Of that day or that hour knoweth no one, not even the 
angels in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father." Im- 
mediately afterwards He added, " Take ye heed . . . 
ye know not when the time is " ; and repeated it, " Watch, 
therefore: for ye know not when the lord of the house 
cometh." In those words He solemnly warned His dis- 
ciples, and us, and the whole age, that we know not when. 
Not in this prophecy, nor anywhere else in the teaching 
of Jesus, nor in the whole New Testament is there a 
single declaration that can help us to fix, even approxi- 
mately within the limits of a human almanac or calendar, 
the hour of the advent.- Nothing could be plainer than 
this: "Ye know not." 

All that brings us to the final and commanding declara- 
tion as to the duty of His followers, more than once re- 
peated in this final paragraph, and summarized in the 

I 279 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 13] 

last word, " Watch." What our Lord meant by; that is 
indeed f ocussed in the very word itself. Readers of the 
Greek New Testament will remember that two words 
are both translated in our English Version, "Watch." 
They are not contradictory, but complementary to each 
other. " Take ye heed, watch and pray : for ye know 
not when the time is"; and then presently, "Watch, 
therefore " ; and finally, " What I say unto you I say unto 
all, Watch." I take the second word, twice repeated, 
" Watch," literally, Be wide awake ; the positive word. I 
take this word, and feel my way into it, to see where it 
came from, and how it came to pass that men used this 
particular word in this connection. At the heart of it I 
find the thought of the market-place. Probably, there- 
fore, the thought of watching comes from the idea of the 
market-place as a place of purposeful and alert gathering 
together. There is a passage in the New Testament 
where that same figure of the market-place is discovered. 
When Paul was writing to the Ephesian Christians he 
said, " Buying up the opportunity," " redeeming the time " 
as the old translation rendered it; and the figure again 
is that of the market-place; a merchant man, eager and 
alert; a company of such merchants, all eager and alert, 
with their hearts all set upon their business. 

These values are all in this word " Watch." Take the 
word in its application to the individual soul. It means 
the faculties gathered together, alert, wide awake. That 
is what Jesus said to these men. He did not charge them, 
to climb some mountain height, and watch the east for 
the flush of dawn ; but He charged them to be watchful. 
He would put them in Jerusalem and Samaria, send them 
on journeyings toward the uttermost part of the earth; 
but He charged them that wherever they should find 
themselves, they were to be wide awake, all their faculties 
gathered together, alert, cooperative. 

The word, and the meaning of our Lord in the use of 
the word, is interpreted by all the injunctions. They 



. THE GOSPEL ACCORDING f MARK 

[Mark 13] 

may be summarized thus. He charged them first to be 
careful, supremely careful in the matter of their loyalty 
to Him. Take heed! twice repeated lest ye be led 
away by voices which claim to be My voice, and prophets 
which claim to speak in My name. 

The second note of injunction is that in which He en- 
joined them to the attitude of courage. Be not troubled 
when ye hear of wars, and rumours of wars. Be not 
even anxious when the tide of hostility focusses itself 
upon you, and you become persecuted, suffering. Be not 
anxious. 

Then immediately He linked the watching with prayer. 
" Take ye heed, watch and pray." " Watch." This is 
the other word. It has exactly the same meaning, but 
from the other standpoint. It is the negative word. It 
means, be sleepless. Do not fall on sleep in this one par- 
ticular matter of prayer. 

Once again we are arrested by a Greek word. It is the 
peculiar word that describes the attitude of the soul in 
worship, including asking for something, but not neces- 
sarily so. There can be praying, without a petition in 
it, and the thought is never exhausted by the idea of ask- 
ing. We may ask for something perpetually, and yet 
never pray in the sense of this word. Praying here is the 
prostration of soul in the presence of God; praying here 
is the wishing of the desiring soul forward toward God. 
We may be unable to ask for anything ; and so I feel on 
many a day, that I do not know what to pray for. But I 
can pray in the sense of this word; the soul desiring it- 
self out to God. There is a great word in an ancient 
psalm when the soul of a man found expression: "My 
soul followeth hard after Thee." That is prayer. What 
shall we pray for to-day? There are things we cannot 
ask for lest we cut across some Divine purpose ; but our 
souls can go out to God. Watching is the sleepless vigil 
of the God-desiring soul. 
And once more I put it last because He put it last, 

[ 281 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 13] 

not that it is least in importance watching is working; 
definite work appointed by the absent Lord; personal 
work, to each one his work; work in which the small 
becomes glorious in its relation to the whole. 

Our watching is first, the solemn and resolute mainte- 
nance of our loyalty to our Lord and Master. It is sec- 
ondly, that of courage of heart that is not troubled by 
wars and rumours of wars, and is not anxious even in 
the hour of suffering. It is thirdly, that prayer-life which 
is not for ever seeking for the second coming of the Lord, 
in order that we may escape from something ; but that is 
for ever seeking His Kingdom, His glory ; the accom- 
plishment of His purpose. 

Finally, watching is working. The attitude of the star- 
gazer with regard to the advent was rebuked at the very 
beginning of the Christian era when the angel said: 
" Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye looking into heaven ? 
this same Jesus . . . shall so come." There need be 
no anxiety. Our business is to fulfil His command. " To 
each one his work." 

My last word is personal. None of the things happen- 
ing in the world which surprise and startle me, surprise. 
or startle God. None of these things which I confess 
I am less able to explain to-day than yesterday, for the 
puzzle and the wonder grow were unknown to my Lord 
so long ago. He saw the age into which He had come. 
He knew the measure of the forces that were against His 
Kingdom, which is righteousness, peace, and joy. That 
is the order in His Kingdom; first righteousness, then 
peace, and joy is never worth while until it comes out of 
the peace that follows upon righteousness. 



[282 1 



XXV 

"In the house of Simon the leper." MARK 14: 3. 
" A large upper room, furnished'' MARK 14 : 15. 

Mark 14: 1-26. 

THE dominant note of this paragraph is emotional. As 
we read it we are conscious of emotional suspense, sup- 
pression, expression, caution, courage. The atmosphere 
is surcharged with feeling. As we attempt to visualize 
the scenes, we observe the personalities : the chief 
priests, scribes, Simon the leper, Mary, Judas, the disci- 
ples ; and central to them all, Jesus. Watching the faces, 
and listening to the speech of all, we detect tones which 
express intense and conflicting feelings; anger and af- 
fection, devotion and antagonism, evil gladness and be- 
neficent sorrow. Gathered around the Son of man are 
foes and friends, all strangely moved. 

While the introductory statements give us a glimpse of 
the avowed enemies of the Lord plotting for His death, 
the principal interest centres around two suppers ; at the 
first of which Jesus was a Guest, while at the second He 
was Host. The gatherings were separated by six days. 
John tells us that the supper at Bethany was six days be- 
fore the Passover. The definite time note in our story 
refers to the plotting of the priests and scribes two days 
before the Passover. The second supper was that of the 
Passover itself. The end was at hand, and with more or 
less intelligence, all were conscious of the fact. Hence 
the emotional activity. Let this then be the subject of 
our meditation. Here we see evil emotions in the foes of 
Jesus ; mixed emotions in the friends of Jesus ; and pure 
emotions in Jesus Himself. 

Let us look at the foes of Jesus ; a group, and a man ; 
the chief priests and scribes, and Judas. As we observe 

[ 283 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14:1-26] 

the first group, the chief priests and scribes from this 
standpoint, watching them in order to understand the 
emotions that were moving them, we see that they were 
filled with hatred, that they were conscious of fear, and 
that they were glad. These three things are clearly 
manifest in this story. 

They were filled with hatred for Jesus. This fact need 
not be dwelt upon, save as it is important to remember 
that they did hate Him with a profound hatred, an in- 
tense hatred. But there was an element that restrained 
them, they were afraid. They were determined to do an 
evil deed, and yet for a moment they were held in check 
Suddenly into this consciousness of hatred and fear there 
came a new and unholy gladness. 

For what reason were these men conscious of hatred of 
Jesus? He had rebuked their ideals through the whole 
course of His public ministry. Ideals are always closely- 
related to conduct; consequently the whole tenor of His 
teaching had been to rebuke their conduct. 

During the latter days of His ministry He had rebuked 
their failures as shepherds of the people. Functional 
failure is always related to organic failure. Sometimes 
the physicians tell us that there is a functional trouble, 
and not an organic one, and we are always comforted. 
Yet the physician would admit that functional failure is 
at least an organic peril. Where functional failure is as 
pronounced as it was in the case of these men, it is 
demonstration of organic failure. These men had been 
compelled, in the whole course of the ministry of Jesus 
Christ, and superlatively in these closing days, to stand 
disclosed; unwillingly, but definitely self-confessed as 
corrupt, as having failed. Their hatred of Jesus was 
consequently of One Who had revealed their failure. 

Mark the high tribute to Jesus which this hatred cre- 
ated. There is no greater compliment that can be paid to 
a man than to be hated by certain men. The greatness 
of a man is revealed, not only by his friends, but by his 

[ 284 ] 



. THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 1-26] 

foes. These men who are seen acting with hatred against 
Christ, by their very hatred were weaving another chap- 
let wherewith to deck His brow. 

They were strangely moved by fear, afraid to do the 
thing that was in their heart. Read again the statement : 
" Not during the feast, lest haply there shall be a tumult 
of the people." Why should they fear a tumult among 
the people? They were perfectly acquainted with the 
fact that the great human conscience, as expressed in the 
life of the multitude, agreed with the ideals of Jesus, 
agreed with His condemnation of their own failure. 
They feared a tumult. And why should there not be a 
. tumult? What is there necessarily evil in a tumult of 
the people? Their fear was purely selfish; behind their 
fear of the people in tumult, there lurked a craven fear 
of Rome, and of the possible loss of favour, and position. 
Again, what a high tribute to Jesus, that these men in 
this hour were afraid of a tumult, which would be in- 
spired by popular love of, and belief in, all that for which 
He had stood. 

The last note of the emotion of these evil men is that 
they were glad when one of His own number, one of the 
apostles, told them a way by which they could wreak their 
vengeance upon Kirn, and kill Him. It was a gladness 
born of treachery, gladness in the heart of men who 
were supposed to stand for the moral instruction and 
spiritual inspiration of the people. Morality was counted 
as nothing, in order that their evil purposes might be 
fulfilled. 

Let us now turn to the emotional life of this man, 
Judas, as it is here revealed. The first note not per- 
haps quite clearly apparent in the paragraph, but made 
clear by the paragraph as it is interpreted by statements 
of the other evangelists, and especially by one illumina- 
tive word of John is that of a man whose whole emo- 
tional nature was mastered by covetousness. John gives 
us a revealing word about Judas. Having recorded his 

[285 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 1-26] 

enquiry, "Why was not this ointment sold for three hun- 
dred shillings, and given to the poor?" he adds, "This 
he said, not because he cared for the poor, but because 
he was a thief, and having the bag took away what was 
put therein." There is revealed the master motive in the 
emotional life of Judas. The word covetousness does 
not startle the human heart. At its mention none blushes, 
or blanches. Yet it is the deadliest of all deadly sins. 
The only word in the Decalogue that brought Saul of 
Tarsus to conviction of sin, as he himself confessed in 
the Roman letter, was the word, "Thou shalt not covet." 
He who could stand erect in the presence of every other 
commandment, bowed his head, and knew his guilt when 
he reached that word. Covetousness is the subtlest sin 
of all! 

Mark the fact concerning Judas. " He was a thief, and 
he had the bag." Was he given the bag because he was 
a thief ? No, but because of his capacity in business mat- 
ters. Undoubtedly everything was orderly in that little 
company of apostles. It may seem a small thing to say 
about Jesus, but He is the Author of order. The weak- 
ness of Judas lay in the realm of his power. His capac- 
ity was the reason of his appointment to the treasurer- 
ship of the little band; and right at the heart of his 
power, or capacity, lay his weakness. This is always so. 
When the apostle declared in one of his letters, " When 
I am weak then am I strong," he declared a great truth 
which may be expressed in another way, Where I am 
strong there I am weak. Temptation always lies within 
the realm of capacity. Financial ability is fraudulent 
possibility not fraudulent necessity! It is not neces- 
sary for a man with financial ability to be fraudulent, but 
the capacity creates the possibility. Here, in spite of the 
brilliant essayists of the past, and the no less brilliant 
novelists of modern time, Judas stands confronting us, 
a man mastered emotionally by covetousness, the weak- 
ness of his own power and capacity. 

[286] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 1-26] 

Yet as we look at his emotional nature again, the more 
amazing thing is not that of the covetousness which was 
the inspiration of his treachery, but that of the callous- 
ness which enabled him to so act. Mark the hardening 
of the nature, the petrifying of the heart ! The marvel of 
it, that any man could have lived and walked with Jesus, 
and yet have done this deed ! 

I am impressed, moreover, by the craftiness of the 
action of this man ; ciumingly choosing a moment, wait- 
ing for an opportunity. An emotional nature, hating; 
yes, strongly moved, wickedly unrestrained, covetous, 
callous, crafty. The picture is almost too dark to tarry 
at the looking. 

So we look at the page again, to see this same emo- 
tional unveiling, in the case of the friends of Jesus. 
Here again we have a group and a person; the group of 
the disciples, and Mary. 

Glance at the group of the disciples at that first supper, 
in the house of Simon the leper; undoubtedly the home 
also of Martha, Mary, and Lazarus, to whom Simon was 
himself surely related. The first thing we observe as we 
look at them is that they were angry exceedingly, and 
as they thought, righteously so with Mary. Misled by 
the speciousness of Judas, misunderstanding entirely the 
action of the woman, they were angry, that in the pres- 
ence of human poverty and need, there should be this 
waste. Judas it was who suggested this. In his case 
the suggestion came out of the thieving instinct of his 
own heart. He was a thief, and he had the bag. It was 
a specious suggestion. In the case of the other disciples, 
the anger did not arise from covetousness. They thought 
that theirs was most righteous anger, they were angry 
with a woman for wasting what might have been given 
to the poor. 

Look at this same group of men once again, at the second 
supper ; no longer glad, but sorrowful, with that poignant 
sorrow that came out of a great dread. Jesus had 

[287] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 1-26] 

startled them by a word, " One of you shall betray Me." 
In a moment every man was afraid arid sorrowful ; and 
each in turn asked the question, " Lord is it I ? " It was 
a great moment of emotion ; it was a moment of splendid 
honesty. When Jesus made His statement He forced 
them as individual men to come face to face with Him- 
self; and the question they asked Him was not, Is it my 
neighbour? but " Is it I ? " It was a moment when every 
man suddenly woke to the fact that there was within 
himself howsoever he hated it something of the capac- 
ity for treachery. We see them there, strangely stirred 
with sorrowful emotion and fear. 

Now let us return to the first supper, and look at Mary. 
Again the whole picture is one of the emotions. First ob- 
serve the understandingness of this woman; how she saw 
and knew, that day, what no apostle saw or knew. She 
had had previous experiences of very close fellowship 
with Jesus. Luke records one, John another. The first, 
recorded by Luke, was in the day of sunshine and pros- 
perity. He tells the gracious and wonderful story of how, 
having rendered her share of help in the work of the 
home, she also sat at His feet to hear His word. In the 
day of joy this woman had made time for quietness and 
discipleship, for adoration and listening. She had then 
found her way to His feet. On a later occasion, as John 
tells us, when the heaven was black with sorrow, when 
Lazarus was dead, and in his grave, she found her way 
to His feet in her desolate anguish, and the sequel is 
known. Now this was the hour of His anguish, this was 
the hour of His desolation ; and this one woman, of all the 
group, discovered it. The keen intuition of her heart 
understood better than any other, all that He was passing 
through. Mary, coming with that cruse of precious spike- 
nard, approached nearer the sacred sorrow of the Son of 
man, than did any other soul, at any period in His min- 
istry. Such understandingness is a rare thing. How 
few possess it ! I sometimes think that the highest thing 

[ 288 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 1-26] 

that pan ever be said of man or woman is that he or she 
is an understanding person. 

Again, she was impulsive. There may be those who 
think that to be a sign of weakness. Nay, it is a thing of 
strength! Of course it matters what the impulse is, it 
may be evil, but it may be good. For a long while we 
have been suffering from an unholy horror of anything 
impulsive or emotional. This was an impulsive act, un- 
conventional, uncalculating, imprudent if you will, on 
Mary's part. Of course Judas could not understand this. 
Even the apostles could not understand it. It was an act 
born of the prodigality of love, daring not to calculate. 
No careful, mathematical, mechanical, consideration of 
how much or how little was this ; but the bringing of the 
most costly gift available, and the pouring of it out upon 
His head and feet. 

This was magnificent impulse; emotion, without re- 
serve ; and the deepest value of it was that it brought her 
into true fellowship with Him, not merely in the sense of 
understandingness, but in the sense of cooperation. Not 
idly or carelessly did our Lord utter His words of com- 
mendation. Not idly or carelessly did He say to those 
disciples, "Wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached 
throughout the whole world, that also which this woman 
hath done shall be spoken for a memorial of her." In 
those words He was revealing a wonderful truth con- 
cerning the thing that Mary did. Notice how He brought 
together, " The Gospel " and " That . . . which this 
woman hath done." But six days away from that scene 
was Golgotha, the unfathomable darkness and mystery 
of the Cross ; and beyond it the light of the Resurrection, 
and out of these came the Gospel. "The Gospel," and 
"That" stand side by side with each other for ever. 
That keen intuition of love, that uncalculating outpouring 
of love was Godlike, and an act in fellowship with the 
act of God, by which a world is to be redeemed. Mary 
is here to be measured, not by the inspiration of intel- 

[289] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14:1-26] 

lectual apprehension, but by the inspiration of a great 
heart. 

Finally, and that with all reverence, let us look at the 
picture of Jesus presented here. It is purely emotional. 
In some senses there seem to be no very great things in- 
tellectually. There are however three things emotional, 
which impress me, as I read the story. First, His appre- 
ciation of love in the case of Mary ; secondly, His repre- 
hension of treachery in the case of Judas ; and finally, His 
preparation for emotional communion between Himself 
and His disciples in all the coming days, for that is what 
the institution of the Supper really meant. 

First, as I look at my Lord z I am impressed by His 
appreciation of love. Do not spoil this story by trying to 
explain away this attitude of Jesus toward Mary. Be 
simple about it, graphic and childlike, and look at the 
scene as it really was. They were feasting in the house 
of Simon the leper. A wonderful hour was that; Martha 
still serving ; Lazarus, risen from the dead, sitting at the 
board, and the disciples round about the Master, blinded 
intellectually by the mystery of His recent teaching. 
Then it was that this woman came with the alabaster 
cruse. Note the whispering among the apostles, and the 
sudden, swift, almost angry protest of Jesus against their 
whispering. " Let her alone; why trouble ye her? " Do 
not be afraid to interpret the words of Jesus so. I think 
His very protest was a revelation of His appreciation of 
her love. It is very difficult for us to do ; but let us try 
and understand what that action meant to Him. There 
He was, humanly speaking hemmed in by blind hate ; and 
here was one action of understanding love! There He 
was, amid the hindering of His activity; and here was one 
act of help ! There was He A in a dark and desolate land ; 
and lo! out of the heart of a woman, a spring of fresh 
water sprung for the thirsty Christ ! He valued it. 

Look at Him again on that second occasion ; and again 
do not rob the story of its force. He knew what treach- 

[ 290 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:1-26] 

ery lurked in the heart of Judas, and of his arrangements 
made for His arrest; and He resented it! Try and 
enter into His feelings here again, so much as may be. 
Remember His purpose of love, and then see standing in 
the way of it, this act of hate. Remember His power to 
help, and then think of this as an attempt to hinder His 
exercising that very power. Endeavour to apprehend 
the world-sphere of His benevolence, and then mark how 
in the highway of its operation, He saw this malevolent 
action. Then we shall not be surprised at the solemnity 
of His words, and the emotional anger of His soul, 
against the act of the traitor. 

When the traitor was excluded from the paschal board, 
He instituted the sacred new feast. The supreme value 
of the Supper of the Lord is emotional, not intellectual. 
These symbols reveal no secrets, but they remind us of 
mystery. Although Mark does not give the full account 
of the words spoken at this time, we may remember them 
in this connection. Our Lord said, " This do in remem- 
brance of Me." The activity of memory produces the 
renewal of feeling, the reawakening of thanksgiving. The 
Holy Table is the place of the Eucharist. The Eucharist 
simply means the thanksgiving. Christian men and 
women who gather around the board, are priests of 
thanksgiving, offering the sacrifice of praise. Our Lord 
instituted the Supper with that end in view. Such pro- 
vision was inspired by emotion. Jesus was making ar- 
rangements for the perpetual recurrence of an hour of 
tryst between Himself and His lovers, in which they 
should remember Him. 

What is the value of that portrait that hangs upon the 
wall, dear mother, of your son, or of your daughter away 
in a distant land? It is something that reminds you of 
him, of her; when you look upon the face, your heart is 
moved anew. The portrait is not there to instruct your 
intellect; it is there to touch your emotion. So in this 
final hour, our Lord instituted this simple Feast, and es- 

[ 291 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14: 1-26] 

tablished a ritual which, whenever it be truly observed, 
brings Him back to the memory more vividly, and causes 
an emotional outgoing toward Himself. 

How did the Feast end? With twelve men singing, 
Jesus, and the eleven. "When they had sung a hymn, 
they went out." Take the book of Psalms, and read from 
the one hundred and thirteenth, to the one hundred and 
eighteenth. They constitute the great Hallel, and from 
these Jesus undoubtedly sang with His disciples. What 
is singing but emotional expression? 

Oh ! the value and the power of emotion. Evil emo- 
tion slays the Lord of life and glory! Pure emotion 
makes possible the saving of the slayers. 

Then let us guard our emotions. What masters them ? 
What inspires them? Is it self? Or is it the Christ? 
If it be the Christ, then let us trust them, and let us obey 
them. Let us decline for evermore to listen to the 
mechanical, arithmetical, accurate, prudent, and devilish 
calculation, that prevents waste ! Let us dare to pour out 
our hearts and ourselves in emotional adoration! 

We may say if only He were here to-day to sit with 
us at the board, we could do it, and we would ! Ah He is 
here to-day, in the person of all who are in distress. Do 
not let us be afraid of our hearts. Have you found out 
that you have one? Count this a gain indeed, and follow 
its dictates. 



[ 393 I 



XXVI 

"And Jesus saitH unto them, All ye shall be offended: 
for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered abroad. Howbeit, after I am raised 
up, I will go before you into Galilee." MARK 14 : 27, 28. 

Mark 14: 27-52. 

IN this paragraph we have the record of a series of in- 
cidents following each other in close succession. The 
story is characteristic of the method of Mark in that these 
incidents are given with great brevity, many details being 
omitted; and yet with great clarity, in that the central 
things are made perfectly plain. Jesus and His disciples 
had joined in singing together the hymn appointed for 
that Passover feast ; the great Hallel, found in our Psalter 
in Psalms 113-118. We can easily imagine how the last 
cadences of this song were still in their memory as they 
left the upper room, and the city, and went to Olivet. 
Very significant are the final sentences : 

" Jehovah is God, and He hath given us light ; 
Bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of 

the altar. 

Thou art my God, and I will give thanks unto Thee; 
Thou art my God, I will exalt Thee. 
O give thanks unto Jehovah ; for He is good ; 
For His lovingkindness endureth for ever." 

They passed from the upper room, and from the city, 
to the quietude of Olivet. There Jesus told them of His 
smiting, and of their scattering. They immediately and 
vehemently protested, Peter being the principal spokes- 
man of their common conviction and intention. Then 
they went to Gethsemane, and its overwhelmingly solemn 
events transpired. 

I 293 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14 : 27-52] 

The next incident was that of the arrival of Judas, and 
the arrest of Jesus. This was immediately followed by 
the action of Peter, in the use of the sword. Jesus pro- 
tested against the method of the mob, and yet consented 
to His own arrest. Then the whole company of the dis- 
ciples forsook Him and fled. Mark adds one incident. 
A certain young man, probably hot of the company of 
the disciples, but aroused from sleep in some cottage by 
the way, as the mob moved along the road back to the 
city, rushed out after Jesus, covered only with the gar- 
ment of the night, was seized by the mob, and fled naked. 

Here then are seven incidents grouped, massed to- 
gether; many details found in other Gospels are omitted, 
but seven incidents constituting a sequence and a unity 
are given. The key-note of the study is found in the 
word of Jesus: " I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered." The final note is found in the tragic 
declaration, " They all left Him, and fled." 

The dominant note in this particular paragraph is vo- 
litional. In our last meditation we considered a section 
in which the emotional was clearly supreme. Here the 
Son of man is seen in perfect relation to the will of God, 
understanding it so clearly that He told His disciples 
exactly what was about to happen. The Shepherd was 
to be smitten. He was in such perfect harmony with the 
Divine Will, that we see Him in communion with God, 
daring to speak in the holy Presence of His own shrink- 
ing from the hour of darkness which He had already 
declared to be inevitable. We see Him finally in co- 
operation with that very Will, as He yielded Himself to 
the people against whose method of arrest He made His 
strong and urgent protest. The disciples are seen yield- 
ing, retreating, fleeing, because in their case, will was 
mastered by sight, rather than by faith. Yet once again, 
the enemies of Jesus are seen working out their choices, 
following the line of their own will. Finally the will of 
God is seen triumphing in spite of them, and through 

I 2 94 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:27-52] 

them, making their very wrath to praise Him, while the 
remainder He restrains. 

Taking the words of Jesus at the beginning as the key- 
note, let us consider first, the smiting of the Shepherd ; 
secondly, the scattering of the sheep ; and finally, the way 
of the smitten Shepherd with the scattered sheep. 

First then, let us consider the smiting of the Shepherd. 
Our Lord told these men distinctly what was about to 
happen: "All ye shall be off ended/' or to carry over the 
Greek word into the Anglicized form, "All ye shall be 
scandalized," that is "All ye shall be made to stumble in 
Me." Our Revisers have omitted the words "in Me," 
perhaps with good reason ; the fact remains however that 
even if they are not warranted by the text, the thought 
is present. Our Lord was not rebuking these men; He 
was telling them a fact. "All ye shall be made to stum- 
ble " ; not, "All of you will stumble/' as though blame 
were attached to them. Here was the fact; before the 
darkness of that night should be dissipated by the dawn- 
ing of a new day, the whole of them would be scandalized 
in Him, made to stumble in Him. 

Having said so much, He gave the explanation : " For 
it is written, I will smite the Shepherd, and the sheep 
shall be scattered abroad." Jesus was quoting from 
Zechariah : "Awake, O sword, against My Shepherd, and 
against the Man that is My Fellow, saith Jehovah of 
Hosts : smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scat- 
tered; and I will turn My hand upon the little ones." 
After His perpetual habit, and that of all New Testament 
writers, He did not quote the actual words of the Old 
Testament Scriptures; but the spiritual truth was con- 
tained in the quotation. He said then, that they would be 
offended, because " It is written, I will smite the Shep- 
herd " ; the smiting of the Shepherd would be the cause 
of the scattering of the sheep. 

He here referred to all that was coming in His own 
experience, and the experience of His disciples, by the ci- 

[ 295 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14:27-52] 

tation of a prophecy, which distinctly declared that the 
Shepherd of the people should be smitten by the stroke 
of Jehovah Himself. By that solemn quotation we are 
admitted to the inner working of the mind of the Lord at 
that moment. He knew full well, as we have seen in 
previous studies, that Judas was absent on the nefarious 
business of bargaining away His life. He saw distinctly, 
what He had been telling His disciples now for some 
time, that the end of all must be the Roman gibbet, the 
Cross. Yet now, in this dark hour, after singing the 
great Hallel, when His voice had joined the voices of 
His disciples in the words, "Bind the sacrifice with cords, 
even unto . . . the altar/' His reference to His com- 
ing death declared that He was going, not to the buffeting 
of humanity's malice, but to the stroke of God upon His 
soul, the stroke of Jehovah. As one of the quaintest of 
old hymn writers expressed it: 

" Many hands were raised to wound Him, 

None would interpose to save ; 
But the awful stroke that found Him, 
Was the stroke that Justice gave." 

However great and profound the mystery, that is what 
our Lord said as He approached the darkness of Geth- 
semane. "All ye shall be offended." Why? " For it is 
written, I will smite the Shepherd." Where is that writ- 
ten? In the ancient prophecy. What is the context? 
"Awake, O sword, against My Shepherd, and against the 
Man that is My Fellow A saith Jehovah of hosts." We are 
thus admitted to the inner consciousness of the Lord, 
and see Him going, not as a Victim, mastered by human 
brutality and malice ; but as One, walking along the path- 
way where the severest mystery of pain would be the 
smiting of the Shepherd, by Jehovah Himself. 

Yet, as we thus return to ancient prophecy for the in- 
terpretation of our Lord's teaching, we must include an- 

[ 296 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 27-52] 

other thing. Hear again this word of Zechariah. " The 
Man that is My; Fellow." Our Lord then was taking His 
way toward a smiting which was to be endured in fellow- 
ship with Jehovah. Here we are at once reminded of the 
fact that according to His own thinking, He was not 
proceeding to an hour in which He would come into con- 
flict with God. He was not proceeding to some mystery 
of pain whereby He would persuade God to some new 
attitude of mind and heart and will toward humanity. 
He was proceeding to an hour in which there would be a 
strange smiting and mystery of pain, all of which would 
be in fellowship with God, and would be the outcome of 
the effect of God's unchanged and unaltering attitude of 
love and compassion toward men. "It is written, I will 
smite the Shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. 
Howbeit." Here immediately our Lord did that which 
He never failed to do; He linked the mystery of His 
passion with the mystery of the power which should im- 
mediately result therefrom; He illuminated all the dark- 
ness of the coming Cross, by the radiant light of the as- 
sured resurrection. There is not one single occasion 
when our Lord made a reference to His coming Cross, 
but that He linked with it a reference to His coming 
resurrection. Although He faced this strange and dark 
mystery of pain, outside which we must ever stand in 
worship and wonder, even though He had to say that He 
was going to a smiting which should issue for the moment 
in the scattering of the sheep; yet He immediately said: 
" Howbeit, after I am raised up I will 'go before you into 
Galilee." The smiting was to be the way toward an ap- 
pointment and a crowning and a victory. The smiting 
and the dark hour .would be the prelude to, and the 
preparation for, a new gathering, in which He would go 
before them, and lead. 

If indeed therefore it be true that at this moment we 
are admitted to the inner secret of the mind of Christ, we 
see Him resolutely facing the smiting, understanding that 

[ 297 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:27-52] 

it was a smiting of Jehovah; and yet seeing clearly that 
by that way He would pass out to a larger ministry, to 
the ultimate victory upon which His heart was ever set. 
The most reverent thing we may do is to think of Geth- 
semane almost in silence, for it was there in that 'garden 
that the stroke fell upon Him; it was there that the 
Shepherd was smitten. 

Observe Him reverently, leaving eight of the disciples 
at the entrance to the garden ; taking three of them a little 
further with Him ; and then leaving the three, and going 
into absolute loneliness. Let us observe two things; His 
communion with His Father} and His cooperation with 
Him. 

This story of Gethsemane is one of perfect communion. 
Much has been said of it in criticism by unbelievers, and 
sometimes by believers themselves. It has been averred 
by unbelievers, brilliant with the brilliance of mere human 
intellect, in speaking of this hour, that our Lord here 
shrank from suffering in a way in which many martyrs 
have not done. 

Is it not rather a picture of perfect communion ? Is there 
any evidence of perfect communion between a soul and 
God so great, as the fact that the soul says everything to 
God, of its own shrinking, of its own pain, of its own 
agony; providing always, that the speech is united with 
the saying of the one thing that is supreme: Father, Thy 
will, not mine be done ? There is a simple hymn that we 
sometimes sing. 

" I tell Him all my doubts and griefs and fears." 

That is perfect communion. If there is one thing God 
hates, it is to hear a song about resignation, when the 
heart is hot and rebellious. In such hours, He would far 
rather hear about our doubts and our fears. Here the 
supreme picture is that of the Son of man telling God of 
the shrinking of His own soul, and of His acquiescence in 

[298] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:27-52] 

the Divine Will. " Father . . . remove this cup from 
Me : howbeit not what I will, but what Thou wilt/' That 
is communion with God ! 

There was cooperation with God in that very surrender 
of the will. This is not the picture of a vacillating soul, 
but that of the soul of the Shepherd, yielded to God, 
knowing the pain that lay ahead, the mystery, and the 
darkness ; feeling the weight of the stroke as it fell upon 
Him; resolutely declaring the sense of shrinking; and yet 
pressing closer, into fellowship with God, and coopera- 
tion with Him. 

Personally I can go no nearer. The light is 

". . . Too bright, 
For the feebleness of a sinner's sight." 

It is dark with the darkness of essential light, upon which 
my eyes cannot gaze. But this I know, according to His 
own account thereof; in that moment the sword awoke 
against the Shepherd, and against the Man Who was the 
Fellow of God. 

So we turn from a most incomplete, and yet I trust a 
reverent glance at the mystery of the smiting of the 
Shepherd, to look at tjiis ; j^ttering_of. the .sheep, 

The first evidence of the scattering came when our 
Lord pointed out the false security which they felt. 
Peter said, If I must die with Thee, I will not deny Thee; 
and he meant it ; he was perfectly sincere. He never said 
a finer thing in all his discipleship. When Jesus said to 
him: Before daybreak thou shalt deny Me thrice; he 
vehemently denied. When we are inclined to criticize 
him, and be angry with him, let us never forget that Jesus 
was not angry, and that no rebuke came from Him. Then 
bear in mind that these men all said the same thing. We 
have here, then, personal devotion to Jesus, and confi- 
dence in the power of their own will to carry out their 
devotion to the end. False security was the first evidence 
of their coming scattering. 

[ 299 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14 : 27-52] 

The second evidence is found in the Garden itself, 
when they fell asleep while Jesus prayed. The physical 
failure resulted from mental dulness, and spiritual weak- 
ness. Said the Lord to them, " The spirit is willing," but 
He did not say strong. Turn from all the more hallowed 
and sacred surroundings of this story, and think of it 
purely upon the human level ; then it will immediately be 
seen that if these men could sleep upon such an occasion, 
it was due to the fact that they had no adequate concep- 
tion of that through which their Lord was passing. Their 
mental dulness was due to spiritual weakness. A woman 
will watch, not one hour, or one night, but day after day, 
and night after night; never shutting her eyes, in the 
presence of some peril threatening her child, tossed with 
fever ; or her loved one in the place of danger. Yet these 
men here slept! I do not blame them. I do not think 
that they could help their mental dulness; I do. not think 
they were responsible for their spiritual weakness; but 
the fact is patent. That was the second evidence of a 
coming scattering. 

There was a third evidence that flamed out after they 
had been awakened, having its first manifestation in 
Peter. His was zeal without knowledge. He made use 
of the sword in that hour, as our Lord distinctly said, be- 
cause he did not know the Scripture, and therefore had 
no true understanding of what his Lord was actually 
doing. In the moment when Peter used that sword which 
was intended to be a sign of his own constancy, and an 
expression of courage; it was really the last proof of his 
fear. He had not entered into that spiritual realm that is 
unconquerable, in which his Lord was now abiding, in 
the full strength of His Messianic and saving work; and 
he was therefore filled with fear. 

Then came at last the flight: "They all left Him, and 
fled." If in thinking of the story we are tempted to im- 
agine that Peter led the flight; let us look again more 
carefully, and we shall find that he was one of the few 

[ 300 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:27-52] 

who did not go altogether. He did follow afar off. That 
flight of the disciples was inevitable. It was not blame- 
worthy. There was no sin in it, there was no wrong in 
it. They could not help it, and our Lord knew that, and 
had told them so; you will all be scandalized in Me. The 
only mistake they made, if they made a mistake at all, 
was that they did not trust His judgment and knowledge 
of them. It is always easier to bear the Cross when the 
resurrection light falls upon it. If there were nothing in 
this Christianity other than the CrosSj then men would 
flee it to the end. There came a day a little later on, 
when Peter was writing a letter, and he said this : " God 
. . . begat us again unto a living hope by the resurrec- 
tion of Jesus Christ from the dead." A living hope! 
There was no hope in their hearts on that night. It was 
the darkest hour that ever came to human souls, the hour 
in which Jesus was arrested to be crucified. It was in- 
evitable that these men should go. The human heart, the 
human intellect, cannot understand the Cross until it is 
seen in the transfigured light of the resurrection. 

Again let us look at the Shepherd Who was smitten, ^x" 
and the sheep who were scattered. There is nothing more / .' ' . 
beautiful in the study than to observe His method with "*' 
them. 

Notice first, how He prepared them. He did not ex- 
pect their fellowship in that garden. He told them so. 
It was not a telling, born of a sense of superiority, but of 
an infinite compassion, and a perfect knowledge of their 
capacity. He prepared them. What a strange thing to 
prepare men for running away, to prepare men for de- 
nial ! Not strange at all, if we know Him. He told them, 
so that presently, when the inevitable thing took place, 
they should remember that He had told them. In that 
hour, coupled with His foretelling of failure, He uttered 
the prophecy of coming victory. To know all the beauty 
of this story, read John's account. Begin in the thirteenth 
chapter. It is the same story of these events in the upper 

[ 301 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14:27-52] 

room. Peter said, "Lord, whither goest Thou?" Jesus 
replied, "Whither I go, thou canst not follow Me now; 
but thou shalt follow afterwards." Peter said, "Why 
cannot I follow Thee even now? I will lay down my life 
for Thee." Said Jesus, " Wilt thou lay down thy life for 
Me? Verily, verily I say unto thee, the cock shall not 
crow, till thou hast denied Me thrice. Let not your heart 
be troubled ; ye believe in God, believe also in Me." You 
ask Me where I am going. " I go to prepare a place for 
you. And if I go . . . I come again, and will receive 
you unto Myself " ; in spite of the feebleness that lurks 
within you, the weakness that will make you deny Me. 
So the story runs on; the Shepherd with the sheep, pre- 
paring them, and linking His declaration of their failure 
with indications of His power; so that presently, in the 
depth of the agony of failure, they should have some- 
thing to which they could hold, and be brought back. 

"Was there ever kindest Shepherd, 
Half so gentle, half so sweet? " 

All this shines out yet again and again in ever increas- 
ing beauty as we observe His patience with them. Listen 
to the gentle reminder to Peter when He found him 
asleep. "Couldest thou not watch one hour?" That 
was no rebuke, but a reminder, a reminder of the fact 
that He had told him so, and that he had vehemently 
protested against the accuracy of his Lord. " Couldest 
thou not watch ? " 

Mark the generous recognition of our Lord in that 
hour. "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is 
weak." Then consider one of the most beautiful things 
of all: "And He cometh the third time, and saith unto 
them, Sleep on now, and take your rest : it is enough; the 
hour is come; behold, the Son of man is betrayed into 
the hands of sinners. Arise, let us be going : behold, he 
that betrayeth Me is at hand." 

If it be read so, what an infinite muddle it is. What 

[ 302 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:27-52] 

difficulties expositors have been put to with this pas- 
sage. They have said that the Lord came to the disciples 
the last time, and said satirically, Sleep on! Nothing of 
the kind! He told them to " Sleep on now"; and they 
slept; and He watched them while they slept. Between 
the permission to sleep and the awaking, how long passed 
we do not know; but certainly some period. He said, 
" Sleep on now, and take your rest : it is enough." He 
meant, The hour is not come. Judas is not here yet! 
Sleep on now and get a rest. Then there was a waiting 
time. Presently He said: "The hour is come; Behold, 
the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. 
Arise, Jet us be going." Between the permission to rest, 
and the awaking, there was something which if I were an 
artist, I would try to paint. They could not watch with 
Him. They were too sleepy. Ah ! well, He said in ef- 
fect : Go and have your sleep out ; I can watch ; and He 
watched them while they slept. The smitten Shepherd, 
the Cross ahead; and yet so patient with the men who 
could not watch with Him that He let them take their 
sleep, and watched them ! In the face of the Son of God, 
there was all anguish as He bent in prayer; and the 
infinite tenderness of motherhood at its best as He 
watched them. There is nothing more beautiful in all the 
dark hours than to see Him in Gethsemane watching, 
while those three were asleep. Then they left Him, but 
He did not leave them. So they were never parted from 
Him, " No one is able to snatch them out of the Father's 
hand," said He. 

The great value of this meditation to us is its revelation 
of the good Shepherd. 

Oh ! Shepherd true, I may be weak, I shall deny Thee ! 
But let me follow. He will bring me through ; for He is 
the good Shepherd, the great Shepherd, the chief Shep- 
herd. 



[ 303 ] 



XXVII 

"And they led I esus away. . . ." MARK 14:530. 

Mark 14: 53-72. 

IN our previous meditation we heard the last cadences 
of the Hallel sung by the Lord and His disciples; and 
then passed out with them to the silence of Olivet. We 
heard His prediction of their imminent scattering; and 
listened to their vehement protests. Reverently we fol- 
lowed Him into the garden of Gethsemane, leaving eight 
disciples at the entrance; and three further on, but still 
far removed from the place of His loneliness. We saw 
Him in communion and cooperation with His Father, in 
an experience of unfathomable mystery. We watched as 
Judas came, and the Son of man was arrested. We saw 
the flight of the eleven, and of the unnamed young man. 
Throughout that consideration we were impressed with 
the grace and glory of the Shepherd. 

We are now to consider the last events of that dark 
betrayal night. The paragraph pulsates with pain, and 
throbs with fever and unrest. 

We see first, the swift gathering together of an illegal 
assembly. The high priest, the chief priests, the elders, 
the rulers, and, as a subsequent verse says, the whole 
council assembled. In other words, the Sanhedrim came 
together. This was an illegal assembly. The law de- 
clared that the Sanhedrim must not meet at night under 
any circumstances. 

The law, moreover, provided that whenever the Sanhe- 
drim met for the purpose of trying a prisoner, they 
should never pass sentence on the day of trial, but defer 
it. In spite of this they at once came to a decision that 
He was worthy of death. 

E 304 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 53-72] 

They were evidently ready, waiting, and expecting His 
coming. They had entered into unholy compact with one 
of His own disciples to betray Him unto them. They 
knew full well that Judas had gone with an armed mob 
to arrest Him. Therefore when He was arrested, they 
swiftly gathered together in the darkness of the night, in 
the house of the high priest. 

We hear the indistinct, and yet noisy clamour of the 
witnesses. We do not know whether these witnesses were 
heard singly, or whether they were all present at the same 
time. If singly, then the story told by one was con- 
tradicted by the next. The picture is more likely one of 
an irregular session of the court, in which witnesses lis- 
tened to each other, contradicted each other, and quar- 
relled. 

There was a solemn interval of tense silence in which 
the high priest addressed himself immediately to the 
Prisoner, and, according to Matthew's record, put Him 
on oath. Mark simply says that he asked Him: "Art 
Thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" Matthew 
gives us the form of his asking: " I adjure Thee by the 
living God, that Thou tell us whether Thou art the Christ, 
the Son of God." This was the legal form of admin- 
istering the oath. Jesus answered; affirming solemnly 
on oath, that He was the Messiah, and the Son of the 
Blessed. 

Then immediately followed a scene of confusion. The 
high priest in his wrath again committed an illegal act, in 
the rending of his garments. A reference to the Levitical 
law will show that the high priest was explicitly charged 
under no circumstances of emotion to adopt the heathen 
practice of the rending of clothes. This act of the High 
Priest was followed by an outbreak of brutal passion on 
the part of the members of the Sanhedrim. They spit 
upon Him, and flung a garment over His face, the symbol 
of the death penalty; they struck Him, through the gar- 
ment, and said, " Prophesy . . . who is he that struck 

[305] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14 : 53-72] 

Thee?" "And the officers received Him with blows of 
their hands." 

In the meantime, in the court beneath, perchance in 
the outer court, some few steps down from where these 
events were transpiring, there was taking place the busy 
gossip of the officers; the soldiers, and the serving maids; 
and there, in the midst of them, was Peter, warming 
himself by the fire. There follows the account of his 
perturbation, of his profanity, and of his denial. 

Through all the story, so full of restlessness, fever, and 
pain, there is one element of strength. It is centralized 
and glorious in the Prisoner, Jesus. Strength was mani- 
fested first in His august and dignified silence ; and then 
in His profound and pregnant speech. 

Thus, as we consider the whole paragraph, we feel how 
full it is of the essential things of human life. Emotion 
is here, acute and intense; volition is here, fixed and de- 
termined. The supreme note, however, is neither emo- 
tional, nor volitional ; it is intellectual. The question sug- 
gested by the paragraph is a question that concerns the 
inspirations of conduct; the story unveils the reasons of 
those conceptions of the mind, which express themselves 
in actual deeds. The matter of vital interest here is that 
of viewpoint, conception, outlook. As we look into the 
inner life of the personalities that pass rapidly before us, 
while we are conscious of the intensity of emotion, and of 
the fixity of volition, the most arresting element is that 
of the revelation of the secret motives and conceptions 
which produced these effects. 

As from that standpoint we look at the paragraph, and 
at the things that it records, we are inclined at first to 
say in very deed : " Truth is fallen in the street." Here 
the intellect of the age is seen utterly at fault. To quote 
the words of Paul A written long afterwards to the 
Corinthian Christians, here the rulers of this world lacked 
wisdom: "Which none of the rulers of this world hath 
known : for had they known it, they would not have cru- 

[306] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 53~ 

cified the Lord of glory." Here also we see light and 
love, overshadowed and eclipsed, in the person of the 
cursing disciple. 

The first impression that the paragraph makes is that 
of truth wounded, beaten down, trampled under foot, 
violated. Yet we look again, and discover that Truth 
was never more erect. Behold It first; silent, declining 
speech, refusing a word, and most eloquent in Its silence. 
Then hear It, speaking at last ; in terms so simple and so 
definite that there can be no misunderstanding of Its 
meaning; so, speaking that every lie falls back into 
shadow, and men are compelled at last to do in the clear 
daylight, the nefarious deeds they had been trying to per- 
form in the darkness. 

From that standpoint of intellect or wisdom, looking at 
these scenes, we have a revelation first, of debased in- 
telligence in the case of the rulers ; secondly, of insulted 
and wounded intelligence in the case of Peter; thirdly, 
of victorious and triumphant intelligence, in the case of 
the Lord Himself. 

The fundamental wrong, so far as the rulers were con- 
cerned was that the whole case was prejudged. That is 
perfectly patent. " The chief priests and the whole coun- 
cil sought witness against Jesus," by no means to dis- 
cover the truth concerning Him but. "to put Him to 
death." The revelation of some intellectual obscurity or 
wickedness is obvious. They were gathered together os- 
tensibly for the purpose of investigation ; but really they 
were mastered by one determination; the death of the 
Man Who was arraigned before them. The inevitable 
issue of such a gathering would be that of ignorance. 
Light could not penetrate their minds. They were pre- 
determined to encompass, at all costs, the destruction of 
the Prisoner at the bar. Ignorance must be the result of 
that attitude of mind. There was no room for light. 
What was said by one and another was contorted, 
twisted, to the one purpose of putting Him to death. 

[ 307 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING f o MARK 

[Mark 14:53-72] 

Let us watch the proceedings, for they reveal some 
striking facts. These men, mastered by this unholy pas- 
sion, set upon realizing and encompassing the death of 
this Prisoner at the bar, were nevertheless compelled to 
a recognition of the rights of truth. Else why should 
they look for witnesses at all ? Why not dispense with a 
trial, and at once lay violent hands upon Him? No, that 
even they dare not do. They must seek some accusation 
which will appear to be true. They must find witnesses ; 
they must have some reason for the thing they do. This 
was the unconscious compliment which devilish false- 
hood paid to the ascendancy of truth. 

True, there was a ghastly readiness to compromise, to 
accept as true the basest falsehood, if only it might be 
made to serve their purpose of having an appearance of 
truth. Oh! it was an unholy business; it is a terrible 
picture. Yet it is a wonderful illustration of that mar- 
vellous and inherent consciousness of right and wrong, 
from which humanity never has, and never can escape. 
Whenever humanity forgets to make its bow to truth, 
then humanity is entirely and absolutely hopeless. 

Only one witness borne against Him has been pre- 
served for us. We do not know what the other witness 
said. Doubtless the one witness preserved for us is an 
illustration of their whole attitude of mind. "And there 
stood up certain, and bare false witness against Him, 
saying, We heard Him say, I will destroy this temple that 
is made with hands, and in three days I will build another 
made without hands." This is the most diabolical form 
of untruth, because it is an untruth in which there is an 
element of truth. We remember Tennyson's words: 

" A lie that is all a lie, may be met with and fought out- 
right; 

But a lie that is partly the truth, is a harder matter to 
fight." 

There is a sense in which there was not a word of truth 

[ 308 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:53-72] 

in this statement. There is a sens^ however, in which it 
was based upon something actually true. Notice in pass- 
ing, how His words were treasured, not only by those 
who loved Him, but by those who hated Him. He had 
in the early days of His ministry, when first He cleansed 
the temple, said to the men who asked Him by what 
authority He proceeded: "Destroy this temple, and in 
three days I will raise it up." It was a mysterious saying, 
not understood by those who heard Him ; not understood 
until after His resurrection even by His own disciples. 
It was so little understood by the men who heard Him, 
that they laughed at Him, and said : " Forty and six years 
was this temple in building, and wilt Thou raise it up in 
three days?" Now even if, as they supposed, He had 
referred to the temple in Jerusalem, notice what He said: 
" Destroy this temple." There was no Suggestion in His 
word, that He would destroy it. He was speaking of 
what they would do, not of what He would do. Over 
against their destructive capacities, He placed His con- 
structive ability, " In three days I will raise it up." The 
reference, as we now know, was to the temple of His 
body. They did not know that. But on the ground of 
their own understanding, mark their remembrance of His 
words after three years have passed; and observe their 
distortion of them. 

Mark twice records the fact that these witnesses failed, 
and for one reason. Their witness did not agree. There 
is no harmony in falsehood. A lie must always be cov- 
ered by a lie. 

" Ah ! what a tangled web we weave, 
When first we practise to deceive." 

The men who had been observant of Jesus during the 
days of His public ministry not His disciples, but His 
watchers had heard His words, and seen His works, 
and perfectly understood His claim. That is made evi- 
dent by the form of the high priest's question: "Art Thou 

[ 39 I 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14:53-72] 

the Christ, the Son of the Blessed ? " Why ask that ques- 
tion if they did not understand His claim ? Nevertheless, 
in spite of every word spoken, and every work wrought, 
they were set upon His murder. Whatever intellectual 
conviction they might have had concerning the beauty of 
His words, or the beneficence of His works, such convic- 
tion must be debased and refused. Yet, in that ghastly 
attitude of mind, they made a false appeal to truth; and 
then with a lie sought to slay the Lord of truth. 

Let us take next that which is last in the story, the 
picture of Peter. We see in Peter a man whose intelli- 
gence had been singularly illuminated, and a man who had 
wonderfully responded to the illumination of his intelli- 
gence. What brought Peter to that outer Court? It 
was the light in his own soul that took him there; and 
that light was shining with a great brightness. He knew 
his Master. He knew the insight of his Lord. That had 
been his first revelation of Jesus when at the first his 
brother Andrew had brought him face to face with Christ, 
and Christ had said, " Thou art Simon, the son of John : 
Thou shalt be called Rock." In that moment Peter had 
discovered in Jesus One Who knew his deepest nature; 
and ever after He had been patient with him, and had 
realized the latent capacities of his soul. Peter had not 
forgotten these things. He knew how for three years 
the Master had with infinite tenderness borne with him, 
led him, instructed him, and brought him nearer and yet 
ever nearer to Himself in love and adoration. Love and 
adoration in Peter, were the outcome of clear under- 
standing. 

We must not forget, nor undervalue the fact, that six 
months before, Peter at Caesarea Philippi had said ex- 
actly what the high priest now asked Him. " Thou art 
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed." That light was still 
shining in the soul of Peter; and he loved his Lord with 
a love that was the outcome thereof. It was .his love for 
his Lord that took him into the courts of the high priest. 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14: 53-72] 

Peter had followed Him afar off, yet he had followed 
Him ! No other disciple had done this, except John; but 
John went at no risk, because he was related to the high 
priest. Peter took great risk when he went. 

Neither let us forget that Peter had drawn the sword, 
and smitten Malchus. The impulse was a right one. 
Wrong things are done from a right impulse sometimes. 
Moses was shut out of the promised land because he did 
a wrong thing with a right impulse. The more clearly 
we see all this, the more shall we understand the sorrow- 
ful thing that took place that day. When Peter denied 
his Lord, he was insulting his own intelligence. Yet 
descending to profanity, he took his oath that he did not 
know Jesus at all. 

Let us try to put the doings of these two places side by 
side. Probably the court, where Jesus stood in the midst 
of the priests and elders was somewhat elevated, by a few 
steps perhaps, from " the court beneath," as Mark says, 
where the officers and the maid-servants were, and Peter 
also. In the first false witness after false witness arose; 
the high priest put Jesus on oath ; Jesus took the oath that 
the confession that Peter made several months ago was 
true. In the second, there was the clamour of the gossip 
of the officers, the saucy laugh of a servant maid, as she 
said to Peter, You belong to them. The great soul of 
Peter stumbled and fell at the laugh of that serving-maid, 
and presently he took an oath that he did not know Jesus ; 
Jesus on oath, within ; Peter on oath, without. Peter out- 
side, taking his oath that he did not know Him; Jesus 
inside, taking His oath that what Peter had said in the 
better hour of his life, was true. The contrast is vivid. 

Peter was lying about his faith. He did know Him; 
more, he wonderfully understood Him. He was also 
violating his own love. Here was an instance of the con- 
tradiction of sinners against themselves. He was wound- 
ing his own soul. This must be borne in mind. Peter's 
love for Jesus never failed; his faith in Jesus never 

I 3" J 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 14 : S3~72] 

failed. Christ had said to him, " I have prayed for thee 
that thy faith fail not/' and his faith never failed. His 
hope failed, the light of hope went out; his courage 
failed; but never his faith, nor his love. Here then, was 
a man who believed in Jesus, who loved Him with a 
great heart, or he never had followed Him to that court; 
denying his faith, and the denial was a lie; denying his 
love, and the denial was a lie. His own intelligence was 
insulted ; the truth that was in him, and never really de- 
stroyed, was flung in the mire. 

Yet look again; and mark how that light which was 
the inspiration of his going to the court, though insulted 
-when he lied, persisted; and at last mastered him. The 
final thing is not the denial, but the tears. The last 
phase of the picture is not that of a cursing, profane 
man; a man made into a coward by the taunt of a ser- 
vant maid. The last picture is that of a man gathering 
his garment about him, and hurrying from the first into 
the darkness of the night; a strong man in tears. An- 
other evangelist tells us that Jesus looked at him. Prob- 
ably between these two courts, the higher where were the 
priests, and the lower where were the servants, there was 
only a curtain which may have been drawn aside, and 
from within, Jesus looked at Peter. In the course of a 
sermon I once heard Father Stanton say something about 
this very scene, which was very suggestive. Said he: 
" Never forget that the look of Jesus would have been 
wasted on Peter, if it had not been that Peter was looking 
at Jesus." The look of Peter toward the Lord is a reve- 
lation in itself, as surely as is the look of the Lord to- 
ward Peter. 

I will not attempt to interpret that look of Jesus ; but I 
am quite sUre that it did not mean : " I told you so ! " 
Another thing is also certain, though perhaps not quite 
so patent ; Jesus did not by that look say to Peter, What 
are you doing to Me? Why are you wounding Me? 
Christ was too selfless to have meant that. I think 

I 3 12 ] 



GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14:53-72] 

said to Peter, in His look : Peter, why are you wounding 
yourself? Then Peter went out and wept. Poets some- 
times talk of " blinding tears." I suppose there are such, 
but I do not know them. I also have wept. I did not 
find that tears of this kind were blinding tears ; they are 
sight-giving tears! Charles Mackay's lines are full of 
beauty : 



ce 



O ye tears, O ye tears ! I am thankful that ye run ; 
Though ye trickle in the darkness, ye shall glitter in 

the sun; 

The rainbow cannot shine if the rain refuse to fall, 
And the eyes that cannot weep, are the saddest eyes of 

all." 

Peter wept; and his tears were evidences of the answer 
of his soul to the truth of his faith ; and to the love which 
he had so cruelly insulted and desecrated as he denied 
his Lord. 

Reverently in conclusion, let us look at the central pic- 
ture. Here is One Who in His intelligence is victorious, 
though it is a dark, dark hour of apparent defeat. No 
debasement of intelligence is here; no insulting of in- 
telligence. Truth declines to argue with a lie. The si' 
lence of our Lord here, and at other points during this 
trial, was wonderfully eloquent. The witnesses were ly- 
ing. The witnesses were distorting His words. What 
hast Thou to say? said the high priest; and He answered 
him never a word. Truth is silent in the presence of a 
lie, because even the truth cannot contradict a lie so as to 
end it; and also because a lie cannot harm truth in the 
final issue. 

But when He was challenged on oath He answered; 
and His answer was remarkable in the effect it produced 
in that court of justice. Said the high priest, "Art Thou 
the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?" and He said, "I 
am." As He said so, He swept away the refuge of lies 
which they were attempting to make for themselves. 

t 313 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 14 : 53-72] 

Listen to the high priest, " What further need have wa 
of witnesses ? " His answer had swept that need away. 
The answer of Jesus compelled wickedness to act in the 
light. If they would slay Him, they must do so on the 
basis of that claim, and not for a false reason. By that 
one word on His part, His affirmation on oath that He 
was the Messiah, and the Son of the Blessed; He re- 
moved all the false witnesses, and swept away the refuge 
of lies. For evermore therefore, the murder of the Son 
of God is seen in all its ghastliness, for they rejected 
Him for claiming to be that which the centuries have 
proclaimed Him to be. 

Then he added to His claim that further word: "Ye 
shall see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of 
Power, and coming with the clouds of heaven." This 
was a poetic declaration, borrowed from the prophet 
Daniel, in which prophecy the Son of man is seen coming, 
not to earth, but to heaven; coming to sit at the right 
hand of the Ancient of Days, to be the Ruler of the uni- 
verse. That is what Christ told these men they should 
see; not His second advent,. but His coming into, and 
sitting in the place of power. 

The last note is that most of help to us. The chief 
glory of the light in the midst of the darkness, is that of 
its revelation of the deep-seated love and devotion of a 
disciple; and the action and grace of the Lord in giving 
that love and devotion their chance of recovery in spite 
of deflection. The very last thing in the dark betrayal 
night is the vision of the tears of Peter ! Upon those 
tears the light of God's face rises; and they become 
radiant with rainbow glory, suggesting for evermore to 
hearts that believe and love, that even though in unutter- 
able folly they deny Him, He .makes a way by which His 
banished one may return. 



[314] 



XXVIII 

"He saved others; Himself He cannot save" 

MARK 15:31. 

Mark 15: 1-52. 

THESE words were uttered by the religious rulers in 
Israel, the chief priests. With them were associated the 
moral rulers, the scribes. Mark distinctly tells us that 
the words were spoken among themselves, but evidently 
in the hearing of the assembled people. The statement 
revealed the thought, at the moment, of the spiritual and 
moral rulers of Israel concerning Jesus. They were 
spoken, as Mark also reveals, with equal distinctness, in 
mockery. They were the words of jeering contempt. 

This becomes the more patent as we read the remainder 
of what they said : " Let the Christ, the King of Israel, 
now come down from the Cross, that we may see and 
believe." Those words were saturated with the spirit of 
contempt and mockery. Jesus had claimed to be the 
Christ, on solemn oath before the high priest but a few 
hours previously. He had claimed to be the King of 
Israel, with equal solemnity before Pilate the Roman 
Procurator, even more recently. Let this Christ, this 
King of Israel come down from the Cross. Then mark 
the last tone of satire : " That we may see and believe ; " 
He has always been calling us to believe, and declaring 
that unless we believed we should die in our sins; let 
Him now give us some proof, so that we may believe! 
It was the language of jeering contempt. They were 
singularly cruel and devilish words, for supposing them 
to be true, in the sense in which they meant them, then 
the cruelty of uttering them under such conditions is al- 
most unthinkable and utterly appalling. Observe their 

[ 3*5 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

admission : " He saved others." That was a fact which' 
even they could not deny. Everywhere, in Jerusalem, in 
all the towns and villages and hamlets through the coun- 
tryside, were those whom He had saved. Palsied limbs 
were stilled with peacef ulness ; blind eyes were looking 
out with joy upon the light of day ; dumb mouths were 
uttering forth the praises of the Lord ; men long op- 
pressed with serious disease, and women bowed down 
with long infirmities, were well. "He saved others." 
They were bound to admit the fact. There could be no 
contradiction. What refinement of brutality then, to 
taunt Him in this hour with His inability to deliver Him- 
self ! Even if they believed that His claims to Messiah- 
ship were worthless, common decency would have said, 
now it is over, let Him die in peace. But no ! such is the 
human heart, in spite of all refinement, in spite of all 
culture. So they taunted Him in His dying, " He saved 
others; Himself He cannot save." 

'These words of the spiritual and moral rulers were 
singularly revealing, drawing attention to the then con- 
dition of Jesus, making us look at Him and think. They 
were singularly revealing also, in manifesting the igno- 
rance of the men who uttered them. But these words, 
uttered in the ignorance both of contempt and hatred, 
were most of all remarkable in that in the uttering of 
them they declared, all unwittingly, the supreme and cen- 
tral truth concerning Him: "He saved others; Himself 
He cannot save." 

Let us then, first look at Him as they saw Him; sec- 
ondly, consider their double mistake ; and finally, think of 
the issue of that upon which they looked, but did not 
understand. 

In the first place we will attempt to see Him as He 
was seen of men that day. Two ugly words cover the 
whole story. They saw Him, condemned and executed. 
We are not dwelling in these meditations upon details. I 
am growingly impressed, that the only way to come to 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

these stories of Christ is with the self-same reticent rever- 
ence which characterized the men who wrote the story. 
We have no detailed description of the actual crucifixion 
in either Gospel. When these writers came to the actu- 
ality, they ever dismissed it, as it seems to me, in an al- 
most half- whisper: "They crucified Hjm." I wish Art 
had been as reticent, in all the centuries, and that we 
had no pictures of Jesus on the Cross. I say we are not 
dealing with details, but we must not forget this dark 
background; He was condemned, executed; high lifted 
upon the Roman gibbet; apparently one of three male- 
factors, doers of evil. That is how they saw Him; con- 
demned, found guilty by the highest religious court, of 
blasphemy against God Almighty; rejected for Barabbas, 
Barabbas being chosen by the priest-inspired crowd, fickle 
and unstable as a crowd always is; God pity the man 
who depends upon a crowd; finally they saw Him de- 
livered, as expedient, by political authority, that of Pon- 
tius Pilate. 

./""After He had raised Lazarus from the dead, a council 
. was held among t-hese-self^same chief priests and rulers,; 
and the subject of discussion at the council was this: 
What are we doing? Everybody is going after this Man, 
and unless we stop His influence, we shall to quote the 
spirit of the passage lose our power and place with the 
Roman authorities. It was then and there that Caiaphas 
the high priest had said : " It is expedient for you that 
one should die for the people, and that the whole nation 
perish not." John interpreted the deeper meaning of 
that, for he added, "This he said not of himself;" but 
what Caiaphas meant was this : We must get rid of Him, 
it is politically necessary to get rid of Him. That was 
the ground of their appeal to Pilate, and the ground upon 
which Pilate delivered Him. His condemnation was con- 
sidered expedient in the interest of political necessity. 

Thus we see Him upon the Cross, crucified with male- 
factors ; as a danger to the Roman rule, as having exer- 

t 317 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

cised an evil influence among the people of His time, as 
being the enemy of God. Therefore we look upon Him 
with the eyes of these men, as done for, and done with. 
The body is destroyed, the spirit is dismissed, and the 
world is rid of Him. The body is destroyed; those feet 
that have travelled long, long miles for three persistent 
years ; and those hands that have been held out in bless- 
ing, and have touched men from disease into health, from 
death into life, from suffering into joy; they are fast at 
last ; they have nailed them to the gibbet. Those ears that 
have always been open to listen to a story of sorrow, those 
eyes that have flashed with the light of essential emotion 
and tenderness and strength; the ears are deafening as 
He hangs there^ and the light of the eyes is fading. That 
voice that has so often been heard, is soon to be silenced. 
They have destroyed the body and they have dismissed 
the spirit. The Sadducees probably denied that He had 
a spirit ; the Pharisees claiming that He had, now saw it 
passing into Hades, the world of departed , spirits. At 
least they would be rid of Him. It was then that they 
said, " He saved others ; Himself He cannot save." 

Now let us observe their double mistake; first their 
literal blunder; and secondly, their spiritual blunder. 

As to their literal blunder, let us for the moment forget 
all that we know spiritually of the significance of these 
words of our text. It is a little difficult to get away from 
the ultimate spiritual interpretation, even at the beginning 
of our meditation. They said, "He saved others," a 
great admission "Himself He cannot save," a strong 
declaration. They were wrong, and first they were en- 
tirely wrong, even in the sense in which they meant the 
thing they said. Jesus, during those four and twenty 
hours, could easily have saved Himself. His. being upon 
the Cross was not the result of their victory over Him. 
They had not caught Him, trapped Him, shut Him up, 
imprisoned Him, crucified Him, and so beaten Him. 
His being on the Cross was not their victory. All that 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

is not the deepest truth. Jesus could have escaped the 
Cross in three ways. He could have escaped the Cross 
by diplomacy with Pilate. Pilate earnestly sought some 
loophole of escape, wrought with strange and weird 
persistence to discover some way by which he could 
deliver Him; and a word from Jesus would have been 
enough. Some word of diplomacy, of policy, of arrange- 
ment; and all the priests would have been powerless to 
persuade Pilate to the thing he ultimately did. It was the 
silence, the heroic silence of Jesus that compelled Pilate 
" to do what he finally did. If for the moment that is not 
convincing, then hear the words of Jesus spoken to 
Pilate as recorded by another evangelist: "Thou would- 
est have no power against Me, except it were given thee 
from above." He could have escaped. 

But there was another way in which He might have 
escaped, and in proportion as we really get into the at- 
mosphere of this wonderful scene we shall realize it. He 
could have escaped by popular appeal. The cry of the 
crowd, presently hissed between shut teeth, "Crucify, 
crucify! " was but a parrot cry. They were only repeat- 
ing what they had been told to say. The high priests 
persuaded them to it. If one catches a mob anywhere 
at the psychic moment, it will shout anything under God's 
heaven! Individually, that mob may go home to repent 
of what it shouted, but under the influence of excitement 
they will do it. The crowd was driven by the high priests 
because they appealed to it first. Supposing Jesus had 
reached them first with an appeal! The attempt of the 
rulers to avoid the feast time as the hour of His arrest, 
was based on their knowledge that this was so. They 
said: "Not during the feast, lest a tumult arise among 
the people." They knew perfectly well that He had but 
to stand erect for one moment, and say something to that 
crowd, and the whole mob would have swept the priests 
out of the way, and delivered Him. But He did not do 
it. He did not save Himself, 

[ 319 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

I cannot consider this matter without going further; 
for He is not wholly a man as I am. If not by diplomacy 
with Pilate, if not by popular appeal, then He could have 
escaped by Divine wrath and destruction of His enemies. 
Listen to Him as He said, but a little while before to one 
of His own disciples: "Thinkest thou that I cannot be- 
seech My Father, and He shall even now send Me more 
than twelve legions of angels ? " Knowing full well the 
danger, or, at least the inadequacy of imagination, yet as 
I look upon that scene, being-no Sadducee, believing as 
I do in angels as well as spirits, it seems as though the 
very hosts of heaven could hardly be restrained from de- 
livering Him. One glance of His eye, one word of power, 
and Pilate and priests and mob would have been swept 
away. He could have delivered Himself. That was their 
literal blunder. 

Involved within it, is that which is the deeper thing; 
their spiritual blunder. He could not save Himself ! But 
His inability was born of His ability; His weakness was 
the outcome of His strength. He was strong enough not 
to save Himself, strong enough to decline diplomacy 
with the Procurator, strong enough to be silent when one 
word would have turned the mob into an army of His 
friends, strong enough to .restrain His own omnipotence, 
and to bow, bend, stoop, submit. He could not save 
Himself. 

Whence came that strength which manifested itself in 
weakness? What were the secrets of that ability which 
had its most eloquent expression in disability? I shall 
attempt to answer the question, by putting the actual 
facts concerning the Lord Jesus, in contrast with the 
ways already suggested, that were open to Him for 
escape. 

Instead of employing diplomacy, we see Him cooperat- 
ing with God; that is, acting in conformity with truth, 
moving along the line of the essential and the eternal ; set- 
ting His face resolutely, in spite of all that such setting 

[320 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

of His face involved, in the direction of holiness and 
light. Here we pass into the mists. Here we come into 
the presence of the mystery. Yet, through the mists, out 
of which the light breaks; and the. mystery, through the 
darkness of which the revelation has proceeded, He was 
striving against sin, and He was resisting unto blood ! 
Because that was the Divine pathway why it was, is not 
now under discussion, because in the Divine economy 
He could only slay death by dying, only end sin by being 
made sin in an appalling mystery, He would have no con- 
ference with any suggestion of escape from that path- 
way. In that cooperation with God, in conformity to the 
underlying and essential truth, however dark the way 
and mysterious the hour, He was strong enough to be 
weak enough to die. 

Or again; the second method of escape that was cer- 
tainly open to Him on the natural level was that He might 
have escaped by popular appeal. He did not, because He 
was acting in separation from man that is by separa- 
tion from sinners, uninfluenced by their advice, by their 
votings, by their clamour and with God for their sakes. 
Perhaps we can understand this better if we allow our 
minds to travel away from the scene for a moment, and 
remember that ever and anon in human history, as those 
have appeared who have trod this self-same pathway 
not in the same degree, but obedient to the self-same 
principle over and over again the men who have fash- 
ioned the ages, and have made the conditions which have 
been brighter and better and purer for the world, have 
had to stand alone, separating themselves from humanity 
in the interest of humanity, travelling up new Calvaries, 
Calvaries for which they gathered inspiration here. So 
He withdrew from the crowd, He did not ask its aid. 
He made no appeal to them; and that for their sakes. 
In the interest of their condition, and in order that pres- 
ently He might win from them a truer judgment, a more 
righteous vote, a sanctified assent, He asked nothing of 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

them. He trod the winepress alone, separate in His 
heroism from humanity, for the sake of humanity. 

Or again, if we really seek for the secret of His 
strength, it is to be found finally, fundamentally, and in- 
clusively in that He, Who might that day have escaped 
the Cross by an act of Divine destruction inspired by 
Divine wrath, accepted the Cross in order to an act of 
salvation inspired by Divine love. He was still acting un- 
der the mastery of the will of His God; here also, as 
surely as when He declined diplomacy, and stood alone 
for truth, He was moving along the line of the essential 
and the eternal ; here, He was not in conflict with God, 
but in cooperation with Him. He could not save Himself, 
because He was one with God in a double determination ; 
the determination to smite and blast and destroy sin; 
and the determination to heal and lift and ennoble a sin- 
ning race. Not these things held Him ; the court, and the 
brutality of His enemies ; but His o'ermastering, and o'er- 
whelming love. He could not save Himself. Therefore 
He can save others. 

So, finally, let us glance at the issue of what they did 
not understand. Yet the whole truth of that was ex- 
pressed in what they themselves did say. What is the 
issue of that attitude of Jesus ? He saved others. Per- 
haps it would be better to change their statement a little, 
not to interfere with its essential thought, but to change 
merely the tenses of its verbs ; so that from beneath the 
mistake, the essential truth which they knew not may 
emerge. They said, "He saved others," and the tense 
was past. They were looking back. " Himself He can- 
not save," and the tense was present. They were looking 
at Him on the Cross. We look back at this scene, and 
say : Himself He c.ould not save. We look around to-day, 
and say: He saves others. Though they did not under- 
stand it even the disciples themselves did not under- 
stand, but presently light came, and ever and anon these 
men who wrote the records reveal in some passing phrase 

[ 322 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15:1-32] 

their past ignorance and their new illumination the truth 
is this, that all those whom He had already saved, He 
had saved in the power of the fact that He could not, in 
that final way, save Himself. He had opened blind eyes, 
He had healed palsied limbs, He had driven fever away, 
He had restored physical conditions ; but He always did 
these things upon the basis of His passion and His atone- 
ment. The writers came to know it, I repeat, and one 
memorable passage comes to mind, in which Matthew 
tells the secret of a wonderful eventide by the side of 
the sea. They brought unto Him from all the country- 
side the sick folk, and He healed then! all. If Matthew 
had written his record that night, he would have written 
with wonder and amazement ; but later on the publican 
saw things as he had never seen them ; and in the light of 
the resurrection, when he wrote his record afterwards, 
this is what he said: He healed them all, "that it might 
be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, 
saying, Himself took our infirmities, and bare our dis- 
eases." Behind all His physical healing, was the spiritual 
passion of the Lord. I reverently declare that the Man 
of Nazareth would never have healed a sick lad or lass, 
man or woman, but in the power of that hour, when they 
mocked Him and scorned Him. 

Turning from that past, to which they looked, and con- 
sidering that future toward which He was looking when 
He could not save Himself because He would not save 
Himself, let us ask what is the issue of that great fact. 
We will confine ourselves to the atmosphere of this very 
story in considering this matter; measuring the strength 
by the weakness; going again to the threefold door of 
escape that was open to Him in the natural, and consider- 
ing the threefold issue in the supernatural. He might 
have escaped by diplomacy. He was bound by the sim- 
plicity of truth. He might have escaped by popular ap- 
peal. He was bound by a separation from popular ac- 
claim in order to the redemption of the populace. He 

[ 323 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

might have escaped by the exercise of His Divine power 
in wrath. He was bound by the consideration of a Divine 
love and mercy. 

Now what has the issue been? He established author- 
ity on the basis of truth, rather than on the shifting sand 
of diplomacy. Jesus Christ is not ruling over men by 
diplomacy, by compromise. Perhaps one of the most 
terrific things, one of the most frightening things, and one 
of the most blessed things concerning Him is that He will 
not make a compromise with men, that He will enter into 
no diplomatic relationship with them by which, if they 
grant Him so much, He will grant them so much, He will 
not meet men half-way. There is no diplomacy in the 
government of Jesus. The day will dawn, which is not 
yet, but which must be, when delegated authority; and 
all authority is delegated to the Christian; in his under- 
standing of the universe, and his philosophy of the world, 
the final authority is God, and the powers that be are all 
ordained by God for beneficent purposes ; shall be based, 
not upon diplomacy but upon truth. I do not say that all 
diplomacy must be untrue, but it is in terrible danger of 
being untrue. I will go so far as to say that when in this 
country we have done with a good deal of our diplomacy, 
and the whole truth of foreign conditions is before the 
people, we shall do better than we have done ; when we 
have simple, clear statements of the facts of the case, and 
not half-veiled lies that deceive. That day is coming. 
We are moving toward it slowly, through catastrophe and 
cataclysm and blood and fire and vapour of smoke; and 
all the way He leads, the Man Who can save others, be- 
cause He would not save Himself. 

Consequently, therefore, by His action He prepared for 
a popular vote which shall be inspired by wisdom and 
by love. He prepared for a people ransomed, and a peo- 
ple emancipated, who presently will bow to the authority 
of His truth, and acclaim Him Lord. To-day we may 
hold almost in contempt the opinion of the crowd. How 

[ 32.4 ] 



THE GOSPEL~ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 1-32] 

soon a man is forgotten. Let him drop out, and who 
thinks or cares for him? Let a prophet be gone, and 
within a decade there will be a letter in the newspaper, 
drawing attention to the fact that his grave is neglected ! 
If a man is going to depend upon the opinion of a crowd, 
God pity that man. Nevertheless, the day is coming when 
all peoples and kindreds and nations and tongues and 
temperaments will forget their differences, and merge in 
one great song, and it will be the song that proclaims Im- 
manuel, King of kings, and Lord of lords. But that day 
would never have been reached but by His pathway of 
loneliness. 

Finally, therefore, He made possible the saving of those 
very men who otherwise would have been destroyed. 
What men? Those very men locally, for the universal 
will best be seen here in the light of the local. The men 
who were round His Cross, the soldiers who crucified 
Him, the mob that clamoured against Him ; the priests, 
those very men could be saved because He did not save 
Himself. There is a little statement of history, in the 
Acts of the Apostles, full of interest: "And the word of 
God increased, and the number of the disciples multi- 
plied in Jerusalem exceedingly ; and a great company of 
the priests were obedient to the faith." These very men 
that mocked Him, that jeered at Him, He made possible 
their saving! In that is the greatness of His victory. 

This, blessed be God, is the Gospel. He saves others ; 
Himself He could not save. Or once again, to change the 
reading: To save others, He did not save Himself. He 
could not save Himself, because He was determined to 
save others. 

If we name His name, if we wear His sign, if we 
profess that we are Christ's men and Christ's women, 
then we have to remember that this is not the Gospel 
only; it is the law. It is the abiding principle of the 
propagation of the Gospel, and must be to the end of 
stress and strain and conflict. Every Christian worker 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15:1-32] 

of whom it is true that he or she is saving others, cannot 
save himself or herself. Or again to change the method 
of the statement ; the measure in which we are at the end 
of attempting to save ourselves, is the measure in which 
we are moving out upon the highway of being able to save 
others. That is true in statesmanship. That is true in 
all the ministry of men to the needs created by the tragedy 
of life. It is true of the Sunday School class ; and it is 
true of the pulpit. 

It is true of statesmanship. If statesmen are attempt- 
ing to save themselves and their country, they will fail. 
If statesmen are seeking the larger good, and are moving 
along the line of giving themselves out in sacrifice in 
order to reach the larger goal, they will save others. 

In the case of those who minister to human need, doc- 
tors and nurses, I need not argue it. It is always true of 
such that they are not counting their own lives dear unto 
them, that they may make this sacred service of ministry 
and sacrifice. 

It is true of the Sunday School class. It is true of the 
pulpit. We can make no contribution toward the victory 
of spiritual truth save at the point of sacrifice. A young 
minister fresh from college,, said to W. L. Watkinson, 
that master of satire, upon one occasion, "You know, 
Dr. Watkinson, preaching does not take anything out of 
me." " No," said Dr. Watkinson, " and therefore, it puts 
nothing into anyone else ! " That is true, Biblically true. 
If we are to save others, we cannot save ourselves. The 
only question that we have to face is this : Are we strong 
enough to be weak, mighty enough to submit, able for 
the gracious disability out of which the forces that renew, 
spring for the blessing of humanity? 



[ 326 



tc 



XXIX 

C A stone against the door of the tomb." MARK 15 : 46. 



Mark 15:33-47. 

THERE is a note of brooding melancholy about these 
words. They revive some of our own most despairing 
experiences. The open grave, the mortal remains laid 
therein, the closing of the grave, the going back to face 
the days ahead without the comradeship of the loved 
one ; these are the things that come crowding back upon 
us as we read these words, " a stone against the door of 
the tomb." 

As we separate the thought suggested by the words 
from the sequel of the narrative, all these feelings of the 
.heart are accentuated a thousandfold when we think of 
t,he One Whose body was placed within the rock-hewn 
iomb of Joseph of Arimathaea. The. shadows of evening 
were gathering about the garden when this thing was 
done. It was the close of a stupendous day. At nine 
o'clock in the morning they had crucified the prophet of 
Nazareth, Who, while He saved others, could not save 
Himself ; and for three hours the tides of human passion 
had raged around Him on His Cross. At noon super- 
natural darkness had settled upon the scene, and at three 
of the afternoon He had breathed out His Spirit. Now, 
at even, two men, Joseph of Arimathaea and Nicodemus, 
are seen enswathing the body, and laying it in the tomb; 
while two women, Mary of Magdala and Mary the mother 
of Jesus, are watching. These acts of love being com- 
pleted, Joseph rolled the stone to the entrance of the al- 
ready prepared tomb: "A stone against the door of the 
tomb." 

Here we pause. This is death's victory. The world is 
without Christ. What lay buried in that grave? Our 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

meditation is an attempt to answer that enquiry; that we 
may consider together the beauty of that which was dead, 
and the ugliness of the fact of death. 

First we see the death of things of beauty. " A stone 
against the door of the tomb." When referring to the 
beauty of that which was dead, I am thinking not so 
much of the personal and sentimental, as of the universal 
and essential. To the disciples at the moment, the former 
things were of course the most real, and supreme; the 
personal loss, the sense of loss, the sentimental conscious- 
ness. It is at this point that we feel the most acute hu- 
man sympathy with them, realizing that in that scene 
and those circumstances, there are elements with which 
we are appallingly and tragically familiar to-day; not 
with a familiarity that breeds contempt, for no man who 
loves life loves death, or pretends to admire it. It is 
ghastly, horrible, devilish, wherever it appears. Yet 
larger things were involved in the disciples' sense than 
those which were personal and sentimental; and our 
thought is not so much of them in that personal and senti- 
mental sense, as of the world, of the ages, of life in its 
entirety. In that grave wherein lay the body of the dead 
Jesus, life was challenged, insulted, and spit upon, as it 
never had been before, and as it never has been since. 
Whatever we may feel about the tragedy of death, here 
it is in its most ghastly form ; for here, central to human 
history, is a death by the side of which none other seems 
to be able to compare. 

I enquire what then lay within that tomb? I propose 
to answer the enquiry by referring to four things that 
for those three days and nights the world had lost, and 
which the world had lost for ever if this had been the 
end of Jesus. The things of beauty which we have been 
looking upon as we have studied this Gospel ; which our 
eyes have seen, and we have beheld, which we have heard 
as we have caught the accents of the voice of the dead 
Man, which we have spiritually touched and handled as. 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

we have grown familiar with Him, walking the ways of 
men; these things of beauty have been slain, and now lie 
dead in that rock-hewn tomb. 

In that tomb there is first a dead conception of God. 
There is moreover, a dead ideal of humanity. There is 
beyond that, a dead passion to redeem. Consequently 
and finally, there is a dead religion. 

A dead conception of God. Not long before His Cross, 
when one of His enquiring disciples, Philip, had in his 
agony cried out amid the shadows of the upper room, 
" Show us the Father, and it sufficeth us," Jesus had said, 
" He that hath seen Me hath seen the Father." In order 
to be true to the line of our meditation, without arguing 
the truth of that declaration of Jesus, but accepting it as 
from Himself, we npw enquire what conception of God 
had been presented in Him? What was His idea of God ? 
Not the idea of His, teaching, for His claim was not that 
men who had heard Him had discovered the truth about 
God ; but that " He that hath seen Me hath seen the Fa- 
ther." In the uttering of that word, on the purely hu- 
man level, our Lord was proclaiming a truth that is of 
universal application. Every man reveals his god by what 
he is in himself. Every man has a god, however much 
he may deny the existence of the God in Whom we be- 
lieve, however much he may declare that he bends the 
knee to none in worship, and recognizes no authority over 
him other than that of his own will. The god of a man 
is that to which he yields the devotion of his life, in 
thought and energy. It may be gold, pleasure, fame ; but 
seated at the centre of every human life is some master 
idga, passion, desire, enterprise ; and that is the god of the 
in. Sooner or later that god will manifest itself in the 
m's life. There is a sense therefore, in which every 
man may say, He that hath seen me hath seen my god; 
for a man becomes like his god. 

Now when Jesus said: "He that hath seen Me hath 
seen the Father," I am aware that there were profounder 

[ 329 1 




THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15:33-47] 

significances in the word than this particular one, but we 
may begin here. What have we seen in Him as we have 
walked with Him during this time of our meditation upon 
this one brief Gospel ? We have seen in Him grace and 
truth; mercy and justice; peace and righteousness. The 
wonder of the revelation, however, does not consist so 
much in these particular qualities as they have been repre- 
sented in JesuSj but in the fact of their union in Him. 
This union was a new revelation in man, and therefore a 
new revelation of God. Man had known something of 
God in the past, as to His truth, His justice, and His 
righteousness ; and it is equally true and no man can 
have been a diligent student of the old Hebrew prophecies 
without admitting it they had known very much of His 
grace, mercy, and peace. But in Him these things were 
united, without doing violence to the distinctive value of 
either. The wonder and the marvel of the conception of 
God that had been given to these men who surrounded 
Jesus, was that in Him these things thus met. John de- 
clared, " We beheld His glory, glory as of the only be- 
gotten from the Father " and then he described what he 
meant in a phrase " full of grace and truth." Grace, 
compassion, mercy; truth, the right, devotion to the es- 
sential; and yet the two things always merged in Him; 
grace and truth, mercy and justice, peace and righteous- 
ness. In the few brief years of His public ministry, His 
conception of God, not in His teaching alone, but in all 
that He was in Himself, had been given to a little group 
of men. It was a thing of ineffable beauty, a thing of 
surpassing wonder, a thing that we are compelled to ad- 
mit, that after two millenniums have gone the Church 
has not been able finally to express the beauty of, with all 
its thinking, and all its devotion. Now that conception of 
God lies dead in a grave; and the stone is rolled against 
the door of the tomb. 

In the second place there lay dead in that grave an 
ideal of humanity. Once again to quote the words of 

[330] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

Jesus Himself He had said to men, " He that f olloweth 
Me shall not walk in the darkness, but shall have the light 
of life " ; His meaning being that if a man would follow 
Him, that man would in Him see the light and glory of 
his own being. He claimed to have fulfilled in His own 
living the real meaning of the secret of the possibility of 
every human life. Looking back at Jesus from the stand- 
point of our common humanity, what then have we seen 
in Him ? We have seen a Being, spiritual, but very defi- 
nitely material. We have seen One Who in all His think- 
ing and all His speaking and all His acting was perpetu- 
ally conscious of the supernatural, the vastness that lies 
beyond; but equally and patently conscious of all the 
temporal and near, the things His hands touched, and 
upon which His feet trod. We have seen One char- 
acterized by an awful dignity, even in His humanity; a 
majesty so pronounced and so profound, that I make 
one brief statement with which all will agree, no one ever 
dared to take a liberty with Him. There was an aloof- 
ness about Jesus that held men away from Him. Yet 
there was a meekness which brought all men into the 
closest touch with Him; and publicans and sinners dared 
to draw nigh to Him for to hear Him. 

Here again, the ideal of humanity revealed in the Per- 
son of Jesus is not so much that of these separate quali- 
ties, for we have also seen men who have been spiritual ; 
we have come into contact with people supremely, con- 
scious of the supernatural things ; individuals who were 
characterized by a dignified majesty that prevented our 
taking liberties with them. On the other hand we have 
found in the common crowd of people, men and women 
living within the temporal; and also people who were 
meek and merciful and generous. But the ideal of hu- 
manity in Jesus was the merging of these things in Him; 
for to Him the sacred and the secular were not two 
realms for ever to be kept apart To Him all secular 
things were sacred ; all sacred things were secular. The 

[ 331 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

things of the vast eternities to Him were the things with 
which men were to deal every day and every hour in 
every circumstance, and every condition. All the little 
things of life were to be dealt with as related to the 
eternal things. With Him His majesty expressed itself 
in meekness. With Him His meekness was powerful 
in its majesty. These men had lived in close companion- 
ship for three years with a Man Who towered above them 
apart from His Deity, and His claims to Deity in His 
humanity. He was surpassingly wonderful, at once awe- 
inspiring and beautiful, in His revelation of the possibil- 
ity of human life. Now that One lay dead, and they had 
rolled a stone to the door of His tomb. 

Yet once more; and because of our own condition of 
heart and soul and life and experience, this thing is more 
wonderful than all. These men had seen in these three 
years, a human Being mastered by one passion, that of 
redeeming lost things. This was the story of His life: 
" The Son of man came to seek and to save that which 
was lost." That was new; that was something even the 
Hebrew religion, divine as it was in its origin, had never 
understood, never preached; that was something that 
Greek philosophy had never dreamed of, and would have 
laughed out of court as being unutterable foolishness. 
Men had known high inspirations before the coming of 
Jesus ; they had desired to create the new, and that pas- 
sionate desire was the inspiration of all artistic effort; 
they had craved to know the truth, and that craving was 
the inspiration of all philosophy ; they had endeavoured to 
preserve the good, and that endeavour however much 
they had failed, had been the underlying reason of every 
attempt at government. 

But in Jesus there appeared, in the midst of the mil- 
lenniums, centuries, cycles; in the midst of the artistic 
aspirations, the philosophic endeavours, and the efforts at 
government ; One Who said : My master-purpose in the 
world is not to create the new, is not to ,know the truth, 

[332 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15: 33-47] 

is not to preserve the good ; but to get hold of the effete, 
and make it new; to touch the false t and transmute it 
into the true ; to reach the bad, and make it good. " The 
Son of man c'ame to seek and to save that which was 
lost." In proportion as we have the great human experi- 
ence, in proportion as we are able to escape from our- 
selves individually, and to think in the terms of human- 
ity as a whole, humanity as we know it, with all its sor- 
rows and sighings, and wounds, with all its weariness, 
agonies, and heartbreaks, we shall realize that this is what 
we need supremely; some One Who can lay His hand 
upon the dead, withered flower, and make it live and 
blossom with new beauty; Who can lay His hand upon 
poor, withered, unworthy life, and make it beautiful 
again; a heart that beats with all the movements of com- 
passionate Deity. That was the passion of Jesus. Where 
is He ? Dead ! They have rolled a stone to the door of 
His tomb! 

Ultimately therefore I see dead in that grave, not 
merely a conception of God, an ideal of humanity, a pas- 
sion to redeem; but resultantly, a religion; in all the 
broadest, widest, and most inclusive sense of that great 
and gracious word. A religion having foundations, hav- 
ing structural processes, having a finality in view; a re- 
ligion that fundamentally was faith in God and in man; 
a religion that structurally was love working toward the 
satisfaction of the Divine heart, and the well-being of hu- 
man conditions ; a religion which in its finality was hope, 
rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, and consequently 
rejoicing in hope of the glory of man. 

Speaking of Jesus of Nazareth again, as within the 
strict limitations of His humanity, and the fact of His 
manhood ; that was His religion. It was based on faith in 
God and faith in man. The first need not be argued. 
The Christian religion, however, is not merely a religion 
of faith in God ; it is also a religion of faith in man. If 
we profess to believe in God, and do not believe in man, 

I 333 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

we are not Christians. The man who is for evermore 
declaring that humanity is an evil thing in itself, and that 
it must perish, is thinking without regard to the Christian 
religion. The word hopeless, with regard to man, must 
be cancelled from the vocabulary of all truly Christian 
souls. Jesus knew no hopeless cases. Individually, or 
socially, He believed in men. He so believed in them 
that He was willing to die to realize their latent, para- 
lyzed, possibilities. That was the fundamental fact in 
His religion; belief in God, and belief in man. 

How was His purpose to be realized? By loving God 
and by loving man. Here no argument is necessary. 
When He was asked which was the greatest command- 
ment, His own word covers the whole ground: "Thou 
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with 
all thy soul, and with all thy mind " ; and, " Thou shalt 
love thy neighbour as thyself." His faith in God and 
His faith in man was the inspiration of activity, growing 
out of His love. The Man Who thus had stood among 
His compatriots, and consequently at the centre of human 
history, giving to men this conception of God, giving to 
men this ideal of humanity, suggesting to men this new 
inspiration of life, and thus creating for men a religion ; 
where is He, and what has become of -Him? They have 
murdered Him ; and now lies He there, and pone so poor 
as do Him reverence. They have rolled a stone to the 
door of the tomb. 

That we may be led a little further along what is neces- 
sarily a melancholy meditation, I want to speak of the 
ugliness of the death of these things of beauty. His con- 
ception of God was denied. In His death there was 
neither grace nor truth. In the activity that produced 
His death there was neither mercy nor justice. In His 
dying there was neither peace granted to Him, nor right- 
eousness. All the things opposed to the things of God, 
joined to slay Him. Consequently His conception of God 
was destroyed in the hour of His dying. They put Him 

[ 334 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

on the Cross. By their own action He was slain, and 
God was withdrawn from human life by the volition of 
humanity. This God of Jesus, the God of His thinking, 
His conception of God was absolutely refused. 

His ideal of humanity lay dead. His ideal of human- 
ity was proved impossible by His dying. Men mocked it, 
men trampled on it, men slew it, and would have none of 
it. Consequently the ideal must be abandoned. When 
they nailed Him to His Cross,, and took the dead body 
down from the Cross and laid it in the grave, they said in 
effect: No, we will not have that. That is not the ideal 
of humanity to which we are willing to bow. They said, 
as He had indicated in one of His parables, " We will not 
have this Man to reign over us." That is not the ideal of 
humanity that we will accept! 

More tragic still in a contemplation like this, producing 
more poignant grief in the heart than either of the other 
hvo; more terrible than the loss of the conception of God, 
than the loss of the ideal of humanity, is the fact that 
there lay dead a passion to redeem. It was refused. It 
tvas thus declared not worth while to try and redeem 
men. This was the conviction of the philosophy and 
wisdom of the age. Moreover it was impossible, and 
therefore it was foolish. Fling it out. We will not have 
it. Worthless things are not worth redeeming. There is 
no wealth in waste. And they were right, apart from 
Him. It is not worth while, because it cannot be done. 
That master-passion of the love that goes after lost things 
was dead, and in its tomb. 

"""" Consequently religion was dead. The foundation was 
destroyed, for He died, and was buried ! We cannot be- 
lieve either in God or man, if this be the end. Many are 
now reading Russian literature. So far as I have read, 
and am able to express any opinion, I do not know any- 
thing more wonderful in any literature than the writing 
of Dostoievsky. In his novel The Idiot, he describes two 
men, looking at Holbein's picture of Jesus being taken 

[335 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 15 : 33-47] 

from the Cross. It is a terrible picture. One of the 
Russians, looking at the Cross, says : " I like looking at 
that picture/' " That picture ! that picture ! " said his 
companion. "Why, some people's faith is ruined by 
looking at that picture!" That is an illustrative story. 
That picture must ruin my faith if there be nothing to 
come after it. They have put that dead body in the tomb, 
and rolled against the door a stone. I have seen it, and 
cannot believe in the goodness of God, nor in the possi- 
bility of humanity. 

Consequently the structural motive of religion is with- 
ered at its root, for if I cannot believe in God I cannot 
love Him. And if I do not believe in humanity I cannot 
love it. 

Finally therefore, and necessarily, the inspiration of 
religion is quenched; for if I cannot believe in God and 
love Him, nor in man and love him, I have no hope about 
to-morrow. A stone is against the door of the tomb! 

What did that tomb contain?, /In the story in Mark 
there is something which is more significant than perhaps 
appears upon the surface. Joseph asked for " the body 
of Jesus." Pilate gave him "the corpse." There is a 
great difference in the two words. They are entirely dif- 
ferent. Joseph begged for the body of Jesus, the ff&fia; 
Pilate gave him the corpse, the TTT S>fia. Joseph begged 
for the body of Jesus. The Greek word there referred 
to a body, as sound, and complete. I think when Mark 
wrote this Gospel, probably under the direction of Peter, 
he used these words carefully. This Greek word here 
used for a body, Homer always employed for a dead 
body, but from Hesiod onward in Greek writings, it was 
used of a living body. When Joseph asked for the body, 
he asked in the respectful term that referred to the body 
in its entirety and its beauty. It was the word that a 
lover would use. Pilate said He could not be dead al- 
ready, and sent for the centurion; and as soon as the 
centurion showed that Jesus was dead, he gave to Joseph 

[336] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 15:33-47] 

the corpse. What is the significance of that word? The 
ruin ! That is what Pilate granted to Joseph. That is 
what they put in the grave. 

Is that the end? If so, these are the things that we 
have lost; a conception of God, an ideal of humanity, a 
new master-passion in life to redeem, and therefore a re- 
ligion. If that be the end then I declare that every suc- 
ceeding grave is the continuity of ghastly despair, includ- 
ing the latest graves. If that be the end A then tombs 
forever accentuate the ghastly failure. 

This melancholy consideration is necessary lest we fail 
to appreciate the transcendent wonder of the sequel. I 
dare not, however, end a meditation thus. So, while our 
meditation has been around certain words, we may be 
led to the sequel in Biblical words, where the same terms 
are employed, and so our present meditation may be 
complete. What have we seen? "A stone against the 
door of the tomb." Let us read again: "And very early 
on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene, and Mary 
the mother of James, and Salome come to the tomb when 
the sun was risen. And they were saying among them- 
selves, Who shall roll us away the stone from the door 
of the tomb? And looking up, they see that the stone is 
rolled back!" 

In the ineffable glory of the light that breaks, we say, 
That conception of God is not dead, that ideal of hu- 
manity^ continues, that passion to save will still inspire, 
and our religion abides, faith, love, and hope. There- 
fore all our graves are prophecies of God's great final 
victory. 



I 337 1 



XXX 

"And looking up they see that the stone is rolled back." 

MARK 16:4. 

Mark 16. 

IN the first eight verses of this chapter we have a vivid 
picture of events in the earliest hours of the first day of 
the week, following that in which our Lord was crucified 
and buried. First, three women are seen on Saturday 
evening (that is, after six o'clock, when the Sabbath 
ended, and the first day began), buying spices for the 
anointing of the body of Jesus, which two of their num- 
ber had seen laid in the tomb. The three who bought the 
spices were Mary of Magdala, Mary the mother of James 
and Joses, and Salome; and it is interesting to observe 
that these three were the women named as having 
watched the crucifixion from afar. After the passing of 
some hours " when the sun was risen " they came to 
the tomb, and the " they " here of Mark's record would 
seem to refer to the second Mary and Salome only, for 
John explicitly declares that Mary of Magdala had ar- 
rived earlier " while it was yet dark." She had come to 
the sepulchre first; and the other two came a little later. 
She came "while it was yet dark"; they came "when 
the sun was risen." She also saw the stone taken away, 
but instead of waiting, and going into the grave, she ran 
on to bear the news to Peter and John, who evidently 
were living in separation from the other disciples, declar- 
ing that they had taken away the Lord out of the tomb. 

Be all that as it may, the story is in no way invalidated, 
the whole emphasis being on what these people expected 
to find, what they found, and the results which followed. 
As they came then, they remembered, the great stone 
which they had seen rolled against the door of the tomb, 

[338] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

and " were saying among themselves, Who shall roll us 
away the stone from the door of the tomb ? " They knew 
their physical weakness, and that it was a great stone 
" exceeding great," and so they knew that they could not 
move it. Then they looked up, and as Mark says " they 
see that the stone is rolled back." These two women 
were evidently not of Mary Magdalene's temperament, 
for they did not jump to the conclusion that His body had 
been removed. Probably surprised, and certainly glad, 
they entered in with the spices to anoint the dead body of 
Jesus. 

Then came the supreme astonishment. . Instead of the 
dead body of their Master they saw " a young man ar- 
rayed in a white robe/' They were amazed, and imme- 
diately the heavenly watcher addressed them: "Be not 
amazed; ye seek Jesus the Nazarene, Who hath been cru- 
cified; He is risen, He is not here: behold, the place 
where they laid Him! But go, tell His disciples and 
Peter, He goeth before you into Galilee: there ye shall 
see Him, as He said unto you." Then, in a sentence or 
two, Mark gives a most graphic picture. These women 
left the tomb, and fled. Seized with trembling, and as- 
tonishment ; the actual Greek word there is " ecstasy," 
seized with trembling and ecstasy, filled with fear; so 
they fled. 

In the next eleven verses we have massed together 
some of the principal events of the next forty days, up 
to and including the ascension of the Lord. The last 
verse declares in yet briefer form, but with remarkable 
inclusiveness, the story of the days following His ascen- 
sion. They went everywhere preaching; the Lord ac- 
companying them, working with them, and confirming 
the Word by the signs that followed. 

These last twelve verses constitute a battleground of 
textual criticism, and by many are rejected as not genu- 
ine. I do not propose to stay for a moment to discuss the 
matter. Suffice it for me to say that while recognizing the 

[ 339 3 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

difficulties giving rise to the contention, I most strongly 
hold that they are certainly genuine, the weight of evi- 
dence both external and internal, compelling me to that 
conclusion. 

To return to the text itself^ " the stone is rolled back/' 
That declaration, as it introduces us to the fact which it 
indicated, constitutes the answer to all the forebodings to 
which " the stone against the door of the tomb " gave 
rise. Let us then consider the fact indicated by that stone 
rolled back from the tomb; and note some of the results 
following thereupon. 

The fact indicated ! The stone rolled back was not the 
supreme fact, but rather an indication of the fact, some- 
thing which was intended to draw attention to the fact 
itself. The rolling back of the stone happened after the 
resurrection. It was not rolled back from the tomb in 
order that Jesus might pass out of the tomb. He had 
left the tomb before the stone was rolled back. Matthew 
gives a fuller account of the event, and says that there 
was a great earthquake, that an angel descended, whose 
appearance was as lightning, and his raiment white as the 
snow, and the keepers the soldiers who had been ob- 
tained from Pilate to keep watch over the tomb did 
quake and became as dead men. The coming of the 
angel was for the rolling back of the stone ; not that Jesus 
might pass, out of the grave; but to show that He had 
gone. 

When the stone was rolled back, what was there to be 
seen? An empty tomb, and undisturbed grave-clothes. 
These grave-clothes were lying in the very folds that they 
had been in, around the body of the dead Christ ; and the 
napkin that had been on the headi was laid separately 
as John is particular to say that is, as it would be sepa- 
rated from the other wrappings, as they were round the 
dead body of Jesus. Familiarity with Eastern customs 
will help us here. The wrappings around the dead were 
voluminous. They were enswathed in these bandages in 

I 340 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

the most careful and systematic and even scientific man- 
ner. What Peter and John saw when they looked into 
the grave was those grave-clothes lying exactly as they 
had been wrapped around His body; but His body was 
not there! It was that vision of the grave-clothes un- 
disturbed, that convinced Peter and John that He was 
risen. If the grave-clothes had been disturbed, and care- 
fully folded up, then they might have imagined that 
somebody had unwrapped them, and that the body of 
Jesus had been stolen, as certain people said it had ; but 
the ' undisturbed wrappings in the tomb demonstrated to 
these men that He was risen. This then, was what they 
saw when the stone was rolled back an. empty tomb, and 
undisturbed grave-clothes. Of these signs angels be- 
came guardians, until they had borne testimony to the 
disciples, which would settle forever the question whether 
our Lord was truly risen from the dead. 

What then is the fact that was thus indicated? The 
very fact which the angel announced : " Ye seek Jesus the 
Nazarene. . . . He is risen : He is not here." Jesus 
of Nazareth had been raised from the dead ; had emerged 
from all its material bondage and bandages ; had passed 
into a new life, the same but entirely different; had 
proved Himself Victor over death, and Conqueror of the 
grave. That is the central fact of Christianity through 
all the centuries. If that is not true, Christianity is 
doomed. 

It is the central fact of Christianity. It is the fact that 
cannot be explained save by revelation, and revelation has 
never explained the process of the resurrection. It has 
explained it in so far that it has declared that God raised 
Him from the dead. Whether that declaration be be- 
lieved may depend upon our conception of God. If God 
be a prisoner in His own universe, having created an 
order in the midst of which He dwells imprisoned, so 
that He cannot move out of what we call the ordinary, 
then perhaps that never happened. Even then, before we 

[ 341 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 16] 

can be reasonable in unbelief we must be sure we know 
all the ordinary ! But if God is greater than His uni- 
verse ; if in brief, He is the God of the Bible, Who spake 
and it was done, Who commanded and it stood firm, Who 
upholds all things by the word of His power, and is able 
out of apparent nothing to bring cosmos and beauty into 
being, and to deal with chaos and disorder, and destroy 
them; if this be our God, then though we never have an 
explanation of the process of resurrection, we have a fact 
upon which we can rest. God raised Him from the dead. 

I will go further, and declare that the resurrection is a 
fact that cannot be proved, except to the faith of the 
heart. The resurrection cannot be proved mechanically, 
mathematically, by the demonstration of our small clever- 
nesses. It will always evade us. It never has been so 
proved; it never can be done. Man cannot prove God 
by these self-same processes. God is not to be demon- 
strated mathematically, mechanically ; not even philosoph- 
ically, unless our philosophy be the philosophy of reve- 
lation. .We cannot prove the resurrection by reason. 
Therefore the apostle wrote at one time, " If thou shalt 
confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe 
in thy heart that God raised Him from the dead, thou 
shalt be saved: for with the heart man believeth unto 
righteousness." Belief with the intellect never produces 
moral and spiritual results. Belief with the heart does; 
that belief that rises out of a great agony, and a great 
sorrow, and a great shame, and fastens upon a declara- 
tion, and rises healed and helped that faith is the faith 
that demonstrates the resurrection. Apart from such 
faith we cannot prove it. No man knows Jesus rose from 
the dead, save the man who in helplessness of soul has 
trusted Him, and has received that spiritual, mystic, inner 
witness, that knows no denial, and laughs at criticism. 
That man knows that He Who died, and was buried, rose 
again, and ever lives to make intercession. 

Not only is it a fact that cannot be explained ; not only 

[342] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

is it a fact that cannot be proved; it is also a fact that 
cannot fee denied save by ignorance. I use that word 
sympathetically. If there is a man who does deny it, then 
he does so in ignorance. The word " ignorance " is de- 
rived from the Latin. We may use the Greek equivalent 
and say, It cannot be denied, save by agnosticism. The 
Greek word " agnostic " sounds more poetical than the 
Latin equivalent " ignoramus," but they mean the same 
thing; the man who does not know. We can respect such 
a person, and respect his honest agnosticism about this 
very fact ; only it should be understood that the moment 
when agnosticism becomes an impertinence, is the mo- 
ment when a man makes it a resting-place for his soul. 
When a man makes it a harbour of refuge, then he is 
really a prisoner in his own agnosticism. No intellectual 
soul finds its last resting-place in ignorance. The resur- 
rection cannot be disproved by agnosticism. Such treat- 
ment can never disprove it. The resurrection cannot be 
disproved by denying it. Nor can His appearances after 
the resurrection be disproved. 

Some one may say: Yes, but do you thus escape your 
problem? You say the fact is proved by other facts. But 
the other facts are disputed as much as the fact which 
you make them prove. But, I inquire on what ground 
these subsequent facts are disputed. The appearances 
of Jesus of Nazareth^ alive from the dead, after He had 
been most certainly crucified, are as well authenticated 
as any facts of history which we do not hesitate to believe 
to-day. When you deny them, by that denial you declare 
that all history is invalid. You may be right ! Perhaps 
those things did not happen under Julius Caesar, which 
were said to happen in this little island of ours! Per- 
haps there is no history ! 

The final, and conclusive fact, however, is that the 
whole Christian propaganda is the last proof that He rose 
from the dead ; for the whole of it has been based upon 
this belief, and inspired by this fact. Had there been no 

[ 343 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 16] 

resurrection, what then? There had been no Christian 
Church, no Christian propaganda, no Christian influence. 
Everything for which the lonely Nazarene stood, lay 
murdered, dead, in the tomb when they rolled against it 
a great stone. His disciples had been scattered like chaff 
before the wind, and the whole movement had been 
stamped out. How did it live again ? It lived again, and 
it lives, because He lived again, and lives! 

Let us then pass on to consider some of the values re- 
sulting from the fact of the rolling back of this stone. 
Here I can only deal with certain aspects of the one in- 
clusive result, which is Christianity. I want to name three 
aspects of that one result^ which also have been con- 
tinuous. 

The result of the empty tomb, and the fact of the risen 
Christ which it indicated, was first, the transfiguration of 
the Cross for His disciples; secondly therefore, Jt was the 
vindication of His teaching for His disciples and all such 
as consider that teaching ; and finally, it was for His dis- 
ciples and for all time an interpretation of His Person. 

These men, gathered round about Jesus His disciples, 
His apostles, and . subsequently other disciples, these 
people first came into contact with His Person. It was 
the personality of Jesus which made, an appeal to these 
men in the earliest days. Then as they walked and talked 
with Him, they came to know His teaching. At last they 
knew His Cross. The resurrection transfigured the 
Cross, vindicated His teaching, and interpreted His per- 
sonality. Their experience had been that of contact with 
His Person, attention to His teaching, and shame and 
shuddering in the presence of His Cross. Now, inter- 
preted by the resurrection, they saw the transfiguration 
of the Cross; they knew the vindication of His teaching; 
and they received the amazing revelation of the deepest 
and profoundest fact concerning His Person. 

The resurrection meant the transfiguration of His 
Cross, Remember once more how these apostles hacj 

[ 344 I 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark i6J 

feared the Cross. They feared it for Him. They feared 
it for themselves. Their fear was by no means low and 
mean. I used to criticize these disciples for fearing the 
Cross, but I have given up doing so. I used to deduce a 
good many lessons therefrom about our own fears of the 
Cross. I think those lessons are needed still, but I think 
the illustration was false. The more I study these Gos- 
pels, and follow these men, the more I sympathize with 
them in their shunning of the Cross. I do not think that 
it was selfishness made Peter say, "That be far from 
Thee, Lord." It was pure affection for his Lord. He 
feared the Cross. To him it was intolerable to think that 
Jesus could be mauled to death by brutal, men. I think 
they feared for themselves also, but on no selfish level. 
If He were going to die, where were all their high hopes ? 
He had talked of a Kingdom. All that must come to an 
end if He died. They did fear the Cross. From the mo- 
ment when He began explicitly to declare it to them, they 
could hardly bear to walk and talk with Him. That is 
manifest in all the accounts of His last months with 
these men. They only saw the wrong of the Cross. They 
were right in so far as they saw. There is nothing so 
shameful in all human history as the Cross of Jesus. 
There is nothing that reflects in such unmistakable and 
deadly manner upon the human heart as the Cross of 
Jesus. Oh, the vulgarity of it ! the utter devilishness of 
it ! If we lose that early sense of the horror of it, then 
we are losing a good deal more than we realize. It was a 
terrible thing ! When the disciples saw that it really hap- 
pened ; that brutal men caught Him, mauled Him, bruised 
Him, murdered Him; they felt that it was all over, and 
they fled. 

Now observe in the second place how these men came 
to glory in it. " God forbid that I should glory, save in 
the Cross of Jesus Christ my Lord." That was the writ- 
ing of the apostle, born out of due time, who nevertheless 
was not a whit behind the chief est apostle. He was 

[ 345 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
(Mark 16] 

thinking for the whole of them. The apostles gloried in 
it for Him, and gloried in it for . themselves. They 
counted it all joy that they were considered worthy to 
suffer shame for the name. What had happened? The 
resurrection made them look back, and look again, and yet 
again; and the rough, brutal, devilish Roman gibbet, 
began to bloom and blossom and flame and flash, with the 
love of God. If there had been no resurrection, there 
would have been nothing but the black tragedy of a 
murder. The resurrection revealed to these men, and 
has revealed to us for all time, that in that dark hour, 
God wrought in the darkness for light, through death 
unto life, in bondage for the creation of liberty. Come, 
"behold, the place where they laid Him! He is risen: 
He is not here." "The stone is rolled back." We go 
again to Golgotha, to Calvary, to the green hill, and there 
lay our intellectual clevernesses in the dust, and worship : 

" For God comes down our souls to greet, 
And glory crowns the mercy-seat." 

But again, that resurrection was the vindication of His 
teaching. We may mass the teaching of Jesus in certain 
regards, His teaching concerning relative values, His 
teaching concerning moral standards, His teaching con- 
cerning redeeming motives. Along these lines His teach- 
ing proceeded through all the three years ; line upon line," 
precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, He 
had been dealing with these things. 

Concerning relative values He perpetually insisted upon 
the supremacy of the spiritual over the physical ; calling 
men always into that attitude where they sought first the 
Kingdom of God, remembering that all the things of 
material necessity should be added to them; calling men 
to know no fear of men that only kill the body, and after 
that have no more that they can do ; persistently declar- 
ing to men that the spiritual is supreme over the physical^ 

[ 346 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

and as insistently claiming the sacredness of the material. 
There was nothing in the teaching of Jesus approaching 
the Gnostic heresy that declared that the flesh is in- 
herently evil. Plato could only get rid of sin by getting 
rid of the body. Jesus retains the body; and declares 
that God feeds the body as well as the soul, that the body 
is as sacred a thing as the soul, since the soul makes it 
its sanctuary. He never castigated His body, He never 
inflicted flagellations upon His flesh. That foolish prac- 
tice was reserved for a decadent Christianity to discover. 
He lived a life that was natural and beautiful in the 
physical and the material. They had taken that fair and 
beauteous body, and brutally murdered it,, and put it in 
the grave. But said the angel, "He is not here: He is 
risen " ; and in that rising His teaching was vindicated. 
He did not fear those who should kill the body. He 
knew well that they could do no more. His victory over 
death was His vindication of the supremacy of the spiri- 
tual. It was also a vindication of His conception of the 
sacredness of the material. If the body were an evil 
thing, when He emerged into the spiritual life, after the 
resurrection, He would have left the body; but He took 
the body also; and from that moment unto this, all human 
bodies are what the Church has called them, "sacred 
dust." When He came back and here is where intel- 
lectuality will break down He came in a risen body to 
eat broiled fish with His disciples ; to be up in the morn- 
ing when men are fishing, to light a fire and prepare a 
breakfast I Do not cut out those last chapters of John, I 
charge you again. Keep them where they are ; for they 
are necessary. The supremacy of the spiritual, and the 
sacredness of the material were both vindicated by the 
fact of His resurrection. 

Again, concerning moral standards, He had taught the 
glory of holiness ; but He had also claimed the power to 
forgive sins. He stood among the sons of men the most 
insistent Demander of purity; yet to sinning men and 

[ 347 1 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TQ MARK 
[Mark 16] 

women He had said, "Thy sins are forgiven thee"; 
" Hath no man condemned thee ? Neither do I condemn 
thee: go thy way; from henceforth sin no more." He 
had taught two things apparently contradictory; the 
necessity for absolute purity, and yet the possibility of so 
forgiving the sins that out of the sense of forgiveness 
there should spring a new moral incentive. By the resur- 
rection that teaching was vindicated. By the resurrection 
the glory of holiness was revealed. Said Peter on the 
day of Pentecost, " It was impossible that He should be 
holden of death." Why? Because in Him is no sin, and 
by His resurrection sin was destroyed. Yet more than 
that and this is the supreme thing to every human heart. 
By that resurrection the possibility of forgiveness was 
vindicated, for the resurrection is the sign and symbol to 
men everywhere that God has accepted that mystery of 
atoning work for the redemption of humanity. The ac- 
tual experimental fact of forgiveness is a new moral 
incentive. A man says, I am forgiven, and goes on sin- 
ning, and we know that the truth is not in him. A man 
says, I am forgiven, and I hate sin and will turn myself 
from it ; I may flounder and fall, but so help me God, I 
am against it myself ; that man is telling the truth ; and 
out of his sense of forgiveness a, moral inspiration has 
sprung up. All that was vindicated by the resurrection. 
And once again: His teaching concerning redeeming 
motives was vindicated. He had taught the beauty of 
sacrifice; and no one had believed Him. He had de- 
clared the strength of love ; and they had murdered Him, 
and found Him weak enough to die, as they said in : un- 
utterable contempt. Now behold Him, alive from the 
dead ! In the resurrection is the vindication of the beauty 
of sacrifice, the vindication of the ultimate triumph of the 
sacrificial life. In the resurrection is the wonder of 
eternal love. Love is stronger than death, and mightier 
than the grave. That motive of compassion which we 
referred to as one of the lost things if He were dead, 

[348] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 

[Mark 16] 

flamed again, in light and power and beauty, by the way 
of the resurrection. 

Finally we come to that which in some senses is su- 
preme, but which may now be dismissed briefly ; by the 
resurrection these men came to a new interpretation of 
His person. How far had they gone before His Cross? 
They had travelled a long way. They knew the Man 
Jesus, they honoured Him, and they loved Him. They 
knew that the Man Jesus was the Christ. They had ac- 
cepted His Messiahship, they had followed Him as Mes- 
siah, and obeyed Him as such. They had gained an in- 
tellectual conviction that He was the Son of God, as 
Peter himself declared at Csesarea Philippi, "Thou art 
the Son of God." But an intellectual conviction is never 
a spiritual and moral dynamic, unless it have with it 
something else, mightier than intellect. 

What now happened? I go again to the writings of 
Paul. Speaking of Jesus in the beginning of his great 
Roman letter he says that after the flesh He was of the 
seed of David, but that He "was declared the Son of 
God with power by the resurrection from the dead." I 
like to take that Greek word for " declared," and Anglicize 
it. This is what he said, "He was horizoned the Son of 
God with power." He was placed upon the horizon in a 
new light, so that men saw clearly, as they see the sun in 
its rising, Who He was. By that resurrection they dis- 
covered this deepest truth concerning His personality. 
Presently eight days afterwards in the upper room, a 
magnificent man, an agnostic, but honest withal, and 
broken-hearted withal, did say in the presence of that 
fact that Jesus was alive, " My Lord and my God." They 
all came for ever after to speak of Him with reverence as 
" the Lord Jesus Christ," 

So " the stone is rolled back." Therefore all our fear, 
as we saw " a stone against the door of the tomb " was 
groundless. The conception of God abides. The ideal of 
humanity not only remains, but is attainable. The passion 

[ 349 ] 



THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO MARK 
[Mark 16] 

to redeem is operative, and has been through all the cen- 
turies. The religion of Jesus triumphs; faith as its foun- 
dation, love as its structural power, hope as its finality. 
Because these things are so, all gravestones are tem- 
porary things, for they must all be rolled away. 

Thus ends our study of Mark. In the first sermon I 
preached on this Gospel, dealing with Mark's own de- 
scription of his writing as " The beginning of the Gospel 
of Jesus Christ the Son of God," I quoted as applicable 
to the whole Gospel, some very striking words of Mazzini. 
Let me close with them, as summarizing the whole story, 
as we have tried to consider it. 

" He came. The soul the most full of love, the most 
sacredly virtuous, the most deeply inspired by God and 
the future, that men have yet seen on earth Jesus. He 
bent over the corpse of the dead world, and whispered 
a word of faith. Over the clay that had lost all of man, 
but the movement and the form, He uttered words until 
then unknown; Love, Sacrifice, a heavenly origin. And 
the dead arose, a new life circulated through the clay, 
which philosophy had tried in vain to reanimate. From 
that corpse arose the Christian world, the world of liberty 
and equality. From the clay arose the true Man, the 
Image of God, the precursor of humanity." 



Printed in the United States of America 



[ 350 ] 



& ' , ' - 



<_-> 



& 





, vWfXv^Ar-J) 




4' ... , ? , 



v *f~- 
' 



v-P 



