= Ad <b0 We OAS ee puns jetted ahh Op tbe 
AERP ER OL Seotre se OPUTE SEI RGR T TONEN HES EIE DRS TE TRS M PRESS 


epee 


<n OF PRING ON 


rhe oN 
HOT Tae 


eo 


y 


ai 


if iM 


e 


THE CHRIST WE KNow ~ 


Meditations on the Person and Glory 
of Our Lord Jesus Christ 
By / 
¥ Wf ° 
Arno Clemens Gaebelein, D.D. 


INDICA! 


The Best Answer to the Book 
The Man Nobody Knows 


PUBLICATION OFFICE “OUR HOPE” 
456 FourTH AVENUE 
New Yorx City 


And All Booksellers 


Copyright, 1927, by 
The Bible Institute Colportage Association 


of Chicago 


Printed in the United States of America 


Preface 


seller of religious works a volume with the title, The Man 

Nobody Knows. ‘That such a production should become the 
best seller is far from being complimentary to the American Chris- 
tian public. The book has no marked literary value nor has it a 
true spiritual message. Yet it has the endorsement of religious 
leaders of various evangelical denominations, including the Presi- 
dent of the Federal Council of the Churches of Christ in America, 
Dr. S. Parkes Cadman. 

The book claims to contain a new discovery concerning our 
blessed Lord. The writer of this book declares that our Lord was 
not a “kill-joy” nor a “physical weakling,” but that “He was the 
most popular dinner guest in Jerusalem.” He describes Him as 
the out-door man, the sociable man, a great advertiser and a great 
business man. More serious than all this is the fact that the 
author stabs, whenever he can, at the very heart of Christianity. 
That heart is the Cross of Christ and His substitutionary sacrifice. 
Take the Cross of Christ in its true meaning out of Christianity 
and Christianity becomes a lifeless and powerless religious system. 
One quotation suffices to demonstrate the denial of this great 
essential truth of the Gospel and how the author despises the 
declaration “that Christ died for our sins.’ On page 59 we find 
the following: 


“Thomas Paine remarked truly that no religion can be really 
divine which has in it any doctrine that offends the sensibilities 
of a little child. Is there any reader of this page whose childish 
sensibilities were not shocked when the traditional explanation of 
the death of Jesus was first poured into his ears? Would any 
human father, loving his children, have sentenced all to death, 
and been persuaded to commute the sentence only by the suffering 
of his best beloved?” 


But enough of this. We do not care to pass on more of these 
perversions of this man. The book leads us to believe that he 
does not know Christ at all. The Christ we know is a different 
Christ. God’s people know Him as the Eternal Christ. In spite 
of all the modernistic infidelity which utters its miserable inven- 
tions, as the harbinger of the soon-coming night of apostasy and 
judgment, God’s true Church still holds fast the great confession 
of Peter, “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God,” 


Fu several months book shops have advertised as the best 


3 


4 The Christ We Know 


We know Him as the incarnate Son of God, the Christ who 
was born of the Virgin, who was cradled in Bethlehem’s manger, 
who lived as the perfect Man a holy, sinless life on earth. We 
know Him as the perfect Teacher, the revealing Christ. We too 
cry out with Peter: “Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast the 
words of eternal life.” We know Him as the sacrificing Christ, 
who died for our sins, who bore our sins in His own body on the 
tree. What can wash away our sins? Our character? Our 
attempts to follow Jesus? No! Nothing but the blood of Jesus. 
Can the conception of Christ as a business man, as a leader, or 
advertiser or sociable man, give our consciences rest and bring 
us nigh unto God? No! Nothing but the blood of Jesus. 

We know Him as the risen Christ. The book The Man Nobody 
Knows ends with a brief mention of His death, but not a word 
about His resurrection. ‘True believers know that Christ arose 
and that they are risen with Him. We know Him as the living, 
the interceding Christ, in whose worthy and all-availing Name we 
come to God. We know that He liveth, for our prayers in His 
Name are answered and in sorrow, bowed down with the cares 
and burdens of life, we know Him as our burden-bearer, who 
sustains and keeps His people. We know Him as the triumphant 
Christ. In spite of all opposition to Him He has triumphed in 
every age and His greatest triumph is yet to come, when heaven 
opens and He returns. 

This little volume, The Christ We Know, contains about thirty 
brief articles, unfolding this greatest of all themes, the Lord Jesus 
Christ: His Person and His Glory. ‘These meditations are the 
best answers which can be given to the above mentioned “best 
seller.” 

These meditations were originally published in Our Hope. 
Years ago the writer decided to devote each month the first para- 
graph in the magazine to our adorable Lord. We have given 
Him in this way the place of preéminence. Many of these short 
studies were written after much prayer and soul-exercise and it 
has pleased the Holy Spirit to make them a blessing to thousands 
of members of the household of faith. 

ARNO CLEMENS GAEBELEIN 
Mount Vernon,N.Y., 
March 26, 1927. 


v 


Contents 


Gop AND Man - - - - 


’ Toe One DoctRINE - - - 


Tue Love THAT PASSETH KNOWLEDGE 


“THE WONDERFUL” Aci Pat 
THE PurcHASE PRICE - - 


THE MANGER, THE CROSS, AND THE [THRONE 


“Tuer UNSPEAKABLE GIFT’ - 

Tue UNSPEAKABLE Joy - - 
Tue UNSPEAKABLE GLORY 
His Face aND GLorRyY - - 


EssENTIAL AND ACQUIRED 
THe ALL-SUFFICIENT ONE 2 


“THE PRAYING CHRIST Sar he 


THE SOWER ANDTHE REAPER~ - 
“Hels Tuy Lorn’ - - - 
“Att My Sprincs ARE IN THEE” 
“As He THAT SERVETH™ - 
“THe Lorp ALWAYS - -. - 
LIKETHE RAIN - - - - 
In THE Mipst SY Sage Aa Hh 
Tue Son oF Davip - - - 
His KincsHip SI ihaiiamt see Seek i ith 
THe MorNniInG STAR Be 
“GLORIFIED’”’ AND “ADMIRED” - 
“GREATER THAN SOLOMON” 
THe Empty THRONE - - - 
“Were Have SEEN THE Lorp’” 


THE REVELATION OF THE LORD FROM HEAVEN 


THE MAN AT THE RIGHT HAND 


5 


oe 


The Christ We Know 


Gop AND MAN 
H { ANY years ago there was found in Asia Minor a 


very old Latin inscription chiselled in marble. 

This inscription bears an interesting witness to the 

faith in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ in the first | 

century of Christianity. It presents the eternal Word, the 

Son of God, bearing witness to Himself. He speaks of Him- 

self as incarnate, the Word made flesh, and then declares: 

“T am what I was—God. I was not what I am—Man. 
I am now called both, God and Man.” 

It is a great confession. He was and is and always will 
be God. He can never be anything else. When He left the 
Father’s bosom and took on the form of a servant He did 
‘not cease to be God. He was just as much God when He 
was cradled in Bethlehem as He was God before the foun- 
dation of the world. But He became what He was not 
before; He became Man. He became incarnate. “And the 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we beheld 
His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, 
full of grace and truth” (John i:14). He became man in 
a supernatural way, because it was the only way in which 
the Holy One could take on a human body. ‘That super- 
natural way was the Virgin birth. And now He is both 
God and Man. He was God and Man on earth; He is still 
God and Man in Glory; He will always be God and Man. 
Around these glorious facts upon which everything for time 
and eternity depends the conflict of the ages has raged. All 
the false doctrines and systems of the past either denied His 


7 


8 The Christ We Know 


essential Deity, or His true humanity. All these “isms,” 
Arianism, and its modern expression in Unitarianism, the 
International Bible Students Association (Russellism), Ap- 
pollinarism, Nestorianism, and others are answered and 
silenced by that terse phrase, used by the true Church from 
earliest times, “very God and very Man.” Nor will this 
true confession of Himself ever cease, in spite of boasting 
Modernism, which dreams of a victory over the creeds of 
historic Christianity. 

And how blessedly the Gospel records bear witness to the 
truth of His Deity and His perfect humanity! What joy it 
is for the believing heart to read again and again the fami- 
liar scenes of His life, as it pleased the Holy Spirit to reveal 
them, and find here that which bears witness to Him as 
very God and very Man, and which refreshes and satisfies 
the hearts of His people. 

As the twelve-year-old boy He could speak in divine self- 
consciousness of being about His Father’s business, while 
He manifested Himself in the midst of the Jewish doctors 
as the Wisdom. Yet He was a true man, for in His beauti- 
ful humility He “went down with them, and came to Naz- 
areth, and was subject unto them” (Luke ii:46-51). 

He went to the marriage in Cana of Galilee. He mingled 
with the guests and rejoiced with them that rejoiced, as He 
also wept with those who wept. His presence at the feast 
of joy manifests His true humanity. But the humble guest 
at the marriage is very God and He revealed Himself as 
such when He changed the water into wine. He displayed 
His omnipotence and thus manifested His glory. 

We see Him on a weary way through Samaria, and when 
He reached Jacob’s well, ‘being wearied with His journey, 
sat thus on the well.” As the tired and thirsty traveler He 
manifests His true humanity. But ere long when He speaks 


God and Man 9 


to the lost soul He reveals Himself as very God, for He 
possesses omniscience, knowing the secrets of the human 
heart and life. Again we see Him as a true Man, eating 
and drinking with the publicans and sinners, so that the 
hypocrites called Him a “wine-bibber.” Yet He was very 
God, for He spoke to the penitent soul, ““Go in peace; thy 
sins are forgiven thee,” and who can forgive sins, but God? 

Wearied with much service, tired out when evening came, 
they took Him, even as He was, in the little ship. There 
He lay, utterly weary, asleep on a pillow. All so perfectly 
human. But when they disturbed His peaceful slumber, we 
see Him as God, for “He arose, and rebuked the wind, and 
said unto the sea, Peace! Be still! And the wind ceased, 
and there was a calm” (Mark iv:39). A perfect, true 
Man, when He approached the grave of His friend Lazarus 
and wept. “Jesus wept!” A few minutes later He spoke 
His majestic commanding word, “Lazarus, come forth!” 
The white-clad figure rises out of the tomb. Lazarus is 
raised from the dead. He who wept is God, for as God 
raises the dead, so does He. 

He spent the night on the mountain in prayer. The 
mountain top He reached by climbing there. But in the 
fourth watch He left the place of prayer and came back to 
His disciples, “walking on the water.” He hungered; 
another evidence of His true humanity. But He who was 
hungry could feed thousands with a few small loaves and 
a few fishes; another display of Deity. 

Throughout the blessed, holy life He lived on earth we 
find constantly the double demonstration of His Deity and 
of His humanity. 

And even in His passion, in His sacrificial, atoning work 
we behold Him as God and Man. ‘They came into the gar- 
den to arrest Him as Man, and willingly He held out His 


10 The Christ We Know 


hands to be taken captive by them, for His hour had come. 
But before they took Him He had spoken His “I am” and 
they all fell backward to the ground, for He whom they 
came to deliver into the hands of the Gentiles is Jehovah, 
the “I am.” On the cross He suffered in His body as a 
Man; but He manifested Himself as God when He spoke 
to the dying thief, ““Today thou shalt be with me in Para- 
dise.” : 

And oh, the comfort which is for us in this truth, that 
our Saviour-Lord is the God-Man! As God He has worked 
out our redemption. He who is the brightness of His glory 
and the express image of His person made purification of 
sins. We are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as 
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of 
a Lamb without blemish and without spot; but that blood 
which was paid for our redemption was the blood of God 
(Acts xx:28). As the glorified Man, the risen Christ at the 
right hand of God, the Man who lived on earth, was 
tempted and tried, suffered and passed through all sorrows 
and griefs, He is now for His own the merciful and faith- 
ful High priest. “For in that He Himself hath suffered, 
being tempted, He is able to succour them that are tempted.” 
—‘“For we have not a high priest who cannot be touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points 
tempted like as we are, apart from sin” (Heb. ii:18; iv:15). 
“Wherefore He is able also to save to the uttermost them 
that come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth and 
maketh intercession for them (Heb. vii:25). 

And of this Christ, the God-Man, very God and very 
Man, Modernism, the worst form of apostate Christendom, 
tries to rob us. They rob Him of His Deity. They deny 
the miraculous in His life on earth. ‘They rob Him of His 
Saviourhood and make Him but a superior religious teacher 


The One Doctrine II 


of ethics. They deny His physical resurrection and His 
bodily presence in glory. But God’s true Church is built 
upon the one foundation, which is He Himself, and the 
confession will never cease, in spite of all the modernistic 
infidelity. “Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God.” 
But let it be more than a confession; may we know Him 
better and better, enjoy Him more and more, trusting in 
Him, seeking His face and the comfort of His priestly min- 
istrations. The day cannot be far away when we shall ‘meet 
the glorified Man, our Lord, and be face to face with 
Him, the God-Man, to be transformed into the same image. 


THE ONE DOCTRINE 


NAT eee transgresseth and abideth not in the 

doctrine of Christ, hath not God. He that abideth 
in the doctrine of Christ, he hath both the Father and the 
Son. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doc- 
trine, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God 
speed. For he that biddeth him God speed is partaker of 
his evil deeds” (2 John 10, 11). The one great doctrine is 
the doctrine of Christ. And what is that doctrine? It is the 
revealed truth concerning the Person of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, that He is the Son of God, whom the Father sent 
into the world. “God so loved the world, that He gave His 
only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on Him should 
not perish, but have everlasting life.” 

This is the doctrine of Christ. Anyone who does not hold 
the doctrine of Christ that He is absolutely God, one with 
the Father, come into the world, hath not God. He is 
without God and without hope in the world. He is an Anti- 


12 The Christ We Know 


christ. “Every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is 
come in the flesh is of God; and every spirit that confesseth 
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God; 
and this is that spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard 
that it should come; and even now already is it in the 
world” (1 John iv: 2, 3). One who denies the Deity of the 
Lord Jesus Christ is no Christian at all, and all fellowship 
should be denied to him. This seems severe and intolerant. 
But it is not, if we consider what the denial of the Person 
of our holy and blessed Lord means. God grant unto us, 
who hold the doctrine of Christ, a divine jealousy for His 
honor and glory, manifested by separation from everything 
which in any way denies the doctrine upon which Chris- 
tianity rests. 

But how blessed to faith to see in the first Epistle of 
John the doctrine of Christ revealed and the blessings and 
comforts brought forth, which those enjoy who abide in this 
doctrine. In the Gospel of John the beloved disciple writes 
about the Son of God, how He came from the Father and 
was in the world, and how He left the world to go back to 
the Father (John xvi:28). The Son of God is likewise the 
theme of the Holy Spirit in the first Epistle of John. “Our 
fellowship is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus 
Christ” (i:3). This fellowship means that we share the 
Father’s thoughts about His Son, and that we enjoy in the 
Son the blessed and eternal relationship with the Father. In 
the measure our faith enters into the doctrine of Christ, in 
that measure shall we have deeper fellowship with the 
Father and the Son. 

Let us call to our remembrance other passages in the first 
Epistle of John in which our blessed Lord as the Son of 
God is mentioned. They are sweet and precious to faith, 
and, if read in the Spirit, they will bring the joy, the bless- 


The One Doctrine 13 


ing, the peace and the comfort of the doctrine of Christ to 
our hearts. 

“The blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from all 
sin” (i:7). That precious blood, His own blood, has cleansed 
us once and for all. ‘For this purpose the Son of God was 
manifested that He might destroy the works of the devil” 
(iii:8). “And this is His commandment, that we should 
believe on the name of His Son Jesus Christ and love one 
‘another as He gave us commandment. And he that keepeth 
His commandments [which are: believing on Him and 
loving one another] dwelleth in Him and He in him. And 
hereby we know that He abideth in us, by the Spirit which 
He hath given us” (iii:23, 24). ‘In this was manifested 
the love of God toward us, because that God sent His only 
begotten Son into the world that we might live through 
Him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that He 
loved us, and sent His Son into the world to be the propi- 
tiation for our sins.” “Beloved, if God so loved us, we 
ought also to love one another” (iv:9, 11). “And we have 
seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the 
Saviour of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus 
is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him and he in God. 
And we have known and believed the love that God hath 
for us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love, dwelleth 
in God and God in him” (iv:14-16). “Who is he that 
overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the 
Son of God?” (v:5). “If we receive the witness of men, 
the witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of God 
which he had testified of His Son. He that believeth on the 
Son of God hath the witness in himself; he that believeth © 
not, God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the 
record that God gave to His Son. And this is the record, 
that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in His 


14 The Christ We Know 


Son. He that hath the Son hath life; he that hath not the 
Son of God hath not life” (v:9-12). “These things have I 
written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of 
God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that 
ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. And this is 
the confidence that we have in Him, that, if we ask any- 
thing according to His will, He heareth us” (v:13, 14). 
“And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath 
given us an understanding, that we may know Him that is 
true, and we are in Him that is true, even in His Son Jesus 
Christ. This is the true God and eternal life” (v:20). 

May our faith lay hold anew of these simple yet deep and 
precious revelations. They are the doctrine of Christ. Into 
this we must enter constantly and manifest in our lives the 
fruits of this doctrine, love and righteousness. The increas- 
ing rejection of the doctrine of Christ demands the in- 
creased appreciation of that doctrine. The more the enemy 
attacks the Person of Christ, the more the Holy Spirit de- 
mands of us, who belong to Christ, that we exalt Him. 
Everything at the present time seems to be aimed at the 
setting aside of the doctrine upon which our Hope rests. 
Higher Criticism, evil doctrines, the spurious gospels, ethical 
teachings and every other false doctrine strikes at the blessed 
Person of our Lord. The shadow of the Antichrist is cast 
in our days. Let us heed God’s Word. Let us be separated 
from those who deny Christ, or we are partakers of their 
evil deeds. The path of the true believer becomes narrower. 
It must be so. But Christ becomes more precious, more real 
to our souls. 

What awful times are coming upon this age according to 
God’s Word! With the rejection of the doctrine of Christ 
this age sides completely with Satan, and that great being is 
both blinding his victims and using them for his own /sin- 


The Love That Passeth Knowledge 15 


ister purposes. The blindness is fearful! It will be worse 
before long! They rush into complete apostasy, and from 
there into the delusion with the lying wonders, and then 
complete darkness will come next. Let us praise God for 
the doctrine of Christ, which is our salvation, and may God 
give us faith and courage to walk according to that doctrine. 


THE LOVE THAT PASSETH KNOWLEDGE 


HE Love of Christ! The heart almost shrinks from 
attempting to write on the matchless, unfathomable 
love of our blessed and adorable Lord. All the saints of 
God who have spoken and written on the Love of Christ 
have never told out its fulness and vastness, its heights and 
its depths. “The Love of Christ which passeth knowledge” 
(Eph. iii:19). And yet we do know the Love of Christ. 
While we cannot fully grasp that mighty, eternal Love, our 
hearts can enjoy it and we can ever know more of it. And 
He Himself, whose Love is set upon us, wants us to drink 
constantly of the ocean of his never-changing Love and 
receive new tokens, new glimpses of it. Surely His own 
blessed Spirit, though one feels so insufficient for such an 
object, will guide us in our meditation. The Love of 
Christ, the Holy Spirit ever longs to make known and to 
impart to our poor and feeble hearts. 
The Love of our Lord is an eternal Love. It is not a 
thing of time. It antedates the foundation of the world. 


“His gracious eye surveyed us 
Ere stars were seen above,” 


He as the Son of God in the bosom of God was the ob- 


ject of Love. “Thou lovedst me before the foundation of 
the world” (John xvii:24). And then He knew us and His 


16 The Christ We Know 


Love was even then set upon us, before we ever were in 
existence. He knew our sinfulness, our enmity, our vileness, 
and in Love, which passeth knowledge, He looked forward 
to the time when He would manifest this Love to us, His 
fallen creatures. “Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; 
it is high, I cannot attain unto it” (Psalm cxxxix:6). 

It was Love which brought Him down from the Glory 
which He had with God. What Love to come into this 
dark, sin-cursed world, a world full of enemies! What 
Love to leave that bright and glorious home and appear as 
man, entering as a creature, the world He had made. And 
there was no room for Him in the inn. It passeth knowl- 
edge. 

And then that life, which He lived on earth, was lived 
in that mighty Love. 


“A love that led Thee here below 
To tread a lonely path in grace, 
To pass through sorrow, grief and woe, 
The portion of a ruin’d race.” 

What Love we see in Him, in every step of that lonely 
path! What compassion, what tenderness in every action, 
in every word we discover, ever new and fresh. Wherever 
we look we behold that Love. Loving compassion rested 
upon the multitudes; with Love He compassed the poor, 
the sinful, the oppressed, the heartsick and the outcast. 
Love carried the weak and failing disciples, who had be- 
lieved on him. 

A blessed word it is, which stands in the beginning of 
the thirteenth chapter in the Gospel of John. “Having loved 
His own which were in the world, He loved them unto the 
end.” His Love for His own was expressed by serving 
them. He pleased not Himself but had come to minister. 
He then girded Himself and began to wash the disciples’ 


The Love That Passeth Knowledge 17 


feet. What humiliation! Yet it was the fruit of Love. All 
He did was born of Love. His was on earth a constant, a 
never-tiring, an enduring Love. All the selfishness of His 
disciples could not quench that Love. Nothing could quench 
His Love for His own. Nothing will ever quench it. Peter 
denied Him. ‘And the Lord turned and looked upon 
Peter” (Luke xxii:61). Was it a look of reproach? Was 
it a frown of displeasure which Peter saw in that beloved 
face? Far from it. Love in its divine perfection shone out 
of the eyes of the Son of God. And after His resurrection 
that Love was still the same. There was no reproach con- 
nected with the restoration of Peter to service. In the 
greatest tenderness and Love He committed to His disciple, 
who had so shamefully denied Him, the lambs and sheep 
so dear to His own loving heart (John xxi). 

Again we say, Oh! Love! thou passeth knowledge! How 
could man’s imagination and invention ever have produced 
such a loving Person as our Lord, revealing the perfection 
of divine Love! 

But there is greater Love than the Love which we behold 
in His blessed life on earth. The greater Love is manifested 
when He laid down His life. He came into the world to 
die, to be the propitiation for our sins. He came to take 
our place on the cross. He came to drink the cup of wrath 
in our stead and suffer the awful penalty of our sins. 

“For when we were yet without strength, in due time 
Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous 
man will one die; yet peradventure for a good man some 
would even dare to die. But God commendeth His love 
toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died 
for us.” 

God in Love gave thus His Son, and He gave Himself 
in Love. From shame to shame, from suffering to suffering, 


18 The Christ We Know 


from pain to pain, and agony to agony that Love went on 
to plunge into the deepest sorrow, to reach at last the place 
where His loving lips had to cry, “My God, my God, why 
hast Thou forsaken me?” 


“To death of shame Thy love did reach, 
God’s holy judgment then to bear; 

Ah, Lord, what human tongue can teach 
Or tell the love that brought Thee there.” 

Ah! what human tongue can teach or tell the Love that 
brought Thee there! It passeth knowledge. But with loving, 
praising hearts, in worship and adoration we can look up 
to that cross on which the Prince of Glory died and say 
with Paul, “He loved me, He gave Himself for me.”’ And 
again we join with the innumerable hosts of His own re- 
deemed in the Glory song. “Unto Him that loveth us, and 
washed us from our sins in His own blood, and hath made 
us Kings and priests unto God and His Father, to Him be 
Glory and dominion forever. Amen.” And, beloved reader, 
that Love which knew you and us all before we ever 
existed, that Love which came from glory for you, that Love 
which went into the jaws of death, endured the cross and 
despised the shame, that Love which gave so willingly, gave 
as we can never give, that Love is still the same. It changes 
not. His Love knows no fluctuations. That perfect Love 
cannot grow cold or indifferent. 

We all had our first love; when first we saw Him with 
the eyes of faith, how our hearts were enraptured. How 
soon that love began to grow cold and decreased instead of 
increased. "Then our walk and service became affected, for 
thus it must ever be when the heart is not responding to 
His Love and not in living, loving touch with Himself. 
Oh! the weeks and months and years of our Christian ex- 
perience spent without the full enjoyment of His Love and 


The Love That Passeth Knowledge . 19 


Presence. But has this changed His Love? Has our un- 
faithfulness, our waywardness, our failure and backsliding 
affected His Love? No. He is the same loving Lord, the 
same loving Christ who has borne us and yearned over us, 
who has prayed for us and kept us. Whenever we turn to 
Him with broken hearts, confessing our sins, when in shame 
we hide our faces and tell Him all our failures, we find 
Him still the same loving Lord that He was when His eyes 
rested upon Peter. Oh! how He must love us! How He 
must love us, with that Love which passeth knowledge! 
What treasures that Love contains! Exhaustless, it is ever 
flowing full and free towards His own. 

How it must grieve Him to see us so indifferent, neither 
hot nor cold. How it must grieve Him that we enjoy His 
Love so little that we permit that Love so little to serve us 
and give Him so little opportunity to manifest His mighty 
Love towards us. Alas! we even mistrust that Love. When 
suffering and loss overtake us, when instead of prosperity 
adversity is our lot, we doubt that Love. Fears and anxie- 
ties are nothing less than an impeachment of the Love which 
passeth knowledge. His Love will never fail. He will see 
us safe home. Let the forces of the enemy roar, let trials 
and troubles come, His Love will keep us. His Love is our 
eternal portion. 

“For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor 
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, 
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other 
creature, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, 
which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.” 

And soon He will have us with Himself. The church 
He loved, for which He gave Himself, the church He sanc- 
tied by the washing of water, this church He will present 
to Himself a glorious church (Eph. v:24-27). Even while 


20 The Christ We Know 


on earth He made known His loving purpose, for He 
prayed, “The Glory which Thou has given me I have given 
to them.” 

It is His Love which will make us sharers of His own 
glory and inheritance. What that Love will do then! How 
we shall drink of that Love, deeper than we ever could 
drink here! Oh, the depths of the Love to be fathomed 
in all eternity! Oh, the length and breadth and height to 
be measured! It can never, no never, be exhausted. 

Oh, child of God, is not thy poor wandering heart begin- 
ning to be warmed? Is the warmth of His Love, the Love 
of Christ, refreshing your soul? Thank God for it. It is 
but a demonstration of His Love. And do we not want 
more of it? Do we not need it? 

All our indifference, our cold heartedness, our prayer- 
lessness, our self-indulgences, our inactivity and all else 
which mars our Christian lives, are because we do not have 
the Love of Christ before our hearts. If we were constantly 
enjoying His Love and this mighty Love would constrain 
us, what self-sacrificing lives we would live! How we 
would love one another and in love serve one another. What 
peace there would be among those of like precious faith. 
With a better heart-knowledge of the Love of Christ what 
joy would be ours in all trials and suffering, and with what 
boldness we would approach the throne of Grace and make 
constant use of our God-given privilege, prayer. 

The Love of Christ would lead us on and on in love for 
souls, in service untiring, and yet the same Love too will 
make us long and pray for His coming. 

O God, our Father, grant unto us all and to all Thy 
people throughout the world a greater, a deeper, a more real 
knowledge of the love of Thine ever-blessed Son and fill us 
through that knowledge with all Thine own fulness. Amen. 


“The Wonderful” 21 
“THe WONDERFUL” 


NE of His names is “Wonderful” (Isaiah ix:6). Long 
before Isaiah had uttered this name the angel of the 
Lord had announced the same name. As such He appeared 
to Manoah. This Angel of Jehovah, the Person who ap- 
peared repeatedly in Old Testament history, is an uncreated 
angel. Of this Being we read that He is the Redeemer, for 
Jacob speaks of Him as “the Angel which redeemed me 
from all evil” (Gen. xlvii:15). He is the Angel whose 
voice must be obeyed, who has power to pardon transgres- 
sions, in whom is the name of God (Exod. xxiii:20-23). He 
is the angel of His Presence who saved them (Isa. Ixiii:9) 
and Exodus xxxiii:14 also refers to this Being, “My pres- 
ence shall go with thee and I will give thee rest.” This 
Angel of Jehovah speaks in the Book of Judges and declares, 
“T made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you 
into the land which I sware unto your fathers; and I said 
I will never break my covenant with you” (Judges ii:1). 
He appeared unto Moses in a flame of fire out of the midst 
of the bush and He spoke to Moses as the I am (Exod. iii). 
The same One appeared before Joshua and he worshipped 
in His presence. With Him Jacob wrestled, with Jehovah, 
the God of hosts (Hos. xii:4-6). Malachi iti:1 shows that 
the Lord Himself is this Angel, the Angel of the Covenant, 
who also visited Abraham in the form of man (Gen. xviii). 
And after all_these manifestations, seven hundred years 
after Isaiah had announced Him as the Wonderful, He ap- 
peared in human form in the midst of His people. And now 
we know by divine revelation in the completed Word of God 
that He is wonderful in His Person and in His work; but 
no mind can fathom, no heart can grasp, no pen can de- 
scribe how wonderful He is. 


22 The Christ We Know 


He is wonderful if we think of Him as the Only Begotten 
of the Father. “In the beginning was the Word, and the 
Word was with God, and the Word was God. The same 
was in the beginning with God. All things were made by 
Him; and without Him was not anything made that was 
made” (John i:1-3). “By Him were all things created 
that are in heaven and that are in earth, visible and invisible, 
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or 
powers, all things were made by Him and for Him; and He 
is before all things and by Him all things consist’? (Col. 
i:16, 17). He is the image of the invisible God, the bright- 
ness of His glory and the express image of His Person. 
How wonderful such a One, who ever was, with no begin- 
ning, One with God! 

How wonderful His humiliation. ‘Who being in the 
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, 
but made Himself of no reputation, and took upon Him 
the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men, 
and being in fashion as a man He humbled Himself” (Phil. 
1:6-8). “For verily He took not on Him the nature of 
angels, but He took on Him the seed of Abraham” (Heb. 
ii:16). Wonderful condescension that He who created the 
angels should be made lower than the angels and lay His 
glory by, to appear in the form of man on earth! 

Wonderful is He in His incarnation, “that holy thing,” 
as the angel announced Him, truly God and Man. Born 
of the woman, resting on the bosom of the Virgin as a little 
child and yet He is the One who ever is in the bosom of 
the Father. 

Wonderful was that blessed life He lived on earth of 
which the beloved disciple bears such a beautiful witness. 
“That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, 
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked 


“The Wonderful” 2 


upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life. 
For the life was manifested and we have seen it and bear 
witness and shew unto you that eternal life, which was with 
the Father, and was manifested unto us” (1 John i:1, 2). 
Wonderful are the blessed words which came from His 
lips, wonderful in His moral glory, His untiring service, 
His love, His patience and everything which the Holy 
Spirit has been pleased to tell us of His earthly life. 

The more our hearts contemplate Him the more won- 
derful He appears. But still greater and more wonderful 
is it that He went to the cross to give His life as a ransom 
for many, that the Just One should die for the unjust, that 
He who knew no sin was made sin for us and pay the 
penalty of sins on the cross. He is the Wonderful in His 
great work on the cross, the depths of which have never been 
fathomed. And what can we say of His wonderful glory, 
His wonderful place, His wonderful power, His wonderful 
grace! How wonderfully He has dealt with us, with each 
one of us individually. How wonderful it is that He knows 
each of His sheep, that He guides each, provides for, loveth, 
succors, stands by, restores, never leaves nor forsakes each 
who has trusted in Him and belongs to Him! How won- 
derful are His ways with us, that He guides His eyes and 
that His loving power and omnipotent love is on our side. 

How wonderful is His grace, the supply and fulness of it! 

“One evening,” said C. H. Spurgeon, “I was riding home 
after a heavy day’s work, weary and sore depressed, when, 
suddenly, as a lightning flash, came: ‘My grace is sufficient 
for thee.’ And I said: ‘I should think it is, Lord,’ and 
burst out laughing. It seemed to make unbelief so absurd. 

“Tt was as if some little fish, being very thirsty, was 
troubled about drinking the river dry; and Father ‘Thames 
said: ‘Drink away, little fish, my stream is sufficient for 


Ne | 


24 The Christ We Know 


thee.’ Or it seemed like a little mouse in the granaries of 
Egypt after seven years of plenty, fearing it might die of 
famine, and Joseph might say: ‘Cheer up, little mouse, my 
granaries are sufficient for thee.’ Again I imagined a man 
away up yonder on the mountain saying to himself: ‘I 
fear I shall exhaust all the oxygen in the atmosphere.’ But 
the earth might say: ‘Breathe away, O man, and fill thy 
lungs ever; my atmosphere is sufficient for thee.’ ” 

In His coming manifestation He will be wonderful. 
Wonderful He will be when we shall see Him and stand 
in His presence. What a day it will be when we see Him 
face to face! ‘Then we shall know all the loveliness and 
wonderfulness of His adorable Person and His wonder ways 
with us. With what wonderment we shall then behold 
Him. And when He comes with His Saints, when the 
heavens are lit up with untold glory, when He comes to 
judge, to establish His Kingdom, to speak peace to the 
nations, to restore creation to its right condition, when He 
reigns and all His redeemed ones with Him—Oh how 
wonderful it all will be! 

He is altogether lovely and He is altogether wonderful. 
Glory to His name! Well has one said: “He pervades the 
whole of the New Testament with His presence, so that 
every doctrine it teaches, every duty it demands, every 
narrative it records, every comfort it gives, every hope it 
inspires, gathers about His person and ministers to His 
glory. So dear does He thus become to the heart of the 

4] believer, that Luther may well be excused for exclaiming, 
‘T had rather be in hell with Christ, than in heaven without 

a Elim.’ 
a “We believe in Him as our Saviour (Acts vi:31) ; confess 
Him as our Lord (Rom. x:9) ; we have redemption through 
His blood (Eph. i:7) ; we look to Him as our Leader (Heb. 


The Purchase Price 25 


xii:2); we follow Him as our Teacher (Eph. iv:20, 21); 
we feed upon Him as our Bread (John vi:48); we go to 
Him in our thirst (John vi:37) ; we enter by Him as our 
door (John x:9) ; we are in Him as our vine (John xv:5) ; 
we find in Him our rest (Matt. xi:28); we have in Him 
our example (John xiii:15) ; He is our righteousness (2 Cor. 
V:21) ; we are succored by Him in temptation (Heb. ii:18) ; 
we turn to Him for sympathy (Heb. iv:15); we obtain 
through Him our victory (1 Cor. xv:57) ; we overcome by 
Him the world (1 John v:5); we have in Him eternal life 
(x1 John v:11, 12); we gain by Him the resurrection (Phil. 
i11:20, 21) ; we appear with Him in glory (Col. iii:4), we 
exult in His everlasting love (Rev. i:5, 6).” 

May the Holy Spirit fill our hearts and eyes with Himself 
and reveal to us through the written Word more of the 
matchless beauty of the wonderful Person of our Saviour 
and Lord! We honor and adore Thee, blessed, blessed 
Lord, and while Thou art rejected, we, thy feeble people 
would know more of Thyself and keep closer at Thy feet. 
Amen. 


THE PURCHASE PRICE 


ABM in the First Epistle to the Corinthians the Holy 

Spirit speaks of the fact that we are bought with a 
price. ‘For ye were bought with a price; therefore glorify 
God in your body” (1 Cor. vi:20). “Ye are bought with 
a price; be ye not the servants of men” (vii:23). The 
Corinthians had drifted into worldliness and the Holy Spirit 
reminded them that they were not their own. Bought with 
a price by God Himself, all belong to Him. How we need 
to be reminded of it for our own peace and comfort, that 


26 The Christ We Know 


we are thus bought with a price and as God’s bought ones 
are His property; we belong to Him, body, soul and spirit. 
This great truth must constantly be kept by the power of 
the Spirit of God before our hearts, in order to live to the 
Glory of God. Let the child of God lose sight of this great 
fact of redemption and the claim which God has on account 
of it on our whole being, and spiritual poverty and unreality 
in the things of Christ will at once be the result. 

What a wonderful, blessed theme it is! It is so simple 
and unfathomable. Neither the price which was paid for 
our redemption nor the Person who paid the price can be 
fully estimated by the saints of God. If all the deep 
thoughts and meditations all the children of God enjoyed 
could be brought together they would be found insufficient 
to reach the heights and the depths of this marvellous 
theme. Who can measure all the sins, all the guilt, all the 
misery, sorrow and shame, all the torments of an eternal 
darkness into which sin has plunged us and from which the 
price has completely set us free! Who can fully grasp the 
glory, the eternal glory of an eternal home with God, which 
the price has bought for us believing sinners! Bought with 
a price! Bought with a price! Such will be eternity’s 
glorious memory. All the memories of earth, of suffering, 
of service and blessing may be blotted out. ‘This theme 
can never be effaced. The glorious song which begins when 
the saints are gathered before the throne will re-echo 
through the vaults of heaven and roll on throughout the 
ages tocome. ‘Thou art worthy. ... Thou wast slain.... 
Thou hast redeemed us to God by Thy blood” (Rev. v:9). 

In a day when the Lord who bought us is denied, when 
we hear less and less of His Blood, how well it is that we 
refresh our own souls and honor our dishonored Lord by 
tracing once more the ever blessed truth that we are bought 


The Purchase Price 27 


with a price. One might say that every great truth revealed 
in God’s holy Word is somewhere connected with this brief 
sentence, ‘Ye are bought with a price.’ The One who 
came to earth to pay the price was not a creature. He was 
not an angel. Had He been a creature of God, a holy 
angel or merely a perfect man, He could not have bought 
us. Whenever the Deity of the Lord Jesus is denied the 
purchase price is equally denied. The price which was 
needed to redeem us could only be paid by one, who is 
very God Himself. Such He is, who came in the fulness of 
time born of a woman. ‘The Creator of heaven and earth 
came to buy us with a price. That was the great purpose 
of His incarnation. For this He came in the form of a 
servant. 

And He bought us. He paid the price, which in its 
value, in its matchless worth can only be understood by 
God. Holy ground it is upon which we stand. ‘The theme 
to our souls becomes more entrancing, holier and more 
precious, as an apostate Christendom turns away from it 
and against it. Not that perfect life of righteousness, nor 
His life of doing good was the price, which has bought 
us. The incarnate One in all He was in Himself, what He 
said and what He did in His spotless life could not effect 
our redemption. ‘The price He paid, the price with which 
He bought us, was paid by Him on the cross, when He 
gave Himself and stood in the sinner’s place before a holy 
God. The price is His precious blood. He purchased us 
with His own blood. As the forsaken One He hung on 
that cross, which He so willingly endured, with all the 
shame, He despised. 


“There from His head, His hands, His feet, 
Sorrow and love flowed mingled down; 
Did e’er such love and sorrow meet, 
Or thorns compose so rich a crown?” 


28 The Christ We Know 


Thus we often sing. But who can know what it was for 
Him to pay the price and have the curse of judgment pass 
over His head! 

Glory to God! Because such a One paid the price we 
know that we are bought and redeemed. All was met by 
Him! Every sin of those who accept Him as Saviour has 
been fully paid. He has redeemed us from the power of sin, 
the power of Satan, an eternal separation from God. He 
has by the price He paid brought us to God. Bought with 
a price! We look up into a Father’s loving face. Bought 
with a price! ‘The Father’s bosom is our resting place and 
the Father’s love (the love wherewith He loveth His ador- 
able Son), is our eternal portion. Bought with a price! 
The Son has’ given us His life and our life is hid with 
Christ in God. Bought with a price! ‘The Holy Spirit 
has come and has made our bodies His temple and sealed 
us. Bought with a price! A heavenly possession has been 
purchased for us; to be like Him and with Him is the 
glorious goal of His redeemed. Bought with a price! 
Hallelujah! What a theme! 

Beloved! As we think it all over again, as once more 
we remember His love, our hearts are filled with grief and 
shame. Bought with a price! Yes, but how about “glorify 
God in your body and in your spirit, which are God’s’? 
How we failed! How little we, His bought ones, have 
yielded ourselves to Him who bought us. How often we 
have lived as if we were our own—lived like the poor un- 
saved ones about us, seeking our own pleasures and grati- 
fication, never thinking that He who bought us, bought 
us that we might be His present possession, His willing 
slaves. Well did a brother write many years ago, “Our 
bodies are the property of Him who has purchased us at 
such a cost; for He did not buy us partly, but entirely. Let, 


The Purchase Price 29 


then, the God of our mercy have the willing service of 
those bodies which are His. The fleeting days of our sojourn 
here below are our opportunity of glorifying Him, by yield- 
ing ourselves to Him as those that are alive from the dead, 
and our members as instruments of righteousness unto God.” 
May we confess to Him our want of practical living out of 
all this. “There is still a little time left (how few the days 
may be!) in which we can glorify Him in our bodies and 
live unto Him. We can still serve Him as Lord a little 
while longer. And reader, whatever your failure may have 
been in the past in living a separated life, how little you 
may have glorified Him and how much you may have dis- 
honored and denied Him who has bought you with a price, 
be assured, that His grace will enable you to glorify Him, 
to live unto Him. Just seek His face and tell Him all. 


“T was bought with a price; ’tis a wonderful theme, 
For the Maker of all things came down to redeem, 
And He purchased my body, my spirit, my all, 
From the firm grasp of Satan, from under his thrall. 


I was bought with a price from the hard iron yoke, 
From the tears and the groans that my anguish bespoke, 
From the arms of that monster who gloated to see 
How despairingly wretched his victim could be. 


I was bought with a price from the torments of hell, 
From that dread lake of fire that no waters could quell; 
As a brand from the burning He drew me and smiled, 
As He placed in His bosom His poor weary child. 


I was bought with a price, nay, not silver or gold, 

For their worth might be known and their value be told, 
But the blood incorruptible never can fail, 

All our foes before it shall eternally quail. 


I was bought with a price, O my soul, take it in, 
I’m redeemed from the power and guilt of my sin; 
Yes, Lord, I am thine, I am all, all thine own, 
With Thee in Thy yoke would I labor alone.” 


30 The Christ We Know 
THE MANGER, THE CROSS, AND THE THRONE 


a hue Manger, the Cross, and the Throne, there are the 

three great and wonderful events in the glorious life of 
our Saviour-Lord. “Behold, a Virgin shall conceive and 
bear a Son, and shall call His Name Immanuel.” It was 
the Prophet’s glad message of long ago. And once more 
He looked and in prophetic vision He saw Him, the child 
born, the Son given, with Names which tell out His Glory: 
“Wonderful, Counsellor, The Mighty God, The Everlast- 
ing Father, The Prince of Peace.” (Isai. vii: 14; ix: 6.) 
Seven hundred years after He came. In the manger of 
Bethlehem He was cradled, whose eternal dwelling place is 
the Father’s bosom. ‘That little Babe is none other than 
God’s Son, He by whom and for whom all things were 
created, the seen things and the unseen. Oh, wonderful 
humiliation that the Creator took the creature’s place, to 
live the creature’s life! And when He was born, when the 
Beloved had laid His glory by, to take on the prepared 
body, prepared by God the Holy Spirit, heaven was opened; 
light and glory burst forth. Angels announced the glad 
news which ever since the Prophet had spoken, had been 
believed, and longingly expected, by the saints of God among 
the Jews. The first note was “Fear not!” 


“What was the first angelic word 

-That the startled shepherds heard? 

Fear not! Beloved, it comes to you 

As a loving Message most sweet and true; 
As true for you as it was for them 

In the lonely fields of Bethlehem; 

And as sweet today as it was that night, 
When the Glory dazzled their mortal sight.” 


Then came the good tidings that He had come. He had 
come to live among men. He had come in poverty, in 


The Manger, the Cross, and the Throne 31 


weakness. He who was rich became poor for our sakes. 
But why did He come? What was the purpose of His 
coming? There can be but one great answer to this ques- 
tion. He Himself answers it for us. “Lo, I come to do 
Thy will, O God.” ‘That was His word as He came. He 
knew why He came. In the eternal councils of the God- 
head it was purposed why and for what He should come 
into the world. “Wherefore when He cometh into the 
world (in incarnation) He saith, Sacrifice and offering Thou 
wouldest not, but a body hast Thou prepared me.” (Hebrews 
x: 5, 6.) He came to accomplish the eternal will of God; 
He came to manifest His Love; He came to be the Lamb 
of God. Oh! We can sum it up in one sentence: “He 
came into the world to die.’’ He who is the Life, came to 
give His life. He who was holy, on whom death had no 
claim, came to taste death, He who knew no sin, came 
to be made sin for us. “The Just One came to die for the 
unjust. He who is the Fellow of God came to be smitten 
of God. That is why He was cradled in that manger. It 
was the first step towards the Cross. 

All was appointed from eternity. He came when the 
fulness of time, the appointed time had come. He had to 
be born in Bethlehem, not in Nazareth, the Virgin Mary’s 
home; it was thus divinely ordered. And so were the years 
when He grew up in the poverty of Nazareth. And when 
He began that blessed ministry, when He revealed Himself, 
when He worked His deeds of power and mercy, every step 
of the way He shows He is God manifested in the flesh, 
He spoke of His hour. “Mine hour is not yet come.” But 
finally it came and then He reached the goal, the Cross. 
Oh! Hallowed spot, “the Cross on which the Prince of 
Glory died’’! : 

How little the great mass of professing Christians know 


32 The Christ We Know 


es all this! They speak of a ‘“‘Christ-mass”; they think as 
if it is virtue to keep a holiday commemorating a fictitious 
day of His birth. ‘They make it a day of feasting and 
drinking; yet Christ, who came to die the sinner’s death, 
they know not. But what it must have been for Him to 
come with the perfect knowledge of‘the sufferings of the 
Cross! Then live, and ever that Cross before His heart. 
No finite creature can know what it was and meant for 
Him! But what it means for us who believe in a small 
measure we realize. We turn from the manger to the 
Cross. We know it is there “He loved me and gave Him- 
self for me.” We know it was there “He bore our sins in 
His own body on the tree.” And there the floodgates of 
love and grace are opened wide, and grace more bottomless 
than the sea pours forth to make us free, to save us for time 
and all eternity. In the words of a sweet singer of long 
ago: 

“Jesus came!—and came for me. 

Simple words! and yet expressing 

Depths of holy mystery, 

Depths of wondrous love and blessing, 

Holy Spirit, make me see 

All His coming means for me; 


Take the things of Christ, I pray, 
Show them to my heart today.” 


—Frances R. Havergal 


The Manger, the Cross and after that the Throne! Yes, 
He is on the Throne. In holy, wondrous majesty at the 
right hand of God there is the Man, who laid in a manger, 
who filled the Cross. Sufferings and death forever gone, 
never to be repeated. Risen and glorified He is gone to 
heaven, angels and authorities being made subject unto Him. 
And we, who believe, are in Him there. We share His 
place with Him and He makes us sharers of His Glory. 


“The Unspeakable Gift” Ag 


The Manger, the Cross, and the Throne. ‘The Throne 
He has is not yet, the Throne which God has promised Him 
“His Throne of Glory” is still future. But as surely as He 
lay in that manger and hung on that Cross; as surely as 
He is now on the Father’s throne, so surely will He receive 
from the Father’s hand the Throne of all the earth. He 
looks forward to it; He waits for that Throne. We wait 
with Him in His own patience. Once more heaven will 
open. Once more the Glory will fill the heavens. It will 
be His Glory. Once more the tenants of Glory will be 
seen. Yet more than all this—“He will come and His 
saints with Him” to rule and reign with Him. 

These are the three great fundamentals of our Faith, of 
true Christianity: The Manger, His incarnation, the Virgin 
Birth; the Cross, His sacrificial death, the peace He made 
in the blood of the Cross; the Throne, the coming glory, 


“THE UNSPEAKABLE GIFT” 


2 earn be unto God for His unspeakable gift” 

(1 Cor. ix:15). This sentence stands at the close of 
a chapter devoted to Christian liberality in giving. ‘The 
Spirit of God gives a very simple direction. “Every man 
according as he purposeth in his heart, so let him give; not 
grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loveth a cheerful giver.” 
And why does God love a cheerful giver? Because He 
Himself is the great Giver. “Every good gift and every 
perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the 
Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither 
shadow of turning” (James i:17). To receive gifts is a 
blessed thing, but it is a greater blessing to give, even as 


34 The Christ We Know 


our Lord Jesus Christ has said “It is more blessed to give 
than to receive” (Acts xx:35). There are many exhorta- 
tions to give and also promises in connection with it. “He 
which soweth sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and he 
which soweth bountifully shall reap bountifully” (2 Cor. 
ix:6). “And let us not be weary in well doing, for in due 
season we shall reap, if we faint not” (Gal. vi:g). “But 
to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such 
sacrifices God is well pleased” (Heb. xiii:16). 

“Thanks be unto God for His unspeakable gift.” What 
then is this greatest of all the gifts the eternal, all-wise and 
holy Giver has given? He has given many and varied gifts 
in His physical creation, for the sustenance, for the comfort 
and for the enjoyment of His creatures. What blessed gifts 
these are! How lavish He has been in nature. But nature, 
revealing in so many ways His benevolence, His wisdom and 
His glory, is not His unspeakable gift. He has given to man, 
as an intelligent being, a revelation of Himself. ‘That 
revelation is found in the Bible, the Word of God. It is a 
greater gift than the gifts of creation. What a priceless gift 
it is, this Word of God! As we read it, He speaks to us. 
In it He meets the deepest needs of the human heart; pro- 
vides through it guidance, and wipes our tears away. 

Wonderful as this gift of His written revelation is, it is 
not the unspeakable gift. Another gift which has come 
from above to those who belong to the household of faith 
is the gift of the Holy Spirit. And He, the third person of 
the Trinity, brings also gifts to the believer and to the 
body of Christ, the Church. But is He that unspeakable 
gift? Does He, God the Spirit, ever allude to Himself as 
being the greatest of all gifts bestowed upon man? ‘The 
unspeakable gift of which He writes, is God’s ever blessed 
Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. He is God’s highest, God’s 


“The Unspeakable Gift’ 35 


most precious, God’s unspeakable gift. A greater gift than 
He, even God in His power could not give. The gift of 
His well-beloved Son is so unspeakably great and glorious, 
that it cannot be fully comprehended by the finite mind 
of man. 

It is an unspeakable gift, when we think of who He is, 
whom God has given. Not a created being; not a mighty 
angel, nor legions of angels; not the highest of all the 
created beings, the archangel, but His only begotten Son. 
Had God sent a created being, marvelous and glorious 
though that being was, it would not deserve the expression 
“unspeakable gift.” Such a gift would not have been a 
God-like manifestation of His love. He sent His Son. 
“For God so loved the world, that He gave His only Be- 
gotten Son.” And that Son is God. He is one with God. 
Sharer of His eternity, His glory and all His attributes. 
Of this unspeakably great relation to the Father, of His 
own eternal Godhead and glory, which He had with the 
Father before the world was, He witnessed when He 
walked down here. He was, in incarnation, God mani- 
fested in the fleshe No man knoweth the Son but the 
Father. Though we, as believers know Him, yet is our 
knowledge of Him but partial and imperfect. If we under- 
stood Him in all His glory, in all the majesty of His being, 
He would not be the unspeakable gift. The denial of His 
Deity robs man of the knowledge of the love of God and 
of the unspeakable gift. Modernism, Mormonism, Russell- 
ism, Unitarianism, Theosophy, and Christian Science (falsely 
so-called) know nothing of “the unspeakable gift,” for they 
all deny that the gift is the eternal Son of God. 

The Son of God is His unspeakable gift, because God gave 
Him to be the propitiation for our sins. To the lost soul at 
Samaria’s well, He said “If thou knewest the gift of God.” 


36 The Christ We Know 


How little even we know what it means, “God gave His 
only begotten Son.” We think of the manger, see the babe 
there, and think of Him as the unspeakable gift; but the 
incarnation did not exhaust God’s giving. We think of 
Him in a life of poverty and privation, that He, who had 
not where to lay His head, whose rest was always on the 
Father’s bosom, was thus given to tabernacle among men; 
nevertheless it does not explain God’s unspeakable gift. 

To know what it means, “God gave,” we must go to the 
cross. ‘There we see the full story of His love. ‘He made 
Him, who knew no sin, sin for us.”—“The Just One died 
for the unjust, that He might bring us to God.” —“But He 
was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our 
Iniquities; the chastisement of our peace was upon Him; 
and with His stripes we are healed. All we like sheep have 
gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way; and 
the Lord has laid on Him the iniquity of us all.”—“Who 
His own self bare our sins in His own body on the tree, that 
we, being dead to sins, should live unto righteousness, by 
whose stripes ye were healed.”’ And yet if we sit down and 
ponder over these and other passages of Scripture, we may 
learn now and then a little bit more, what it means, “God 
gave,” but we never reach the end. We shall never be able 
to say, now I know what it all means. God’s gift of His 
Son in our stead is so unspeakably great that no saint can 
fathom it. 

The Lord Jesus Christ is God’s unspeakable gift, because 
in this gift God gives to the believing sinner all He has to 
give. “What shall we then say to these things? If God 
be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not His 
own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, how shall He 
not with Him also freely give us all things?” (Rom. 
Vill:31, 32). God made Him His heir in resurrection. 


The Unspeakable Joy 37 


The risen Son of Man is “the heir of all things,” and we 
are the heirs of God, Christ’s joint heirs. “All things are 
yours” (1 Cor, iii:21). 

Even now we can sing in faith, “Blessed be the God and 
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with 
every spiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ” (Eph. 
i:3). But what will it be when we shall know Him face 
to face; when we shall know as we are known, when the 
immensity of God’s unspeakable gift will be realized by us 
in eternity? What a day it will be when we shall know 
Him, the unspeakable gift, in glory! And while we wait 
for the day dawn, the rising of the Morning Star, we can 
praise and worship, and show our deepest appreciation to ~ 
God for His unspeakable gift by serving Him in holiness 
and righteousness. “Thanks be unto God for His unspeak- 
able gift! 


THE UNSPEAKABLE JOY 


CG HOM having not seen, ye love; in whom, though 

now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with 
joy unspeakable and full of glory” (1 Peter i:8). ‘Thus 
Peter wrote to his brethren in the dispersion. What a 
testimony it is to the reality of the faith of these early 
Christians! Peter had known the Lord, walked in His 
fellowship, heard Him speak, and knowing Him he loved 
Him. ‘Those to whom he wrote, like ourselves, had not 
seen the Lord Jesus, but believing, they rejoiced with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory, because they loved Him, were 
attached to Him, suffered with Him and waited for His 
coming revelation. ‘There are many joys on earth, but none 
is satisfying and none is lasting. It is different with the 


38 The Christ We Know 


joy of the Lord and the rejoicing in the Lord. It satisfies 
the heart and it is an everlasting joy, for He who is our 
joy, in whom we glory, is the everlasting Lord of glory. 

But how can we know such unspeakable joy, a joy which 
passeth all other joys, which satisfies? A joy which is our 
real strength, for it is written “The joy of the Lord is your 
strength.” Many true believers mourn over the fact that 
this joy unspeakable and full of glory is not their daily 
portion as it should be. So many children of God lack this 
real joy, which helps to overcome difficulties and to show 
patience in suffering, which leaves calm when all things 
go wrong. 

Rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory is the 
result of believing in the Lord and having Him constantly 
before the heart. He must be the one great object of our 
lives. The happiest occupation must be the hour when we 
seek His face and are in communion with Him. To culti- 
vate a more real and holy intimacy with Him must become 
increasingly our ambition and, as a result of such a fellow- 
ship with Him, there will be a greater self-surrender, self- 
effacement and humility. This is the path which will 
increase our rejoicing with joy unspeakable and full of glory. 
And all this is dependent on the growth in the knowledge 
and grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. That growth will 
never take place unless we constantly use the Word of God. 
It is in the Word that we find the Lord of glory and the 
glory of the Lord; and through the Word of God and the 
ministry of the Spirit, the Lord becomes daily more real and 
the One altogether lovely to our hearts. ‘Then, as we 
“comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, 
and depth, and height” and “know the love of Christ, which 
passeth knowledge,” the Spirit of God fills us with His peace 
and His joy. 


The Unspeakable Glory 39 


The days in which we live become more evil; even so it 
must be. Powers are now at work which aim at the flock 
of God to rob them, if it were possible, of all. Eyes are 
being blinded. Indifference reigns. Laodicea is here. The 
only way to be kept is by knowing the Lord Jesus Christ 
better, having greater fellowship with Him. ‘The day is 
not far hence when our joy unspeakable through believing, 
will be changed to joy unspeakable by seeing Him as He is. 


THE UNSPEAKABLE GLORY 


ol | KNEW a man in Christ about fourteen years ago, 
(whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of 
the body, I cannot tell; God knoweth). Such a one was 
caught up to the third heaven. And I knew such a man, 
(whether in the body, or out of the body, I cannot tell, 
God knoweth). How that he was caught up into paradise, 
and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a 
man to utter’ (2 Cor. xii:1-4). Every reader of the Word 
of God knows that the man of whom Paul speaks is he 
himself. He had such an experience. When he was caught 
up into the third heaven, and entered paradise, in that which 
was more than a mere vision, he heard unspeakable words. 
‘These words signified the glorious mysteries of the glory 
which is in store for all the saints of God. In the first 
epistle Paul penned by the direction and under the guid- 
ance of the Holy Spirit, he received that unique and blessed 
revelation, which embodies the hope of the Church. 
“For the Lord Himself shall descend from heaven with 
a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump 
of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first; then we 


40 The Christ We Know 


which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with 
them in clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall 
we ever be with the Lord” (1 Thess. iv:16, 17). 

And Paul, who received this great revelation, seems to 
have passed through some such experience as a prophetic 
type of the Church of the Lord Jesus Christ, which some 
blessed day will be caught up in clouds to meet the Lord 
in the air. And so it will be. The dead in Christ will 
come forth first, and we, the living, will be changed in 
a moment, in the twinkling of an eye. Then we shall see 
Him as He is. Then we shall hear the unspeakable words 
which Paul heard, and behold the unspeakable glory of the 
Lord. Oh! how even the writing of these blessed truths, 
in feeble words, make the heart long for “‘that day.” 

Let us remember, beloved: An unspeakable Gift, the Son 


», of God; an unspeakable joy, as we know Him and walk 


with Him; an unspeakable glory which comes when He 
calls us home, 


His FACE AND GLORY 


HEN Moses was in the presence of the Lord, he 
said to Him, “I beseech Thee show me Thy Glory.” 
Moses also desired to see His face and the Lord said, “Thou 
canst not see my face”—‘‘my face shall not be seen” (Exod. 
xxxili:18-23). He looked and saw but the back of the 
departing Lord. And when Moses came down from Mount 
Sinai his face shown so that he had to put a veil upon his 
face. But it was not a permanent glory, it was a vanishing 
glory; it disappeared. 
The Lord who talked with Moses, whose Glory he re- 
flected for a time, and whose face he could not see was the 


His Face and Glory 41 


Son of God. It was He who descended in a cloud and 
passing by Moses proclaimed the name of Jehovah as 
“merciful and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in 
goodness and truth.” And Moses uttered then a prayer, 
“O Lord, let my Lord, I pray thee, go among us; for it is 
a stifinecked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, 
and take us for thine inheritance” (Exod. xxxiv:5-9). And 
this Lord came to His own and His own received Him not. 
The Word, Jehovah, the Son of God was made flesh and 
dwelt among men, and the inspired witness tells us “we 
beheld His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the 
Father, full of Grace and Truth” (John i:14). And again 
“For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear 
witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with 
the Father and was manifested unto us” (1 John i:2). And 
He appeared to be the propitiation for our sins. ‘The death 
of the cross alone could accomplish this. “Herein is love, 
not that we loved God, but that He loved us, and sent His 
Son to be the propitiation for our sins” (1 John iv:10). 
“Without the shedding of blood there is no remission of 
sins.’ ‘‘And it was not possible that the blood of bulls and 
goats could take away sins.” ‘Therefore Jehovah, God the 
Son, came from heaven to do the work He alone could do, 
to give His life a ransom for many. ‘He appeared to put 
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.” He hath made Him 
to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made 
the righteousness of God in Him.” And believing on Him 
we know that in Him “we have redemption through His 
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of His 
grace” (Eph. i:7). Blessed truths and blessed facts! It is 
needful that we remind ourselves of this continually, for 
we are living in days when these fundamental doctrines are 
denied and obscured. 


42 The Christ We Know 


We are living in days when many, who profess these 
truths and knew their power once, are losing the reality 
and heart enjoyment of the Gospel. Oh, to meditate daily 
on what He is and what He has done for us! Oh, to drink 
anew at the fountain of His love, which passeth knowledge 
and thus walk in His fellowship! How soon our hearts 
grow cold and we do not enjoy Him and His salvation as 
we should. With the Laodicean spirit all about us, not de- 
creasing, but increasing, with Satan’s forces rapidly advanc- 
ing and preparing for the final apostasy, we need to be on 
our guard, and watch and pray as never before. 

And what is before us? So near, so very near! Moses 
could not see His face nor could He receive His Glory. 
The Law could not bring man to see His face and become 
an eternal partaker of His Glory. But grace has accom- 
plished it. We can pray to see His face and to behold His 
Glory, for we know this is promised unto us. ‘We shall see 
Him as He is” (1 John iii:2). And again it is written, 
“They shall see His face” (Rev. xxii:4). The heart which 
loves Him beats faster as we think of the blessed and un- 
speakable moment when we shall see His face, the face 
which was marred for us and dishonored on account of our 
sins, the face which the face of Glory now in God’s own 
presence. 

Beloved reader, take often during the day a few quiet 
moments and say to yourself, “I shall see Him as He is”’— 
“I shall see His face.” It will surely be like a refreshing 
drink of water to your soul and the Holy Spirit will fill your 
soul with joy. To be with Him, to see His face and to 
behold His glory was His prayer for His own before He left 
the world to be with the Father (John xvii:24). And still 
He prays for this glorious future of His redeemed people. 
And He longs to see us in His presence. It is a precious 


Essential and Acquired 43 


verse to simple faith and to a loving heart which seeks Him 
in the words, the verse we find in Solomon’s song, “O 
my dove, in the clefts of the rock, in the secret of the stairs, 
let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice; for 
sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely” (Song 
of Sol. ii:14). He wants us to be with Him and some day 
we shall see His face. Then we shall receive His Glory, 
not a vanishing, a diminishing glory, but an eternal, an 
abiding Glory. It is His own Glory the Father gave to 
Him, which we shall share forever with Him. Our blessed 
eternal destiny is ““His Face and His Glory.” May the 
Holy Spirit so govern our thoughts that we daily remember 
‘His face and His Glory.” Then we shall walk worthy 
of Him. 


“Lord, to be with thee in thine own abode, 
The place prepared where thou wilt have us dwell, 
Brought home unto thy Father and thy God, 
Where harpers harping shall thy triumphs tell. 
Sons of His love! heirs of his festal joy! 
What bliss! how full, how pure beyond alloy! 


To gaze around in that effulgent light, 

With not a mist from earth to intervene; 
Thy majesty, thy beauty, full in sight; 

Thy glory flooding all the boundless scene; 
Thy love in its perfection, known at last— 
’T will solve the long enigma of the past,” 


EssENTIAL AND ACQUIRED 


a IS important to distinguish between the essential glories 
of our Lord Jesus Christ and the glories which He ac- 
quired. He is God. One hears often in these days of the 
divinity of our Lord. But the people who use this term 


44 The Christ We Know 


never say Lord, but use His earthly name, His name in 
humiliation; they speak of “the divinity of Jesus.” And 
then they inform us that every other human being is divine. 
This is the miserable delusion of the so-called new theology, 
that bloodless gospel upon which the Spirit of God has pro- 
nounced an anathema. Our Lord is not divine in that sense, 
but He is God. We who desire to honor Him do well to use 
the right words and always speak of the Deity of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

In His Deity the eternal Word possesses essential glories. 
Of these we read in the Holy Scriptures. He is the image 
of the invisible God, because what God is He is and ever 
has been. He is the brightness of, His Glory and the express 
image of His person (Col. i:15; Heb. i:3). What all His 
essential glories are, in which they consist, no human mind 
can fathom. ‘The Glory of God is the Glory of the Only 
Begotten. In His high-priestly prayer He speaks of that 
Glory. “And now, Father, glorify thou me with thine own 
self with the Glory which I had with thee before the world 
was” (John xvii:5). This essential Glory belongs to Him; 
no created being, no angel, no redeemed creature can ever 
share that Glory with Him. ‘The essential Glory of the 
eternal Son of God is incommunicable. 

When He came to the earth in the creature’s form He 
laid His Glory by. His Deity He could not leave behind. 
And yet He also possessed Glory in His humiliation. ‘The 
Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld 
His Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father), 
full of grace and truth” (John i:14). What Glory is re- 
vealed in His incarnation and His blessed life on earth! 
Yet He hid that Glory and only occasionally it flashed forth. 

But there is another Glory which belongs to Him. A 
Glory which He acquired by His obedience unto death, the 


Essential and Acquired 45 


death of the cross. ‘That acquired Glory is communicable. 
He acquired that Glory that those for whom He died and 
who accept Him as their Saviour and Lord, may be sharers 
of it. We quote a few of the blessed portions of God’s Holy 
Word which bear witness to this truth. ‘““Who, being in the 
form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, 
but made Himself no reputation and took upon Him the 
form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men; 
and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself 
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. 
Wherefore God also hath highly exalted Him, and given 
Him a Name which is above every name’’ (Phil ii:6-9). 
He became man and became obedient, and as a result the 
God-man received from the Father a Name which is above 
every name. Oh! that worthy and matchless Name! 
“Whom He hath appointed heir of all things, by whom also 
He made the worlds; who being the brightness of His glory 
and the express image of His person, and upholding all 
things by the Word of His power, when He had by Himself 
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty 
on high, being made so much better than the angels, as He 
hath by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than 
they’ (Heb. i:2-4). Here is a marvellous blending to- 
gether of His essential and acquired Glory. He, who 
created all things, by whom all things were made and by 
whom all things exist, receives all things as an inheritance 
because He made purification of sins and finished the work 
the Father gave Him to do. He is the Heir of all things. 
He fills the throne in the highest heaven. He is above the 
angels in every way. He created them; then was made a 
little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, and 
now He is above the angels, crowned with glory and honor. 
He has also acquired the Glory of ‘Priesthood. ‘‘Where- 


46 The Christ We Know 


fore in all things it behooved Him to be made like unto 
His brethren, that He might be a merciful and faithful 
high priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconcilia- 
tion for the sins of the people’ (Heb. ii:17). ‘Though 
He were a Son, yet He learned obedience by the things 
which He suffered; and being made perfect, He became the 
author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey Him; 
saluted of God an High Priest after the order of Mel- 
chisedec” (Heb. v:8-10). All this He became because He 
suffered and died according to God’s will. Moreover, He 
became the Prince of the kings of the earth. The Father 
hath made Him King of kings and Lord of lords. ‘The 
kingdoms of this earth *shall be put into His hands. He 
has the right to ask for the nations to be His inheritance 
and for the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession 
(Psa. ii). Up to now He has not yet claimed what is His 
own. Some day He will, and then He will receive that for 
which He paid with His blood. 

Another glory He acquired is that of Judge. In anti- 
cipation of His death and resurrection He said, ““The Father 
judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the 
Son” (John v:22). “He hath appointed a day in the which 
He will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom 
He hath ordained; whereof He hath given assurance unto 
all men, in that He hath raised Him from the dead” (Acts 
xvii:31). Throughout the New Testament we find the 
blessed truth made prominent, that He, who is God and 
who became Man to redeem sinners, received Glory. “God 
raised Him from the dead, and gave Him glory” (1 Peter 
i:21). | 

This acquired Glory of our Lord is sevenfold. He is the 
First-begotten Son of God by resurrection from the dead. 
He is the Heir of all things. He possesses a Name that is 


Essential and Acquired 47 


above every name. He occupies the Father’s Throne, seated 
in the highest heaven and is there crowned with Glory and 
Honor as the Head of the church. He has been made 
Priest; He is King and He is Judge. How feebly our 
hearts enter into all this! How little we can grasp the 
fullest meaning of this sevenfold Glory which belongs to 
Him who has redeemed us and washed us in His own blood! 

Yet it concerns every saint, every child of God. The 
acquired Glory of our Lord is the Glory which every saved 
sinner will share with Him. While this great truth, this 
wonderful truth, is fully made known by the Holy Spirit 
in the Church epistles, the Lord Himself stated it first of all. 
“The Glory thou hast given me I have given to them” 
(John xvii:22). He was still on earth when He uttered 
these words in the presence of His disciples. He looked 
beyond the cross. He saw the work finished. He beheld 
the empty tomb and the throne of Glory He would fill. 
And then He tells the Father what was known to Him 
before the foundation of the world, ‘“The Glory thou hast 
given me I have given them.” And thus it is, blessed be 
His Name! 

We are sons with Him, heirs of God and fellow-heirs 
with our Lord Jesus Christ. We shall see His face and His 
Name shall be in our foreheads (Rev. xxii:4). We are 
seated in Him in the heavenly places and shall be with Him. 
He hath made us priests and kings unto God His Father. 
We shall reign with Him over the earth. Yea, judgment 
even will be shared with Him by His saints. ‘Do ye not 
know that the saints shall judge the world? .. . know ye not 
that we shall judge angels?” (1 Cor. vi:2, 3). 

It is all, like Himself, wonderful. May His Spirit give 
us power to enter into these things. The acquired Glory 
of Christ and our participation in it is Christianity’s highest 


48 The Christ We Know 


and best. It will lead us into that life worthy of our calling 
and worthy of our Lord. Paul lived and moved in that, 
and therefore he cried out, with the passion of the new 
nature, “That I may know Him and the power of His 
resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings, being 
made conformable unto His death.’’ May all our hearts 
be filled with this longing. With such a destiny before us, 
what manner of men and women we should be! 


THE ALL-SUFFICIENT ONE 


GC) years come and go; all about us is changing, there 
is nothing permanent in this world, all is subject to 
change and decay. But One never changeth; He abideth 
and is always the same. Our blessed and adorable Lord 
remaineth as He is and as He always has been and always 
will be. What He said to Joshua long ago, is as true today 
as it was then—‘I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.” 
What Isaiah declared of Him has not been changed since 
then “He shall not fail nor be discouraged.” 

All His promises are as unchangeable as He is. Several 
thousand years ago He spoke to His people through His 
chosen instrument words of cheer and of comfort. ‘Fear 
not, I will help thee.”—“Fear thou not, for I am with thee: 
be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee; 
yea I will help thee; yea I will uphold thee with the right 
hand of my righteousness.” He still speaks thus to His 
own and assures them of His faithfulness and of His power. 
He is the same yesterday, today and forever. Of Him it is 
written, ‘Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the founda- 
tion of the earth; and the heavens are the works of Thy 


The All-Suffiicient One 49 


hands. They shall perish, but Thou remainest; and they 
shall wax old as does a garment; and as a vesture shalt Thou 
fold them up, and they shall be changed, but Thou art the 
same, and Thy years shall not fail’ (Heb. i:10-12). As 
our years come and go and the end of our earthly pilgrimage 
draws nearer, our need, as His people, is to draw closer to 
Himself and to find our all, our joy, our help, our strength 
and our comfort only in Him. He is the All-Sufficient 
One, the Christ who is enough. 

He is our All-sufficient Saviour. We found Him so when 
we turned to Him with the burden of our sins. His all. 
sufficiency to save is the result of His work on the cross. 
He bore our sins in His own body on the tree, dying as the 
just One for the unjust, being made sin for us that we 
might be the righteousness of God in Him. “Wherefore 
He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto 
God by Him, seeing He ever liveth and maketh intercession 
for them” (Heb. vii:25). 

He is all-sufficient for victory over our foes. The conflict 
in which we are engaged as His children does not lessen. 
“For we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against 
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of this 
world, but against the wicked spirits in the heavenly places.” 
As the end approaches these powers become increasingly 
active, till the time comes, which seems to be so near, when 
the true church will be called to her heavenly home, and 
Satan will demonstrate his vicious power through the demon 
world. Then he manifests great wrath for he knows that 
his time is short (Rev. xii:12). Never before has he been 
so active as today with his deceptive wiles. ‘The flesh and 
the world are also the means he uses to ensnare the children 
of God. Defeat in this conflict in which we are engaged is 
not necessary. We can be victors, yea more than conquerors 

4 


50 The Christ We Know 


through Him who has loved us. Our carnal man was cruci- 
fied with Him, we can reckon ourselves dead unto sin, and 
He assures us ‘Sin shall not have dominion over you.” All 
our enemies were defeated by Him. He conquered the 
powers of darkness and therefore we read that when we 
resist the devil he will flee from us. He also has overcome 
the world and our faith is the victory which overcomes the 
world. The victorious life is a simple matter. He has won 
every victory and by looking to Him, our risen, glorified 
Lord, as Israel’s hosts in battle against their perpetual foe, 
Amalek, looked to Moses on the mountain-top, thus con- 
quering the enemy, we too shall have the victory. He is all- 
sufficient in every battle; all-sufficient for victory. 

He is enough for the sorrows, trials and troubles of His 
people. He is all-sufficient to sustain us in all circumstances, 
in the perplexing experience often so mysterious. He an- 
nounced beforehand that His own should have tribulations 
in the world. Tribulations, suffering and persecutions are 
repeatedly announced by the Holy Spirit as the lot of God’s 
children in this present evil age. The choicest saints have 
often been suffering saints. It is so still and always will 
be so. 

Often the sufferings and trials of God’s children are un- 
explainable; they are mysteries which we cannot fully under- 
stand now. But this thing we know, “That all things must 
work together for good,” and we also know that He is able 
to carry us through every trial and sorrow and sustain us in 
every tribulation and bereavement. He is the same today as 
He was when His chosen people were suffering in Egypt. 
He knows, He sees and He hears (Exod. iii). He is touched 
with the feeling of our infirmities, for He was also tested 
in the same way in all things, apart from sin. He enters 
into all our sorrows and is with us in every fiery trial. 


The All-Sufficient One 51 


“When thou passest through the waters, I will be with 
thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. 
When thou walkest through the fire, thou shalt not be 
burned; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee” 
(Isa. xliii:2). He is Himself afflicted in all our afflictions 
(Isa. Ixiii:zg). Well may we sing triumphantly, “Halle- 
lujah, what a Saviour!” Nor do we need to fear anything 
concerning the future. “I will fear no evil: for Thou art 
with me.” 

He is all-sufficient for every spiritual need we may have. 
He is the fountain which never runs dry. He is the inex- 
haustible reservoir filled with the supplies of His infinite 
grace. “‘Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, who hath blessed us with every spiritual blessing in 
heavenly places in Christ Jesus’ (Eph. i:3). “For in Him 
dwelleth all the fulness of God bodily. And ye are filled 
full in Him who is the head of all principality and power’ 
(Col. ii:9,10). “He that spared not His own Son, but deliv- 
ered Him up for us all, how shall He not with Him also 
freely give us all things?” (Rom. viii:32). ‘And of His 
fulness have we all received grace upon grace” (John i:16). 
Whatever our spiritual need may be we but need to turn 
to Him and find Him all-sufficient, as well as ever ready 
to supply that need. 

In a certain hymn we sing, “Christ alone can satisfy.” 
To the woman at the well He said, “Whosoever drinketh 
of this water shall thirst again. But whosoever drinketh of 
the water that I shall give Him shall never thirst; but the 
water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water 
springing up into eternal life” (John iv:13,14). All earthly, 
physical things, the best, the choicest, the most attractive, the 
most charming, can never satisfy the human soul. All 
earthly cisterns are but broken, empty things. He alone can 


52 The Christ We Know 


give what satisfies and if we drink of Him, and drink deep, 
we shall find that we thirst no longer for the things which 
are for but a moment, and which can never satisfy. A child 
of God may be in an impoverished condition, but even then, 
without earthly comforts, having Christ as his portion is 
enough. Like the poor woman who laid upon a bed of 
sickness and in want, when she was asked what her needs 
were, she answered “I have Christ, what need I more?” 
He is enough. 

And what will it be when we are at last with Him! In 
eternity we shall be in His fellowship in never-ending glory. 
May we then find Him daily the all-sufficient One. This 


is our need and in this is our strength. 


“Leaning, resting, trusting, loving, 
Enter thy new year! 
For the Lord who lives to love thee 
Will be always near, 
Shielding, guiding, caring, blessing! 
What hast thou to fear?” 


THE PRAYING CHRIST 


ae can never make too much of prayer, that blessed 

privilege which belongs to the family of God— 
prayer by which we draw nigh to our Father in that blessed 
and worthy Name—prayer, the expression of our depen- 
dence on Him. 

How much has been written on prayer! Exhortation to 
pray much, to pray still more, to pray without ceasing, to 
pray fervently, to pray lifting up holy hands is always in 
order; that is according to sound doctrine and the teaching 
of God’s Holy Spirit. But we do not think enough of our 


The Praying Christ 5 


Lord in connection with prayer. The words He spoke con- 
cerning prayer are constantly to be remembered. Above all 
must we think of His own prayers. 

The praying Christ! What a man of prayer He was as 
He walked this earth in the form of a servant! What help 
and comfort there is for us. as we think of Him in His 
blessed prayer life on earth! He is our pattern in this as 


He is in all His walk. And still greater is the comfort when | 


we consider that His prayers were not ended with His 
earthly life. They are continued in glory. We have not 
only a praying Christ on earth, but a praying Lord in glory. 
His blessed lips still make requests of His Father. As the 
great intercessor He is upon the throne. And some day His 
prayers will all be answered. 

‘Much of the prayer life of our Lord is pre-written in that 
book of prayer and praise to which He so often referred 
while on earth, the book of Psalms. The Psalms may well 
be called the prayer book of the Lord Jesus Christ. Many 
of the utterances expressing dependence, loneliness, poverty, 
sorrow, grief, rejection and reproach were written by the 
Holy Spirit in anticipation of His life of humiliation. When 
He who was rich became poor for our sakes these prayers 
were used by Him. He expressed His obedience, His trust, 
His loneliness in a world which hated Him, His soul agony 
and suffering in the inspired words of the Psalms. ‘This was 
pre-written in one of them, “My voice shalt Thou hear in 
the morning, O Lord; in the morning will I direct my 
prayer unto Thee and will look up” (Psa. v:3) ; and in the 
Gospel we read, ‘“‘“And in the morning, rising up a great 
while before day, He went out into a solitary place and 
there prayed” (Mark i:35). And again, “He went into a 
mountain apart to pray, and when the evening was come 
He was there alone (Matt. xiv:23). “He went out into a 


= 


54 The Christ We Know 


mountain to pray and continued all night in prayer (Luke 
vi:12.) 

Prayer was constantly in that perfect life. He prayed 
when He was baptized by John in the river Jordan (Luke 
11:21), Prayer preceded His transfiguration; “as He prayed 
His countenance was altered” (Luke ix:29). Before He 
chose His apostles He spent a night in prayer. He prayed 
as the cross and its suffering loomed up (John xii:27). In 
the garden of Gethsemane we see Him praying with strong 
crying and tears (Heb. v:7). He kneeled down and prayed; 
“He fell on the ground, being in agony He prayed more 
earnestly, and His sweat was as it were great drops of blood 
falling down to the ground (Mark xiv:35). The One-hun- 
dred-and-second Psalm contains the prediction of that 
prayer of agony. He taught, “Pray for them who despite- 
fully use you” (Luke vi:28). He did so Himself and ful- 
filled Psalm cix:4, “For my love they are my adversaries, 
but I gave myself unto prayer.” He prayed for His enemies 
on the cross, as it is written, “He was numbered with the 
transgressors and He bore the sin of many and made inter- 
cession for the transgressors” (Isa. liii:12). But who can 
sound the depths of that blessed prayer-life of the Son of 
God on earth and the things He might have asked of God! 
“Thinkest thou not that I cannot now pray to my Father 
and He shall presently give me more than twelve legions of 
angels? But how then shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that 
thus it must be?” (Matt. xxvi:53). What a submission and 
what an example for us! 

Before He left the world to go back to the Father He 
assured His disciples (and us as well) that He would pray 
for them. “I will pray the Father for you.” Finally they 
listened to His prayer when He addressed the Father (John 
xvii), and we also hear Him pray as the eleven disciples did 


The Praying Christ 55 


whenever we read that ‘matchless chapter. That prayer 1s 
well called His “high-priestly prayer.”’ It is the example of 
His priestly ministry in glory. It gives a glimpse of His 
loving heart, which, in love that passeth knowledge, is con- 
stantly occupied with those whom He redeemed by His 
sacrificial death. He is the great, the never-failing interces- 
sor for His people. After all, our keeping for eternal life 
and glory does not depend on our weak prayers down here, 
but on His prayer and priestly intercession. He keeps us 
and all who truly are His. His life up yonder saves us 
down here. Because He knows us and bears us upon His 
loving heart, He is touched with the feeling of our infirmi- 
ties and enters in loving, gracious sympathy into our lives. 
We can come to Him with all our burdens, for He is the 
burden bearer. We can tell Him of all our cares, for He 
careth. We can tell Him all about our sorrows and trials, 
failures and disappointments, perplexities and heartaches. 
He is ever ready to listen to us. 

In these days of suffering and weeping, when His dear 
people moan and groan, when loss and bereavement is the 
lot of countless numbers of His children, what activity there 
must be in heaven! How He does intercede! Well may we 
all, and all who suffer and groan, expect the manifestation 
of His gracious love and power in our trials, as the result 
and answer, not of our prayers only, but of His prevailing 
prayer. Blessed be His Name! the darker the days the 
greater His power to save and to keep. Just think of the 
praying Christ in glory. 

We do not know what may go on in glory, in the Father’s 
house. Heaven knows all that is going on down here on 
this earth, blood drenched as never before in its history. 
Carried upward by His Spirit, human voices cry in His 
loving ears, “How long, O Lord! How long!” and again, 


56 The Christ We Know 


“Come, Lord Jesus—come, Lord Jesus.” For all we know 
He is pleading now as He did on earth, ‘Father, I will that 
they also, whom Thou hast given me, be with me where 
I am, that they may behold my glory, which Thou hast 
given me” (John xxii:24). And the Father, who heareth 
Him always, will grant Him the desire of His heart and not 
withhold the request of His lips. That prayer will be an- 
swered. The shout, the glorious shout from His own lips, 
will summon His own to meet Him in the sky. In a mo- 
ment—the twinkling of an eye! 

Once more He will pray. The Father has told Him, 
“Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine in- 
heritance and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy pos- 
session. Thou shalt smite them with a rod of iron, thou 
shalt dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel” (Psa. ii). 
He has never yet prayed thus. Some day He will ask the 
Father for His inheritance, the nations and the uttermost 
parts of the earth. When that prayer is answered He will 
return in His glory and receive the kingdoms of the earth. 
He is earth’s future King. The kingdom will be established 
on this earth. Nations will learn war no more. Peace, 
peace with righteousness, has come. All things are put under 
His feet. Groaning creation is delivered. He is on the 
throne and Satan in the pit of abyss. Let us think of the 
prayers of Christ and that His prayers for His own, for 
this earth, for the kingdom will all be answered. 


THE SOWER AND THE REAPER 


GG? ‘HEY that sow in tears shall reap in joy. He that 
goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall 
doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing His sheaves 


The Sower and the Reaper ie 


with him” (Psa. cxxvi:5, 6). Our blessed Lord came to 
earth as the great sower and as the Son of Man sowed the 
good seed (Matt. xiii:37). He came forth from heaven’s 
glory, bearing the precious seed; and sowing, He wept, and 
weeping, He sowed in tears. Who can describe the wonder- 
ful service with which He served, the way in which He 
sowed! See Him at Samaria’s well! In the heat of the day 
He had gone the weary way because He knew the 
one in whose heart the precious seed was to find lodgment. 
And being wearied with His journey He sat on the well. 
Then she came, whom He knew so well, whose history of 
sin and shame was like an open book to Him who has eyes 
like a flame of fire. 

Such was the ground which received the precious seed 
a heart desperately wicked, like all human hearts. And 
while the rejoicing woman rushed back to the city to tell 
the good news, the disciples said, “Master, eat!” “But He 
said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not of. 

My meat is to do the will of Him that sent me, 
and to finish His work. Say not ye, There are yet four 
months and then comes the harvest? Behold, I say unto 
you, Lift up your eyes and look on the fields; for they are 
white already to harvest. And he that reapeth receiveth 
wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal; that both he 
that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together” (John 
iv :32-36). Even so was it His meat to do the Father’s will, 
sowing by making Him known, and doing His works. 

But the great sowing was done by Him when He went to 
the Cross. The great sower was rejected. He who brought 
God to man, making known the invisible God, He who said, 
“He that hath seen me hath seen the Father,” was cast out 
by man and put on the cross. There He had to finish the 
work for which He came. On the cross He Himself was 


58 The Christ We Know 


sown in death, so that there might be the reaping of glory, 
the harvest of redemption. “Verily, verily, I say unto you, 
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it 
abideth alone; but if it die it bringeth forth much fruit” 
(John xii:24). He is the corn of wheat, the precious seed. 
He came to die, to give His life a ransom for many, and 
from this springs the great harvest, the blessed and glorious 
fruit. All who have believed on Him are the precious fruit 
of His death on the cross. And how this fruit has been 
gathered and is being gathered by the power of the Holy 
Spirit, who is on earth for this great purpose! He who 
sowed in tears reaps now in joy. When He went to the cross 
to give His body as the great sacrifice, He saw His seed, He 
saw the travail of His soul, He saw the church and all its 
members, and then loving the church He gave Himself for 
it (Eph. v:25). That was the joy set before Him for which 
He endured the cross and despised the shame. What joy 
is His as member after member is added to this body, 
destined to be with Him and to share His Glory! 

But more than that: “He shall doubtless come again with 
rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.’ Harvest time is 
coming for the great Sower. He has told us that the har- 
vest time is the end of the age. Then He will be the great 
reaper, the ingatherer. The wheat, the children of the 
kingdom, will be gathered into His barn (Matt. xiii:30). 
He comes and takes His own, the fruit of His sowing, home 
to glory—home to the Father’s house to be with Him. Then 
also comes the harvest which belongs to Him as the Son of 
Man, the appointed executor of the judgments of God. 
How solemn is the record! “And I looked and behold a 
white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of 
Man, having on His head a golden crown, and in His hand 
a sharp sickle, And another angel came out of the temple, 


The Sower and the Reaper 59 


crying with a loud voice to Him that sat on the cloud, 
Thrust in Thy sickle, and reap; for the time is come for 
Thee to reap; for the harvest of the earth is ripe. And He 
that sat on the cloud thrust in His sickle on the earth, and 
the earth was reaped” (Rev. xiv:14-16). What a harvest 
that will be! How the enemies of God and of His Christ 
will then be dealt with and all those who destroyed the 
truth of God will meet their well-merited judgment. ‘And 
out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it He 
should smite the nations; and He shall rule them with a 
rod of iron, and He treadeth the winepress of the fierceness 
and wrath of Almighty God” (Rev. xix:15). It will be 
harvest time then and this earth and the nations are fast 
ripening for such a harvest. 

And what will it be when the great sower, who sowed 
in tears, who gave His life and shed His blood, comes again 
with rejoicing, bringing His sheaves with Him! What joy 
and glory will be His when the portals of heaven open and 
He leads forth the ransomed hosts of God! What joy and 
glory when He appears as the head of the body, the Lord 
of all, and every member of His body reflects His own 
glory! What will it be when He brings the many sons to 
glory, when He brings His glorious sheaves with Him! Oh, 
that will be glory for Him! Then He has to the full the 
travail of His soul and will be satisfied, and what glory it 
will be for us the trophies of His victory and His grace! 

We shall then forever be with Him, behold His glory, 
share that glory and His vast and wonderful inheritance. 
And do not our hearts yearn for this? There seems to be a 
universal desire among the Saints of God, those who know 
Him best and love His appearing, for His speedy coming. 
Oh, the many hearts who cry today for this promised event! 
But let us remember that while He tarries it is sowing time 


60 The Christ We Know 


for us. We still may sow and follow Him, in sowing the 
precious seed with tears. We can still sow beside many 
waters, preach the Word and reach out for the lost. We can 
go forth trusting Him, and sow with many tears and many 
prayers that which He has first put into our hands. Blessed 
privilege it is. And if we would only think more of Him 
who has gone before, and is coming again bringing His 
sheaves with Him; if we only would think more of the soon 
coming glorious consummation, of the harvest time the 
reaping time for Him and for us, how much more sowing 
we would do, and how much more we would water the 
seed with the tears of our prayers. Still it is sowing time 
for us. Let us make the best of it and remember what the 
Spirit of God tells us: “But this I say, He which soweth 
sparingly shall reap also sparingly; and He which soweth 
bountifully shall reap also bountifully” (2 Cor. ix:6). And 
again, “Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due sea- 
son we shall reap, if we faint not” (Gal. vi:9). “Therefore, 
my beloved brethren, be ye steadfast, unmoveable, always 
abounding in the works of the Lord, forasmuch as you know 
that your labor is not in vain in the Lord” (1 Cor. xv:58). 
And what shall your harvest be, beloved reader, in that day? 
It depends on your faithfulness, on your self-denial, on 
your sacrifice now, 


® 


“He Is Tuy Lorp” 


a4 EARKEN, O daughter, and consider, and incline 

thine ear; forget also thine own people, and thy 
father’s house; so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty; 
for He is thy Lord, and worship thou Him.” (Psa. 


Ve ls \Lhy Lord” 61 


xlv:9,10). This beautiful Psalm, so blessedly deep, reveals 
to us the King Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ. We brush 
aside the vain babblings of critical and infidel men, whose 
inventions under the guise of scholarship have denied this. 
Even the most ancient Jewish commentators have always 
held that this inspired song shows forth the victorious, glori- 
ous King of Israel. But there is a higher authority than 
ancient Jewish comment and that is the Holy Spirit, who 
put these words into “the pen of the ready writer,” and 
who tells us in the New Testament that He who is ad- 
dressed as King with a sceptre of righteousness is our Lord 
(Heb. i:7-9). 

And what a wonderful picture it is we face in the opening 
verses of this Psalm! He is fairer far than the sons of men. 
Some ancient versions of the Old Testament have rendered 
it by “Beautiful! Beautiful!” a double exclamation in place 
of “fairer far.” And so He is “altogether lovely”! Grace 
is poured into His lips. Then we behold Him as the coming 
One, the victorious King, with the sword at His thigh, ap- 
pearing in glory and majesty. He comes to execute judg- 
ment, because the grace which poured from His lips was 
rejected by man. He comes “in flaming fire, taking ven- 
geance on them that know not God, and that obey not the 
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.” (2 Thess. i:8). He 
comes to receive the throne and the kingdom; the sceptre 
of righteousness will henceforth rule. 

But He is not alone. He has fellows, those who are as- 
sociated with Him; who are partakers with Him in the 
glory and the kingdom. His associates are ‘His saints,” 
those who come with Him, who are manifested with Him 
in glory. And every child of God saved by grace, belonging 
to Him, can say in fullest assurance, even as our own heart 
speaks in penning these words, “I shall be there.” And after 


62 The Christ We Know 


that we hear of the Queen arrayed in gold of Ophir. She 
occupies the place of honor at His right hand. With her 
are the King’s daughters. —TThe Queen is the remnant of 
Israel, saved by grace, when the King comes back; reinsti- 
tuted into the former relationship, taken back as the wife 
once set aside. The King’s daughters, who surround the 
Queen, converted Israel, are the converted nations. It is a 
great vision of Millennial times. Israel is re-married unto 
the Lord and the nations of the earth are joined unto the 
Lord, the subjects in His kingdom. 

But while this is true, this earthly scene and relationship 
of converted Israel is a type also of another heavenly scene 
and heavenly relationship. The Church is not only His 
Body, but His Bride as well. Her destiny is to become in 
Glory the Lamb’s wife. While converted Israel is joined to 
the Lord in an earthly relationship, with the throne on 
earth, the Church is joined to the Lord in a heavenly rela- 
tionship, with the throne over the earth in the New Jeru- 
salem. Israel becomes the Queen on earth; the Church, at 
the marriage supper of the Lamb, becomes the Lamb’s wife 
in heaven. Before the earth celebrates the glad and glorious 
day there precedes another celebration in Glory. “And I 
heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the 
voice of many waters, and as the voice of many thunderings, 
saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord God omnipotent reigneth. 
Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him, for the 
marriage of the Lamb is come, and His wife has made her- 
self ready. And to her was granted that she should be ar- 
rayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the 
righteousness of the saints.” (Rev. xix:6-8). These are the 
nuptials of the Church in Glory. 

It is the exhortation to her who has been lifted so high 
which attracts our attention. She is to forget her kindred, 


“He Is Thy Lord” 63 


her people, her father’s house, all what is behind and past; 
she must be given wholly and fully to Him. “He is thy 
Lord, and worship thou Him.” He claims the entire affec- 
tion, as well as the adoration and worship of the heart. 
This will be His loving demand of Israel; this is His loving 
claim on us. He is thy Lord—worship thou Him! And 
every heart who knows Him answers joyfully, Thou art 
worthy! Thou art all! Thou art all for me; I want to be 
all for Thee. ‘““Thou, O Christ, art all I want—more than 
all in Thee I find.” Yet how little we know of this in a 
practical way. We quote the words of another: 

“A simple truth, therefore, this should be to the Christian, 
and scarcely needing much enforcement. Yet it does need. 
How few of those who have turned to Him, yea, and found 
answer from Him, in the deepest need of their souls, have 
yet frankly taken Him for all other needs! How many have 
to find cistern after cistern of their own cracked in the 
hewing, before they apply themselves in full earnest to 
their own free fountain of living water! How little is it 
understood that Christ and nothing else will more than 
satisfy, when Christ and a great deal else to supplement 
Him will only bring one down to near starvation! Yet 
should it be difficult to see that a Christ honored and trusted 
as all-competent will justify that trust, when a Christ dis- 
honored by other makeweights will seem to justify nothing 
but the distrust ?”—Frederick W. Grant. 

Somehow these words have been ringing in our own 
heart: “He is thy Lord, worship thou Him.” Are they not 
of special meaning in these solemn days? A few steps more 
and we may be face to face with Him. Oh! Let us in faith 
realize His Lordship over us as never before. Let us give 
Him the pre-eminence in our little lives and seek and find 
in Him our all in all. He is thy Lord; we are not our own; 


64 The Christ We Know 


we belong to Him. Let Him exercise His blessed Lordship 
over our lives in all things. He is thy Lord—let us trust 
Him. He is thy Lord—let us serve Him. He is thy Lord 
—let us magnify and exalt His holy and ever blessed Name. 
And worship thou Him! Oh! sweetest of all hours on earth 
when our hearts are bowed in worship and we praise Him. 
It is after all the highest and the best to worship. Feeble 
it is; but the day is nearing when we shall know what it 
means—"“He is thy Lord”—and when we shall bitin in 
His presence. 


“ALL My Sprincs ARE IN THER” 


CC Al” my springs are in Thee” (Psa. lxxxvii:7). The 

earthly Zion in its future glory, when! the Lord has 
come and Israel is restored, is in view in this Psalm. Then 
“the singers as well as the players on instruments shall say— 
all my springs are in Thee.” While this is not yet come, 
God’s children know now the blessed truth expressed in these 
words. In Him, in the Lord Jesus Christ, are all our 
springs. 

All we have is in Christ; all we are is through Him and 
all we shall be will be in Him, through Him and with 
Him. And therefore we rejoice and can sing, “All my springs 
are in Thee.” In whom? In Him “who loved me and gave 
Himself for me,” In Him who is raised from the dead and 
seated at God’s right hand in the highest glory, far above 
all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and 
every name that is named. In Him who has all power in 
heaven and on earth. In Him, in whom the fulness of the 


Godhead dwelleth bodily. In Him under whose feet all 


“All My Springs Are in Thee’’ 65 


things are yet to be put and who will ere long be crowned 
King of kings and Lord of lords. In such a One, wonderful, 
almighty, omniscient, all-loving and all-glorious, are all our 
springs. To know Him means a never failing and a never 
ending supply of all we need in time and in eternity. Apart 
from Him there is nothing but death. 

“All my springs are in Thee.” He is our Saviour, who 
bore our sins on the shameful cross, by whose precious 
blood, the blood as of a lamb without blemish and without 
spot, we are redeemed. He paid the price of our redemption 
and set us free. Having believed on Him as our Saviour and 
being redeemed, He is our Lord whose we are; we are His 
servants. He is also our Shepherd, who careth for us His 
sheep for whom He laid down His life. He is our Life as 
well as our Food. He is our Priest and our Advocate. He 
is our Peace, our Pattern and our Hope. He is all in all. 
And He is altogether lovely. In Him we find all. His full- 
ness can never be exhausted. He is the fountain of living 
waters and all other things in this poor world are but broken 
cisterns that hold no water. 

And do we really find in Him and in Him only, all our 
springs? Or are you, dear reader, still going to broken cis- 
terns? Do you find in Him more and more your joy and 
delight? Is He all your comfort, your strength and your 
hope? Do you realize your complete need of Him as never 
before? Are you living in greater dependence on Him and 
is your heart more longing for Him, more devoted to Him? 
‘These are searching questions. Oh! that we might learn 
that it is just Himself we need, in whom are all our springs. 
What would we do without Him? Such is the cry of the 
soul which leans hard upon Him. What a comfort He is in 
conflict; what a help in present-day difficulties and _per- 
plexities! And what a sustainer in sorrow! Oh! the springs 


66 The Christ We Know 


of joy, peace and hope which flow forth from His blessed 
person! T’o Him we cling closer—Him our souls love and 
desire. Yet a little while, a very little while, and we shall 
know as we never knew down here that all our springs are 
in Him. 

“Take thou our hearts, and let them be 

Forever closed to all but Thee; 


Thy willing servants, let us wear 
The seal of love forever there. 


How blest are they who still abide 

Close sheltered at Thy loving side; 

Who life and strength from Thee receive, 
And with Thee move and in Thee live.” 


““As HE THAT SERVETH”’ 


nan | AM among you as He that serveth” (Luke xxii:27). 

These were His words spoken under the shadow of 
the Cross. He had come to earth to be a servant. “Who 
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be 
equal with God, but made of Himself no reputation, and 
took upon Him the form of a servant, and was made in like- 
ness of men” (Phil. ii:6,7). 

It is the wonder of wonders that the mighty Creator 
should lay His glory by and appear on earth as a servant, 
that He who was rich became poor for our sakes. Prophets 
had predicted His servant character long before He became 
incarnate. “Behold my servant! He shall not cry, nor lift 
up, nor cause His voice to be heard in the street. A bruised 
reed shall He not break, and the smoking flax shall He not 
quench; He shall bring forth judgment unto truth” (Isa. 
xlii:2,3). He is called “My righteous Servant” | (Isa. 


“As He That Serveth” 67 


liiizt1). We hear Him say in the spirit of prophecy, “Thou 
has made me to serve with thy sins, thou hast wearied me 
with thine iniquities” (Isa. xliii:24). The Gospel records 
give us the story of His perfect service. He came not to be 
ministered unto, but to minister, and to give His life as a 
ransom for many (Mark x:43). What a service it was! 
Ever going about and doing good, healing the sick, and 
speaking words of love, comfort, and peace. How untiring 
instant in season and out of season! From early in the 
morning, before sunrise till late at night, with whole nights 
spent in prayer service, He toiled and served. How unosten- 
tatious! It was the mighty eternal love, the love that passeth 
knowledge which constrained His holy soul. In this service 
of love He went the weary road through Samaria to seek 
at the well the lost woman whose sinful story He knew so 
well. In the same love He took up the little children in 
His arms and blessed them. It was this loving service which 
carried the weak and erring disciples and stooped so low as 
to wash their feet. Brief are the records describing the 
wonderful life He lived as the obedient servant. Though 
brief all the Holy Spirit reveals is like Himself unsearchable. 
One can always discover something new, a new beauty, a 
new loveliness, something unseen and unknown before. How 
great His attractiveness to the believers’ heart! To follow 
His path, to trace His blessed steps of meekness and low- 
liness, is always inspiring and refreshing to the heart that 
knows and adores Him. 

And the greatest of all when that holy, obedient, loving, 
never-failing servant went to the cross to give His life as a 
ransom for many. What saint can measure the height, the 
length, the breadth and the depth of this surpassing service 
of eternal love! “Surely He hath borne our griefs, and 
carried our sorrows; yet we did esteem Him stricken, 


68 The Christ We Know 


smitten of God, and afflicted. But He was wounded for 
our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities; the 
chastisement of our peace was upon Him; and with His 
stripes we are healed” (Isa. liii:4,5). 

Nor was His service finished for the objects of His love, 
for His own, when He had bowed His blessed head and 
uttered the never-dying words, “It is finished.” At the right. 
hand of the Majesty on high, angels and principalities 
having been made subject unto Him, He continues to serve. 
As priest and advocate for each trusting heart on earth He 
serves, keeping, sustaining, restoring at all times. How little 
we know of this love-service which is going on above. What 
a revelation it will be in that day, when the hidden, now 
unknown service of our interceding Lord will come to light! 
Then we shall find out what that never-ceasing service in 
heaven’s courts meant for each of us. How much He pre- 
vented in our lives which we never knew here below! How 
many snares and attacks of our foe He frustrated! How 
many things He restrained by His intercession! And then 
His service in restoring us poor, weak ones on earth, thus 
keeping us in His fellowship. If His service was so untiring 
on earth, how much more so is it in glory. And oh, the joy 
to know, He does all things well! We rest in faith in Him 
who knows all and who has all power, whose thoughts over 
us are nothing but love and peace. 

And when at last we shall see His face, when that bliss- 
ful, long-looked-for moment comes, when we shall see Him 
as He is in all His heavenly glory, when we shall be trans- 
formed into the same image, even then His loving service 
will continue. We listen to His own words. “Let your loins 
be girded about, and your lights burning; and ye yourselves 
like unto men that wait for their Lord, when He will return 
on occasion of the wedding; that when He cometh and 


“As He That Serveth” 69 


knocketh, they may open unto Him immediately. Blessed 
are those servants whom the Lord when He cometh shall 
find watching; verily I say unto you, that He shall gird 
Himself, and make them to sit down to meat, and will come 
forth and serve them” (Luke xii:34-37). 

He shall gird Himself, and make them sit down and will 
come forth to serve them. What will it all mean? We do 
not know at this time. We do not know what it will be 
when He comes forth to serve once more those whom He 
has brought to the Father’s house by His sacrificial death, 
who are the travail of His soul and His crown of rejoicing. 
He will have a great surprise for us at that blessed marriage 
supper of the Lamb. 

And does not all this create a deeper longing in your soul, 
beloved reader, to follow Him and to be a real servant after 
Him, in meekness and lowliness, in self-denial and self-sur- 
render? “Ye serve the Lord Christ.” How easy and blessed 
such service is if He Himself is before our hearts. With 
what delight, contentment and peace we can go in our own 
little way, if we do not take off our eyes from His own 
~ blessed person. To serve Him, to serve in love one another, 
to bear one another’s burdens, to be humble, manifesting 
the same mind which was in Christ Jesus that is pleasing to 
the Father, yea, that gives perfect rest. Alas! the modern 
spirit which is pervading everything, aims at human great- 
ness, at being something in a world in which Christ was 
nothing, ever seeking the applause of a world which hates 
Christ and serving for selfish ends. What an evil thing it 
is! How contrary to Him and to His service, this self- 
seeking, this ambition to have “a name”! True rest and 
peace is not known to the servant who is controlled by 
worldly ambitions. The Lord deliver us from it and keep 
us humble, serving with Him as our pattern, till before His 


70 The Christ We Know 


award seat the hidden things shall be manifested and every 
man shall have praise. 


“Servant of all, to toil for man 
Thou wouldst not, Lord, refuse: 
Thy majesty did not disdain 
To be employed for us. 


Thy bright example I pursue, 
To Thee in all things rise, 
And all I think, or speak or do, 

Is one great sacrifice,” 


“THe Lorp ALWAYs”’ 


aa | HAVE set the Lord always before me” (Psa. xvi:8). 
This Psalm gives a prophetic picture of Him who 
existed in the form of God and made of Himself no repu- 
tation and took upon Him the form of a servant, who 
humbled Himself and became obedient unto death, even the 
death of the cross. We hear Him giving in this Psalm 
expression of His trust in God and to the certainty of His 
victory over death and the grave. Our blessed Lord walked 
down here in the path of obedience, and thus He had His 
Father always set before His heart. ‘The path He has gone 
through this world He has graciously left for His redeemed 
people to follow. His own grace and the power of His 
Spirit, whom we have received as one of the blessed results 
of His finished work on the cross, make this following after 
Him possible. ‘Thus all believers are enabled to say, “I have 
set the Lord always before me,” and live daily and con- 
stantly with the Lord before the heart. Such a life is a 
life of blessing and victory, a life unto the praise of His 
Name, which yields abundant fruit. 


“The Lord Always” 71 


We must have the Lord, first of all, before our hearts in 
His redeeming love. We were lost and He came to redeem 
us. “He loved me and gave Himself for me” is the song 
of worship of all who have been washed in His blood. All 
who know the price which was paid for redemption re- 
member daily that He loved us and in His own body on 
the tree bore our sins. As the Lord who has accomplished 
our redemption we love to have Him before our hearts. 
That this might be so He left that blessed request before 
He went to the cross: “Do this in remembrance of me.” 
The Lord’s Supper was instituted by Him that we might 
keep Him before our hearts in a practical way. Each time 
we gather according to this request and worship in Spirit 
and in Truth, the Holy Spirit puts Him afresh before our 
hearts. We then taste His love again and receive new and 
blessed assurance that we belong to Him and He belongs 
to us. We need to get fresh glimpses of His great love 
so that we may increasingly appreciate Him and live out 
the salvation we have in Him. How it does melt the heart 
when we remember the fact that He bought us with His 
blood. 

Centuries ago in Boston the leading of praise was given 
to a Judge Sewell. ‘The ‘“Bay Psalm Book” contained only 
a few tunes. But the good man found even the few tunes 
bewildering. In his diary, which is in existence, he reports 
his successes and his failures. Occasionally he thinks that he 
had “set a psalm well”; at other times he complains that the 
people ran away with the tune. But on a certain Sunday 
he says, “The song of the Fifth of Revelation was sung. I 
was ready to burst into tears at the words ‘Bought with thy 
blood.’”’ Such loving remembrance of Him refreshes His 
heart and becomes a source of blessing in our lives. 


7 The Christ We Know 


We must have Him before our hearts as the One who 
walked on earth in humiliation, meek and lowly of heart. 
How blessed it is never to lose sight of Him in this char- 
acter. His life is our pattern; to walk even as He walked is 
God’s call to His redeemed people. Are there sorrows and 
trials? He passed through them too as the perfect One, 
in perfect submission and perfect patience. Are we mis- 
understood and wrongfully treated? This was His lot 
among a crooked and perverse generation. Are we in want 
and distress? He knows all about this for we see Him thus 
in His path on earth. Well may we have His life down here 
as the object of meditation before our hearts. And as we do 
we shall receive help and by the power of His Spirit reflect 
His image. How blessed it is to look back to His path on 
earth and thus receive courage and strength to follow after 
Him. 

But we also have Him before our hearts as the One who 
is now crowned with glory and honor upon the Father’s 
throne. He is there for us. His love is unchanged; His 
Power is on our side. While we have Him before our 
hearts as the glorified and living One, He has us upon His 
heart. He knows us and knows our needs and will supply 
them in His own way. ‘To step on daily through this 
quickly passing age with the man in Glory before our 
hearts, telling Him our troubles, looking to Him for help, 
expecting all from Him and Him alone, and accepting all 
that comes into our lives as from Himself, that is the life 
we are called to live as His redeemed ones. 

We must have Him before our hearts as the Coming One. 
Every night when we retire our last thought ought to be of 
Him and that before another morning comes we may meet 
Him. Every morning’s first thought should be of Christ 
and that before another evening appears He may come. If 


Like the Rain 93 


He is before us in this way, in reality, it will be a great 
blessing in our lives. Sorrows and trials will become insig- 
nificant. ‘The future will then be left in His hands, while 
every day He gives us while waiting for Him to come, will 
be marked by untiring service and by doing good. Soon He 
will come and we shall meet Him face to face. Having the 
Lord before our hearts as the Coming One, whose glory we 
shall share and whose image we shall bear in all eternity 
will result in never losing sight of the Lord. Wherever we 
go, we look to Him to guide. Whatever we do, His honor 
and the glory of His Name becomes increasingly the desire 
of our hearts. In all we do, in our work, in the household 
duties, in service, in anything and everything, we will have 
but one object. He is before our hearts as Saviour and 
coming Lord, and that object will be to please Him. ‘The 
Lord grant to us all such a walk in the last days. ‘There is 
little time left to be faithful to Him. May we use it. 
Satan’s power will hinder as never before in a life closely 
linked with Him; but He has conquered Satan. If we are 
willing His sufficient Grace will meet all our need. “I 
have set the Lord always before me.” 


LIKE THE RAIN 


AIN is frequently mentioned in the Word of God and 

used figuratively in different ways. It is used as a 
picture of adversity and judgment (Ezek. xxxviii:22) and 
of the outpouring of divine wrath upon the ungodly (Job 
xx:23). It is also used as a symbol of oppression: ‘A poor 
man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which 
leaveth no food” (Prov. xxviii:3). And again says Solo- 


74. The Christ We Know 


mon: “A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a 
contentious woman are alike’ (Prov. xxvii:15). But on 
the other hand rain is often used in Holy Scriptures as the 
emblem of good, the symbol of earthly and spiritual bless- 
ings. It is a picture of the Word of God. “For as the 
rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and return- 
eth not thither, but watereth the earth and maketh it bring 
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and 
bread to the eater; so shall my Word be that goeth forth 
out of my mouth. It shall not return unto me void, but it 
shall accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper 
in the thing whereto I send it” (Isa. lv:10, 11). 

In the Seventy-second Psalm our Lord Jesus Christ is 
compared in His second coming to the rain. This beautiful 
Kingdom psalm stands at the close of the second main divi- 
sion of the Book of Psalms (Psa. xlii-lxxii). Like the 
second book of the Bible, Exodus, these psalms describe a 
suffering, groaning people, prophetically the remnant of 
Israel during the coming great tribulation. And as Exodus 
ends with the glory of the Lord displayed in the midst of 
His people, so the second division of the Psalms ends with 
the vision of the Kingdom, when the Lord has returned 
and His glory covereth the earth. 

“O God, give Thy judgments unto the King 

And Thy righteousness unto the King’s Son. 

Thus shall He judge Thy people with righteousness 
And of thine afflicted with judgment. 

The mountains shall bring forth peace to the people, 
And the hills in righteousness. 

He shall judge the afflicted of the people, 

Save the sons of the poor, 

And crush the oppressor! 

So that they fear Thee while the sun endureth, 

And as long as the moon unto all generations. 


He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass, 
As showers that water the earth.” (Verses 1-6, corrected trans.) 


Like the Rain 75 


“He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass, as 
showers that water the earth.” It is a beautiful expression 
and a picture of the great blessings which are in store for 
man and for the earth when Creation’s Lord and Redeemer 
comes again. It answers the unscriptural view that the 
second coming of Christ will usher in the end of the world, 
the destruction of the earth and the end of all things. The 
blessings the Seventy-second Psalm promises, blessings of 
peace for all the nations, their conversion and gathering 
into the kingdom, which includes the ends of the earth, as 
well as the temporal blessings, are still unrealized. Nor will 
they come during this age. His Second Coming will bring 
about all which is promised in this psalm and many other 
Scriptures. 

When He comes He will come down like rain. The 
showers of blessing to refresh and to bring forth new life 
will come. David in his last words spoke of this also. 


“He shall be as the light of the morning 

When the sun ariseth, 

A morning without clouds— 

From the sunshine and from the rain 

The green grass springs from the earth.” (2 Sam. xxiii:4.) 


Think of the parched meadows. No rain has fallen for 
many weeks. ‘The grass is withering away. The shrubs 
and trees drop their leaves. Death seems to be impending. 
Joel describes such a scene. ‘The field it wasteth, the land 
mourneth, for the corn is wasted, the new wine is dried up, 
the oil languisheth. . .. The seed is rotten under their clods; 
the garners are laid desolate; the barns are broken down, 
for the corn is withered. How the beasts do groan! The 
herds of cattle are perplexed, because they have no pasture; 
yea the flocks of sheep are made desolate” (Joel i:10, 17, 
18). But all at once the rain comes down. Showers upon 


76 The Christ We Know 


showers fall upon the thirsty ground. What a transforma- 
tion follows! What a wonderful reviving these showers of 
blessing bring at once. And thus will it be when He comes 
down to earth again. The earth, before He comes, will be 
in the most dire need. Like the mown grass with its roots 
exposed to the summer heat, like the parched fields with 
threatening death on all sides, such will be the condition 
of the earth and its inhabitants when the present age ends. 


But then He comes like rain upon the mown grass and 
brings the promised showers of blessing. What blessings 
there will be! Blessings for Israel, blessings for all the 
nations of the earth and blessings for groaning creation. 
Then righteousness and praise will spring forth before all 
the nations and the living waters flow forth from Jerusalem. 
“The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad and the 
desert shall rejoice and blossom like the rose. It shall 
blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing; 
the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it, the excellency 
of Carmel and Sharon, they shall see the glory of the Lord, 
and the excellency of our God” (Isa. xxxv:1, 2). “Instead 
of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the 
brier shall come up the myrtle tree’ (Isa. iv:13). 


“The Curse is gone! 

The Blessing comes instead; 
And now, where’er we go, 

On hallowed ground we tread. 
The canopy of love 

Is stretched above our head; 
The soil no longer curst, 

Is like a garden spread; 
The wilderness re-blooms 

With verdure overlaid. 
The reign of right 

Supplants the sway of wrong; 


In the Midst a9 


The reign of promised peace 
To earth has come: the long, 
Long era of the blest! 
With now unloosed tongue 
The nations utter praise; 
Earth’s broken harp is strung, 
Creation now is glad, 
And sings its ancient song.” 


IN THE MIDST 


E IS in the midst! No child of God needs to be told 
who that One is. He was foreshadowed by the tree 

of life in the midst of the garden (Genesis ii:9), He, who is 
the life. He appeared unto Abraham accompanied by two 
angels at Mamre (Gen. xviii). We doubt not He was then 
in the middle, an angel on either side, when Abraham 
bowed himself to the ground and addressed Him as “my 
Lord.” Moses saw Him in the burning bush and He called 
unto him “out of the midst of the bush,” the ever blessed 
assurance that He is in the midst and with His suffering 
people. When Nebuchadnezzar looked into the white heat 
of the furnace he beheld in the midst of the three, who had 
been cast into the fire, a fourth one “like to the Son of 
God.” He dwelt in the midst of His people Israel, in the 
midst of the cloud, the visible sign of His presence, in the 
midst of glory. ; | 
And when the Eternal and Glorious One, the Life and 
the Light, the Only-Begotten came to earth, to be the Lamb 
of God, to die for the ungodly, we behold Him in the midst. 
He was numbered with the transgressors; this was the voice 
of prophecy (Isa. liii:12). The same prophecy announced: 
““He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened not 


78 The Christ We Know 


His mouth; He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and 
as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth not 
His mouth.” It was all fulfilled, when He gave Himself, 
enduring the cross and despising the shame. Oh, that scene 
can never be forgotten! It will be the theme of endless 
praise of all the redeemed throughout all eternity—He came 
to take the sinner’s place. “And there were also two others, 
malefactors, led with Him to be put to death. And when 
they were come to the place, which is called Calvary, there 
they crucified Him, and the malefactors, one on the right 
hand and the other on the left.” (Luke xxiii 232,33). How 
affecting to see Him, the Lord of Glory, by whom and for 
whom all things were created, the object of angelic wor- 
ship, yea more than that, the Father’s delight, led forth with 
vile malefatcors, to be cruelly nailed to the cross! Who 
can picture that scene—the Holy One in the midst of wicked 
men, hanging on the cross, shedding His blood! Why is He 
there? Because man hating Him gave Him that place. 
Why is He there? He came to take that place. His love 
brought Him from heaven to earth and led Him to that 
place “in the midst.” Why is He there? God put Him 
there, for He made Him, who knew no sin, sin for us. 

It was decree of eternity. The cross was not an after- 
thought of God. It was God’s forethought. Before there 
ever was a world it was councilled that He should be “in 
the midst,” to make known God’s love and God’s power 
in redemption. 

His blood was shed. His head, thorn-crowned, had bowed. 
His lips had uttered the triumphant, majestic, “It is 
finished!’ His side was pierced. The evidences of death 
were there as the eye-witness, the beloved John tells us— 
“But one of the soldiers with a spear pierced His side, and 
forthwith came there out blood and water” (John xix:34). 


In the Midst 719 


They took his body from the place “in the midst.” They 
laid Him in the tomb. On the third day the grave was 
emptied, and on the same day we see Him “in the midst” 
again. 

“Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the 
week, when the doors were shut where the disciples were 
assembled for fear of the Jews, came Jesus and stood in the 
midst, and saith unto thm, Peace be unto you. And when 
He had said so, He showed unto them His hands and His 
side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord” 
(John xx:19). We remember His blessed promise, recorded 
in the Gospel of Matthew, in anticipation of His death and 
resurrection, and the church He would have. The promise 
not given when He preached the Gospel of the Kingdom 
heralding the Kingdom promised to Israel, but that promise 
was spoken to His disciples after the message of the King- 
dom had been rejected. ‘“‘Where two or three are gathered 
together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them. 
On the glorious day of His mighty victory He fulfills 
that promise? They were gathered together. Suddenly 
He is in their midst, to greet them with the message of 
peace, to show them His hands and His side. 

And He is still in the midst. Wherever two or three 
gather together in His Name, having believed on Him and 
owning no other name, than His own worthy Name, gath- 
ered unto Him, there He is still in the midst. In Hebrews 
11:12 we read: “I will declare Thy Name unto my 
brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto 
Thee.” This leads us back to the T'wenty-second Psalm, 
the Psalm in which first of all His atoning death is pre- 
dicted. But then we read of the suffering ended and the 
glory begun—“TI will declare Thy Name unto my brethren, 


So The Christ We Know 


in the midst of the congregation will I praise Thee.” (Psa. 
xxii :22). 

It was on that resurrection morning when He spoke for 
the first time of His disciple as being “His brethren.”— 
“Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my 
Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.” 
Oh, blessed identification! He is not ashamed to call us 
brethren. And now as the First-born among many brethren 
He leads in the praises, in worship, and we redeemed 
by His blood, accepted in Him, one with Him sing the song 
of redemption and praises in His Name, rejoicing in Him 
and in His redemption. Such is true worship, gathered unto 
His Name, worshipping Him, singing that song, which He 
first sang—‘“He hath put a new song in my mouth, even 
praises unto our God.” 

And John saw Him in the midst. “I saw seven golden 
candlesticks; and in the midst of the seven golden candle- 
sticks, one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a gar- 
ment down to the foot, and girt about the breasts with a 
golden girdle” (Rev. i:13). 

And we shall see Him ere long in the midst as it is so 
blessedly foretold in the Book of Revelation. Some day— 
and how near that day may be!—we too, like John in the 
isle of Patmos, shall hear the voice from the sky, the mighty 
shout, “Come up hither.” Then we shall pass in and wor- 
ship no longer on earth but before the throne, clothed in 
fine linen, seated upon thrones and ground. And then will 
burst the vision upon our glorified eyes, the vision for which 
even now the loving heart yearns and prays. “And I beheld, 
and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four living 
creatures, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb, as it 
had been slain. . . .” He takes the book and then follows 
the Glory Song: “Thou are worthy to take the book, and 


In the Midst 81 


to open the seals thereof, for Thou wast slain, and hast 
redeemed us to God by Thy blood out of every kindred, 
and tongue, and nation; and hast made us unto our God 
kings and priests, and we shall reign over the earth” (Rev. 
v:7-10). In the midst in glory! Oh! the glory that 
awaits us to see Him in the midst.” The Lamb which is in 
the midst of the throne shall feed them, and shall lead them 
unto living fountains of waters, and God shall wipe away 
all tears from their eyes’ (Rev. vii:17). 

On earth, too, He will have the place in the midst. He 
will be in the midst of His people Israel and in the midst of 
Jerusalem. “Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for lo, 
I come to dwell in the midst of thee saith the Lord. . . . 
I will dwell in the midst of thee” (Zech. ii:11,12). “I will 
dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be 
called a city of Truth” (Zech. viii:3). Around that glorious 
center will be grouped the nations, who have turned their 
swords to plowshares, their spears into pruning hooks, 
saying: “Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of the 
Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and He will teach 
us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths; for out of 
Zion shall go forth the law, and the Word of the Lord 
from Jerusalem” (Isa. ii:1-4). The One in the midst will 
be the object of worship and of praise. He shall be King 
over all the earth. ‘All kings shall fall down before Him; 
all nations shall serve Him” (Psa. Ixxii:11). 

And this glorious Lord is our Lord, our friend, our all! 
Well may faith shout for joy and look forward in happy 
anticipation to the day when we shall be with Him, who is 
“in the midst.” 

“Lord of Saints! Thy ransomed own, 
They the members—Thou the Head; 


Speed the great deliverance, 
First-Begotten of the dead. 


frescos 
t£o 


82 The Christ We Know 


King of Israel! Soon arise, 

And rebuild Thy Salem’s walls; 
Gather Jacob’s scattered flock; 

Hear Thine Israel when they call 


King of Glory! King of Heaven! 
King of earth! Arise and reign; 
All creation sighs for Thee; 
Visit Thine own earth again. 


King of Nations! claim this world 
With its kingdoms for Thine own, 
Raze each rebel fortress here. 
Level every hostile throne.” 


THE SON oF Davip 


A Reliea first title given to our Lord Jesus Christ in the 
New Testament is “the Son of David,’ and the last 

title mentioned in the Book of Revelation is “the root and 

offspring of David, the Bright and Morning Star.” 

It was a great moment in sacred history when David, the 
man after God’s own heart, sat in his house with God’s 
prophet Nathan at his side. The king confided in the 
prophet and expressed his desire to build a house for the 
Lord. Joyfully the prophet answered him with words of 
encouragement. “Go, do all that is in thine heart; for the 
Lord is with thee” (2 Sam. vii). Nathan had spoken of 
himself; it was not the Lord’s message. That night the 
Lord visited Nathan and gave him the message which he 
was to communicate to the king. Not David, according to 
the word from the Lord, was to build Him a house, but the 
Lord would make David a house. The Lord made a cove- 
nant with David, gave him great promises, the covenant 
and the promises of grace. All in that covenant and those 


The Son of David 83 


promises centers in David’s Son. ‘‘He shall build a house 
for my name, for I will establish the throne of His kingdom 
forever. I will be His Father and He shall be my Son. If 
He commit iniquity I will chasten Him with the rod of 
men, and with the stripes of the children of men. . . . And 
thine house and thy kingdom shall be established forever 
before thee; thy throne shall be established forever.” ‘That 
this does not mean Solomon, but Christ, the Son of God 
incarnate as the offspring of David, is obvious. But some 
one may ask, “How can the words concerning iniquity be 
applied to Christ?” “If He commit iniquity I will chasten 
Him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the chil- 
dren of men.” Unfortunately this verse has been badly 
translated. It has been properly rendered as follows: “In 
His suffering for iniquity, I will chasten Him with the rod 
due to men, and with the stripes due to the children of 
Adam.” / 

After David had listened to this gracious revelation, he 
went in and sat before the Lord. It seems that David had 
a special prayer room. Later, when his child was desperately 
ill, he went to that room; when his rebellious son Absalom 
had been killed, he went, lamenting his lost soul, to the 
same room. But now he went in to worship and to praise 
the Lord for His sovereign grace. He poured out his heart 
in giving thanks unto the Lord. One utterance is of great 
interest. David said, “And yet this was a small thing in 
Thine eyes, O God; for Thou hast also spoken of Thy ser- 
vant’s house for a great while to come, and hast regarded 
me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Lord 
God” (1 Chron. xvii:17). The last portion of this verse 
has been correctly translated by a Hebraist as follows: 
“Thou hast regarded me in the arrangement about the man 
who is to be from above.” The man from above is Christ. 


84 The Christ We Know 


David evidently knew that he should be through the grace 
of God the progenitor of the promised Messiah, the Re- 
deemer and King of Israel. He was a prophet and through 
him the Spirit of God revealed, as through no other instru- 
ment in Old Testament prophecy, the person, the work and 
the glory of Him who was to come from him according to 
the flesh (Rom. i:3). Peter on the day of Pentecost said of 
David, “Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God 
had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins, 
according to the flesh, He would raise up Christ to sit on 
his throne; he seeing this before spake of the resurrection of 
Christ, that His soul was not left in hades, neither His 
flesh did see corruption.” 

Nor did David speak only of His resurrection. He testi- 
fied of Him as the Son of God and the Son of Man, made 
a little lower than the angels, (Psa. ii, viii). He spoke of 
His holy life of faith and trust, and that His body should 
not see corruption (Psa. xvi). He saw beforehand His 
‘suffering, the suffering of the cross. In that great prophetic 
psalm, the twenty-second, he beheld Him on the cross, for- 
saken of God, as the sin-bearer. He spoke as a prophet of 
all the details of the crucifixion. Greater still are his proph- 
ecies concerning his greater Son in His kingship and King- 
dom. How marvellous are the predictions in the Forty- 
fifth and Seventy-second psalms! In the one hundred and 
tenth psalm, which our Lord quoted to His enemies and by 
which He silenced their questions, David speaks of Him 
who is His Son as his Lord, exalted to the right hand of 
God and destined to rule in Zion. Then there are many 
millennial prophecies in the psalms written by David 
through the Holy Spirit. These predict the glory, the peace, 
and the blessing which will prevail in His coming kingdom. 

In other portions of the Old Testament we hear of the 


The Son of David 85 


Son of David and of His Kingdom. “Behold, the days 
come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a right- 
eous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and shall 
execute judgment and justice in the earth. In His days 
Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this 
is the name whereby He shall be called, The Lord our 
Righteousness” (Jer. xxiii:5,6). ‘“Thus saith the Lord, if 
ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of 
the night, and that there should not be day and night in 
their season; then may also my covenant be broken with 
David my servant, that he should not have a son to reign 
upon his throne; and with the Levites the priests, my min- 
isters” (Jer. xxxiii:20,21). 

Therefore the first title which our Lord bears in the New 
Testament is the title, the Son of David (Matt. i:1). It 
could not be otherwise in the beginning of the first Gospel, 
which is the Gospel of the Kingdom, the Jewish Gospel. In 
this Gospel He is revealed as the promised King, who came 
as the minister of the circumcision and offered Himself as 
the Son of David. Both the King and the Kingdom were 
rejected by the nation, even as David and the prophets had 
also predicted. 

In the Gospel of Luke, the record which describes Him in 
His perfect manhood, we have the details of His birth. 
Joseph of the house of David was espoused to a virgin whose 
name was Mary. To this virgin of the house of David, 
living in poverty in Nazareth, the angel Gabriel came, an- 
nouncing to her that she was the favored one through whom 
the age-long promise should be accomplished. ‘“‘Fear not, 
Mary, for thou hast found favor with God. And, behold, 
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son, and 
shalt call His name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be 
called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give 


86 The Christ We Know 


unto Him the throne of his father David, and He shall 
reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of His kingdom 
there shall be no end” (Luke i:30-33). And when she had 
come to Bethlehem, the city of David, and brought forth 
her firstborn Son, her virgin-born Son, an angel of the Lord 
heralded the glad news to the shepherds who kept watch 
over their flock that night. He said unto them, “Fear not: 
for behold, I bring good tidings of great joy, which shall be 
to all people. For unto you is born this day in the city of 
David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord” (Luke ii:11). 
The promise made to David in the covenant of a thousand 
years ago had now been fulfilled. David’s Son and David’s 
Lord had come. 

He was known as the Son of David. The blind and the 
sick cried after Him, because they knew His power, ‘Have 
mercy on us, thou Son of David.” Even a Gentile woman 
addressed Him thus, the Syro-Phoenician. To her He did 
not answer a word, for she had no claim on Him under 
this title. Not till she addressed Him in faith as Lord did 
He grant her request. They watched His mighty deeds of 
power and mercy, so that “all the people were amazed, and 
said, Is not this the son of David?” (Matt. xii:23). It is 
the same as if they said, “Is not He the long promised King, 
who comes to bring us the kingdom, and take once more the 
throne of David?” And when He rode into Jerusalem, that 
it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet, 
“Behold thy King cometh unto thee,” the multitude that 
went before, and that followed after cried, ‘Hosanna to the 
Son of David,” and even the children cried in the temple, 
“Hosanna to the Son of David!” 

Yet Gabriel’s announcement to Mary concerning Him 
was only partly fulfilled. His name was called Jesus, as 
Gabriel had said. He was great and was called the Son of 


The Son of David 87 


the Highest, as Gabriel had said. The rest of his message 
is not fulfilled. The throne of His father David has not 
yet been His; nor does He reign over the sons of Jacob, the 
people Israel; nor has He His kingdom on earth, the king- 
dom into which all the nations are to be gathered. In other 
words, the great and many promises of the prophets of God 
concerning the Kingship and the Kingdom of the Messiah, 
the Son of David, await still their literal fulfillment. 

That is why the disciples asked the risen Son of David 
the question, “Wilt Thou at this time restore again the 
kingdom to Israel?” (Acts i:6). He did not tell them that 
they were mistaken, that their hope in a kingdom, such as 
is promised to the Son of David, which David beheld in 
visions, is a false hope. He said, “It is not for you to know 
the times or the seasons, which the Father hath put in His 
own power.” 

The day must come when He receives the throne of 
His father David. The day must come when “He shall 
have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth,’ when ‘‘His enemies shall lick the dust,” 
when “‘all nations shall serve Him’’ (Psa. lxxii). And the 
day will surely come, for God’s gifts and calling are with- 
out repentance, and His oath-bound covenant with David 
can not fail. The Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who 
was made of the seed of David according to the flesh, will 
receive the throne to which He is entitled, and with it He 
will receive the nations for His inheritance and the utter- 
most parts of the earth for His possession. 

From Acts xv:16 we learn that this will be accomplished 
with His personal return to this earth. He is at the right 
hand of God, upon the Father’s throne. This is not His 
permanent place, for He must have His own throne. When 
He comes again He will claim His crown rights. Christen- 


88 The Christ We Know 


dom thinks during the month of His first coming, that He 
was born in Bethlehem. But few think of His second com- 
ing in power and great glory. As David was once rejected 
and crownless, so He is uncrowned, as far as the world 
is concerned. But the crowning day is coming! ‘The day 
of His glory is not far away, when He will appear crowned 
with many crowns. 

His Church does not wait for Him in His coming as King 
to take the throne of David, but His Church waits for Him 
as her Lord and her Bridegroom. 

How soon that waiting may end! Then we shall all be 
gathered home and behold in glory how He, the Lion of 
the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, receives the seven- 
sealed book to begin His judgment work, which ends with 
His visible and glorious manifestation. Another year is 
gone, and as never before God’s own can say, ‘““The night 
is far spent, the day is at hand.” May we, then, be like 
men that wait for their Lord and have “‘our loins girt about 
and our lamps burning!” We know He will surely come, 
and that at a time when we think not. Even now He is at 
the door, for it is the fourth watch, and the root and off- 
spring of David, the bright and morning star, may soon 
arise. 


His KinGsHIpP 


NA eo the Lord Jesus Christ had revealed Himself 
to Nathaniel as the omniscient Lord, Nathaniel said, 
“Thou art the Son of God; Thou art the King of Israel” 
(John i:49). This Israelite in whom there was no guile 
belonged to that class of Jews of his day which waited 


His Kingship 89 


faithfully for the accomplishment of their national promises, 
that God would send them the promised Messiah-King. 
The Lord Jesus Christ, the Virgin-born Son of God, is that 
King; He came as the minister of the circumcision for the 
truth of God, to confirm the promises made unto the 
Fathers (Rom. xv:8). Before He was born His mother, 
the Virgin of Nazareth, received the promise of God com- 
municated by the angel Gabriel, that her Son, conceived 
by the Holy Spirit, should be a King. ‘The Lord God 
shall give unto Him the throne of His father David, and 
He shall reign over the house of Jacob forever and of His 
kingdom there shall be no end” (Luke i:32). 

The promises to Israel had reached beyond their own 
nation; the Gentiles knew of it and therefore a caravan of 
learned men came from the East to Jerusalem asking direc- 
tions to find “the new-born King of the Jews.” John the 
Baptist heralded Him as the King in whose person the 
promised Kingdom had come nigh. Being of the seed of 
David He was a King, entitled to the throne, and as King 
He manifested Himself in royal dignity and royal power, 
the power of God. The signs of the promised kingdom 
attended Him every step of the way. The blind saw, the 
deaf heard, the lame leaped, the dead were raised (Isa. 
xxxv). Many in Israel looked to Him as the promised 
King. At one time a large multitude gathered together. 
They had decided to take Him and crown Him King. He 
knew their desire was but a carnal one; He knew that the 
nation as such would not have Him; He knew that the 
cross would have to come before the crown, and suffering 
before glory. ‘‘When Jesus therefore perceived that they 
would come and take Him by force, to make Him a king, 
He departed again into a mountain by Himself alone” 
(John vi:15). Because He had been promised to Israel as 


90 The Christ We Know 


King, and the Word of God foresaw that they would reject 
Him as King, He had to come as King with the offer of 
that kingdom. Scripture had to be fulfilled. Therefore 
when He entered so triumphantly for the last time through 
the gates of Jerusalem the multitudes greeted Him with 
a mighty shout, saying, “Blessed be the King that cometh 
in the name of the Lord, peace in heaven and glory in the 
highest” (Luke xix:38). Then again it is written, “All 
this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken 
by the prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter of Zion, 
Behold, thy King cometh unto thee, meek, and sitting upon 
an ass, and a colt, the foal of an ass” (Matt. xxi:4, 5). 

A few days later, and we behold the promised King, the 
Son of David, hanging on the cross. A few hours before 
He had witnessed to His Kingship. The Roman had asked 
Him, “Art Thou a King then?” He answered, “Thou 
sayest that I am a King.” And Pilate said to the Jews, 
“Will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the 
Jews?” He knew that the Lord Jesus is the King. Then 
they mocked Him as King, put upon Him the purple robe 
and upon His head the crown of thorns. ‘Thus He was 
presented by the Roman Governor once more. “Behold 
your King!”” The cry came back from the howling mob 
of Jews, “Away with Him! Crucify Him!’ Because Pilate 
knew He was the King, he wrote a title, and put it on the 
cross. And the writing was “Jesus of Nazareth, the King 
of the Jews.” This title, then, read many of the Jews, for 
the place where Jesus was crucified was nigh to the city, 
and it was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latin. Then 
said the chief priests of the Jews to Pilate, “Write not the 
King of the Jews; but that He said, I am the King of the 
Jews. Pilate answered, What I have written I have 
written” (John xix:1, etc.). 


His Kingship gI 


He left the earth in resurrection glory without having 
received the Kingdom. He fills the Father’s throne, waiting 
patiently for His own throne and for the promised kingdom. 
Since He returned He has not received a kingdom, nor is 
there now on earth a kingdom forming for Him. 

But it is strange that while Scripture is so very clear on 
these matters that among those who profess to be Christians 
there should be so much ignorance and confusion. “Thou- 
sands upon thousands believe that the Church is the prom- 
ised Kingdom and that the Lord Jesus Christ is the King 
of the Church. They think that they are building up the 
kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ, by their own efforts, in 
Christian work and missionary activities, as well as other 
activities. As the process by the Gospel and the salvation 
of individuals seems to be too slow to some of the Modern- 
ists, who in fact do not believe in the Gospel at all, they 
advocate legislation and all kinds of social activities to estab- 
lish the kingdom more firmly. That foolish “Inter-Church 
World Movement” sent forth, in its days of reckless spend- 
ing of money and advertisement, promising that the king- 
dom would come in a day, if only enough money would 
come, to bring it in by “money power.” What awful 
blindness! 

The Church is not the Kingdom, nor is Christ the King 
of the Church. No well instructed believer who wants to 
conform in everything to the Word of God will call the 
Lord Jesus Christ “my King,” for the Holy Spirit never 
authorizes a child of God to address Him by this title. He 
is our Lord. It is true in Revelation xv:3 He is called 
“King of the Saints,” but as it has been proven long ago 
the correct rendering is ‘““King of the Nations.” As saved 
by His grace, washed in His most precious blood, accepted 
in Him the Beloved One, indwelt by His Spirit, joint-heirs 


92 The Christ We Know 


with Him, we are not the proper subjects of His kingdom, 
nor in the kingdom to be ruled over by Him. We are 
members of His body, we are with all His redeemed ones 
the espoused virgin to Christ, His bride, destined to be 
united with Him in the coming glory to share His glory 
and His Kingdom. This is our heavenly calling. ‘When it 
is realized we shall be sharers of His throne and reign with 
Him over the earth. 

In that glorious day when “He shall come to be glorified 
in His saints and to be admired in all them that believed” 
(2 Thess. i:10). He will receive the Kingdom, then the 
many unfulfilled promises of God’s Holy and infallible 
Lord will be fulfilled. Let us listen to them. 

In the Second Psalm, so often quoted in the New Testa- 
ment, we are told of what will precede the coming of His 
kingdom. It will not be a converted world, nor nations 
awaiting Him to crown Him Lord of all, but nations raging 
and imagining vain things, against God and against His 
Christ. It is the picture of our own times. But then God 
exclaims: “I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion. 
I will declare the decree: The Lord hath said unto me, 
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten Thee. Ask of 
me, and I will give Thee the nations for thine inheritance, 
and the uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession. 
Thou shalt break them with the rod of iron, Thou shalt 
dash them in pieces like a potter’s vessel.” For this He is 
waiting at the right hand of God. ‘The Lord said unto 
my Lord, Sit Thou at my right hand until I make Thine 
enemies Thy footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of 
Thy strength out of Zion; rule Thou in the midst of Thine 
enemies.” 

Then He will become the Prince of Peace and “of the 
increase of His Government and peace there shall be no 


His Kingship 93 


end, upon the throne of David and upon His kingdom, to 
order it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, 
from henceforth even forever” (Isa. ix:6, 7). And Jere- 
miah spoke, ‘“Thus saith the Lord, David shall never want 
a man to sit upon the Throne of Israel” (Jer. xxxiii:17). 
Who will it be? ‘Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, 
that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a 
King shall reign and prosper, and shall execute judgment 
and justice on the earth. In His days Judah shall be saved, 
and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is His name whereby 
He shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness’ (Jer. 
xxlii:5, 6). David saw His day and rejoiced, so that when 
the Spirit of God showed to him the kingdom He should 
have who is his Son and his Lord, he wrote that his prayers 
were ended (Psa. Ixxii). He had seen in holy vision that 
“In His days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of 
peace so long as the moon endureth. He shall have do- 
minion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the 
ends of the earth... . Yea all kings shall fall down before 
Him; all nations shall serve Him.” 

Several centuries later Zechariah, the great post-exilic 
prophet, bears still the same testimony as to the King, the 
Prince of Peace. “He shall speak peace unto the nations, 
and His dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the 
river [Euphrates] even to the end of the earth’ (Zech. 
ix:10). “And the Lord shall be King over all the earth. 
. . . And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left 
of all the nations which came against Jerusalem shall even 
go up from year to year to worship the King, the Lord of 
hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles” (Zech. xiv: 9, 
16). Israel will then behold Him, looking up on Him 
whom they pierced (Zech. xii:10). They will behold Him 
“the King in His beauty” (Isa. xxxiii}. He, the once 


94 The Christ We Know 


despised King, will in marvellous mercy redeem the remnant 
of His earthly people and restore their long lost inheritance. 
“Thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy 
land any more be termed desolate; but thou shalt be called 
Hephzibah, and thy land Beulah; for the Lord delighteth 
in thee, and thy land shall be married” (Isa. Ixii:4). “And 
righteousness shall be the girdle of His loins, and faithful- 
ness the girdle of His reins. ‘The wolf also shall dwell with 
the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid; and 
the calf and the young lion, and the fatling together; and 
a little child shall lead them. And the cow and the bear 
shall feed, their young ones shall lie down together, and 
the lion shall eat straw like the ox. And the sucking child 
shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall 
put his hand on the cockatrice den. They shall not hurt 
nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be 
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the 
sea” (Isa. xi:5-9). 

What folly then it is to expect the church to do all this 
“to bring in the kingdom” and to establish these wonderful 
blessings with many others we have not mentioned. Nothing 
of all we have quoted can be realized till that day comes 
when heaven opens once more and the silence of centuries 
is broken, when He appears whom the heavens received 
till the time of restitution of all things. He comes as the 
mighty victor upon the white horse and “He hath on His 
vesture and on His thigh a name written, King of kings 
and Lord of lords” (Rev. xix:16). Seven centuries before 
John beheld this vision in Patmos another one had seen 
the same. Daniel wrote these words, “I saw in the night 
visions and, behold, one like the Son of Man came with the 
clouds of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and 
they brought Him near before Him. And there was given 


The Morning Star 95 


Him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, that all people, 
nations, and languages should serve Him. His dominion is 
an everlasting dominion which shall not pass away and 
His kingdom that which shall not be destroyed’’ (Dan. 
vliz13, 14). 

And how this glorious event, this wonder of all wonders, 
His personal and glorious re-entrance into the world is 
nearing! We can almost hear His footsteps in the ever 
increasing signs of the times. But “our Hope’ is that 
blessed Hope, which precedes His visible manifestation, the 
fulfillment of 1 Thessalonians iv:16-18. For that blessed 
Hope we look. We shall not be disappointed. “For yet a 
little while, and He that shall come will come and will not 
tarry.” “Amen, Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” 


THE MORNING STAR 


EAUTIFUL sight! There in the eastern sky in the 

early morning that brilliant star! It is the ‘morning 
Star, the herald of the dawning day, the rising Sun in all 
his glory. Our Lord is both, the Morning Star and the 
Sun. At the close of the Old Testament Scriptures the 
coming day is announced that shall burn like an oven. The 
proud and the wicked shall be the stubble. In that day the 
Sun of righteousness arises with healing in His wings. This 
is His visible and glorious coming to judge the earth in 
righteousness, to bring peace to the nations and to establish 
His Kingdom. ‘The sunrise is for Israel and the nations, 
the breaking of the millennial day. At the close of the 
New Testament His own voice is heard. “I am the root 
and offspring of David, the bright and Morning Star.” As 


96 The Christ We Know 


soon as He announced Himself as the Morning Star there 
is an answer from the earth: “The Spirit and the Bride 
say, Come.” The Spirit is the Holy Spirit dwelling on earth 
in the members of the body of Christ; the Bride is the body 
of Christ, the Church. The word “come” is addressed to 
Him, the Morning Star, that He who has promised to come 
for His own may soon come. ‘The Morning Star is sym- 
bolical of His coming for His saints to take them home to 
glory. 

Surely the Morning Star will rise for the night cannot 
last forever; the morning must come. Surely He will keep 
His promise, in which we hope and trust, and come for us, 
His waiting people. Let us watch and wait. May it be 
true of all His people what David expressed: “My soul 
waiteth it the Lord more than they that watch for the 
morning” (Psa. cxxx:6). 

How often we have looked at the Morning Star in the 
eastern sky and then, with the thousands of His dear 
people prayed, O Lord Jesus, thou bright and Morning 
Star, Come! And what a day when the love-call is an- 
swered! What a sight when we see Him in all His glorious 
beauty! What a joy when earth’s sorrows end and heaven’ s 
portals swing open! 

“Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” 


(TT a) 


GLORIFIED’’? AND ‘‘ADMIRED”’ 


GC HEN He shall come to be glorified in His Saints, 

and to be admired in all them that believe (for 
our testimony among you was believed) in that day” (2 
Thess. i:10). ‘This is a most precious statement. It tells 


“Glorified” and “Admired” 97 


us of the coming glory of our Lord in that day of glory. 
In that day when He will be manifested in great power 
and glory, His glory will be visibly seen and the glory of 
the Lord will cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. 
He will appear, crowned with many crowns, as the mighty 
victor. What His Saints have prayed for and wished will 
come to pass. 

“Come, then, and added to Thy many crowns, 

Receive yet one, the crown of all the earth, 
Thou who alone art worthy. It was thine 
By ancient covenant, ere nature’s birth; 
And Thou hast made it thine by purchase since 
And overpaid its value in Thy blood.” 
—Cowper 

He who was once crowned with thorns in cruel mockery 
of His Kingship, will be crowned King of kings and Lord 
of lords. How great will then be His glory! In the day 
of His visible manifestation He will not find a subdued 
earth, Nations will not welcome Him as their king; but 
the kings of the earth under the leadership of the Beast, 
with their great armies will be gathered together to make 
war against Him (Rev. xix:19). Nor will there be a 
church on earth, loyal and true to Him, for when He comes. 
again He will not find the faith on earth (Luke xviii:8). 
He will find an apostate church, which He will spew com- 
pletely out of His mouth. Yet there will be a welcome for 
Him by the remnant of His earthly people Israel, waiting 
for Him, and rejoicingly they will greet Him with the 
prophetic utterance penned long ago by the Spirit of God, 
‘Blessed is He who cometh in the name of the Lord.” How 
great will then be His glory! Nations will have to ac- 
knowledge His authority; every mouth which spoke against 
Him will be forever silenced. Satan’s power and rule will 
end and the rule of righteousness and peace begins. 


98 The Christ We Know 


But His greatest joy and glory in that day will be His 
own redeemed Saints, the many sons He brings in glory with 
Himself. He will have with Him “the travail of His soul” 
and He will be satisfied, satisfied in His mighty love, when 
all His own are sharers of His glory and are transformed 
into His image. 

The Apostle Paul wrote of believers to whom he min- 
istered, whom he nourished in the Lord, “that they are 
his crown and joy. For what is our hope, or joy, or crown 
of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord 
Jesus Christ at His coming? For ye are our glory and 
joy’ (1 Thess. ii:19). In a higher sense the Saints are 
His glory, His joy, the crown of the Lord’s rejoicing in 
that day. 

Before that day of visible manifestation comes He will 
gave first gathered home His own. In the blessed hour, 
now so near, when He descends out of heaven with the 
promised shout, all who died in Christ will be raised from 
among the dead, and come forth with their resurrection 
bodies, and all the living believers will be changed, being 
clothed upon, without dying, with the promised glorious 
body. This is one of the blessed mysteries. ‘Behold I 
show you a mystery: We shall not all sleep, but we shall 
be changed, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at 
the last trump*; for the trumpet shall sound and the dead 
shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For 
this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal 
shall put on immortality” (1 Cor. xv:51, etc.). And then 
the meeting! It will take place not on the earth, but when 
the Lord comes for His Saints, as taught in the Word of 
God, He does not come down to earth, but the Saints go 
up to meet Him in the air. (1 Thess. iv:17.) He takes His 


*Not ‘the last trumpet of Revelation. 


“Glorified” and “Admired” 99 


true church away from the earth, before His visible man- 
ifestation, for several reasons. 

There is coming for this poor world a day of great 
tribulation, followed by the wrath of God. ‘That period 
with which the present age is to close will be punitive in 
character. How can true believers ever even be imagined 
in this time of trouble and judgments, when the Lord so 
beautifully prayed about them, ‘““They are not of the world, 
even as I am not of the world”? The fact is, the end of 
the age with its judgments cannot begin as long as the 
true church is on earth. For His own there is no more 
wrath and there are no judgments. And furthermore all 
His own must appear before the judgment seat of Christ 
(the award seat), to receive the rewards, the promised 
crowns of life and glory, to be fully made ready for the 
great and glorious manifestation day, when He and all His 
redeemed ones will appear in glory. ‘And to her (the 
church) was granted that she should be arrayed in fine 
linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the righteous- 
nesses of saints.” (Rev. xix:8.) While the earth will 
be visited by judgments and suffer as never before through 
Satan’s power, His own are in His presence, clothed, 
crowned and glorified. 

But what will it be “in that day’ when every eye shall 
see Him! Heaven will then open and He will be seen 
first as the mighty victor and the leader of His redeemed 
hosts. This is wonderfully shown in the Book of Rev- 
elation (Chapter xix:11-16). Symbolically, He is seen 
riding the white horse denoting victorious conquest, and 
He is followed by the armies which are in heaven; they 
too ride white horses, and these heavenly armies are clothed 
in fine linen, white and clean. The armies are the Saints, 
His own, who follow in His train. What a triumphal 


100 The Christ We Know 


march that will be! It will be the most wonderful, the 
most glorious demonstration ever seen. And “in that day” 
He will be glorified and admired in all them that believed. 
What this all means no finite mind can fully tell. We know 
that all who have believed will share His glory, for he 
prayed “‘the glory Thou hast given me I have given them.” 
It means that all will be like Him, for it is written, “We 
shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.” It means 
that each redeemed one will reflect His glory and shine out 
His glory. But what more it means, we will have to wait 
till that day cometh, to know and to understand. 

And that will be His glory. “Oh! that will be glory — 
for Him!” Sinners saved by grace, because He paid for 
their redemption; sinners kept by His grace and finally 
glorified with Him are His crown of glory and of joy. 
And He will also be admired, wondered at, because He 
has with Him the trophies of His great work. What He 
has done will then be seen in visible glory and will be dis- 
played before men on earth, before angels and demons. 

May the Lord by His Spirit ever keep before our hearts 
and minds this coming day of His glory and our glory, of 
His joy and our joy, so that we, His redeemed people, may 
be kept rejoicing even in the days of darkness. And oh! 
the joy! the day is fast approaching, the day when He will 
come to His own and when we shall be with Him. 


“GREATER THAN SOLOMON” 


ily yuaeaes a greater than Solomon is here” (Matt. 
x1i:42). The scribes and Pharisees had demanded a 
sign from Him. He spoke to them of Jonah and the sign 


“Greater Than Solomon” ‘IOI 


of Jonah. Then He added “a greater than Jonah is here.” 
He mentioned the queen of the South, who came to visit 
Solomon, and said “Behold, a greater than Solomon is 
here.” Nothing is said about what the scribes and Pharisees 
answered Him. We imagine they stood there with sneers 
on their lips, as they looked upon Him, who had said that 
foxes had holes, and birds nests, but He had not where to 
lay His head. ‘They looked upon Him, the man from 
Galilee, whom they called the son of Joseph, the carpenter. 
They knew He had been brought up in Nazareth, and 
can there come a good thing out of Nazareth? ‘The 
ignorance of the people of Nazareth was proverbial in that 
day. And this Nazarene said that He is greater than Solo- 
mon! How they must have sneered. Perhaps they thought 
He was beside Himself, as some of His friends thought He 
was (Mark iii:21). Certain German infidel critics have 
used this statement to point out that it evidenced a mind 
not well balanced, while others uttered worse blasphemies. 

But the words which are a stumbling block to the wise; 
that is, those who are wise in their own conceit, to the 
scribes, the Pharisees and the Sadducees, are for us who 
believe and who know Him, words of beauty, which tell 
out the dignity and glory of His matchless person. When 
He said that He is greater than Solomon, we know that it 
is the truth, and we find in this claim food for our souls. 

Solomon was great in many respects. We do not err 
when we say that in him and his kingdom, Israel had 
reached the climax in glory and splendor. No king ever 
sat on David’s throne possessing such greatness as Solomon. 

He possessed great wisdom. It was wisdom which he 
did not possess in himself, for it was given to him in answer 
to prayer; because he had cast himself on the Lord as a 
helpless young man, who acknowledged his ignorance and 


102 The Christ We Know 


weakness. ‘Then when he had asked for a wise heart the 
Lord said, “Behold, I have done according to thy words; 
lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart; 
so that there was none like thee before thee, neither after 
thee shall any arise like unto thee” (1 Kings iii:12). His 
wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the wise men of the East, 
and surpassed all the wisdom of Egypt, which was then 
at its best. It is expressly stated that Solomon was wiser 
than all men, than Ethan, Heman, Chalcol and Darda 
(1 Kings iv:30, 31). All the nations round about heard of 
his great wisdom. He was a great poet, for he spake three 
thousand proverbs and his songs were one thousand and 
five. He knew and understood God’s creation, for he spoke 
of trees, from the tall cedar of Lebanon unto the small 
hyssop that grows out of the wall; beasts, fowls, creeping 
things and fishes were known to him also (verse 33). Ac- 
cording to an ancient book, ““The Wisdom of Solomon,” he 
had knowledge of astronomy, geology, the natures of the 
wild beasts, the forces of spirits, the thoughts of men, the 
medicinal qualities of plants and roots. Jewish tradition 
says that he could even converse with the wild beasts. 

When therefore a great queen, the queen of Sheba, came 
to prove him with hard questions, Solomon satisfied her 
“and told her all her questions; there was not anything hid 
from the king, which he told her not.” Then she was over- 
whelmed with astonishment and said, “It was a true report 
that I heard in mine own land of thy acts and thy wisdom. 
Howbeit I believed not the words, until I came, and mine 
eyes had seen it, and behold the half was not told me; thy 
wisdom and prosperity exceedeth the fame which I heard.” 
Such was Solomon’s great wisdom. 

Far greater than Solomon is the Lord Jesus Christ. He 
had no need to ask for wisdom, Solomon asked for it, 


“Greater Than Solomon” 103 


for He is Wisdom personified. When Solomon penned 
the eighth chapter of Proverbs, he spoke by the Spirit of 
Him, who stood in the synagogue and said, “A greater one 
than Solomon is here.” He is the Wisdom, set up from 
everlasting ; who was there when the heavens were prepared. 
It is the Son of God, called Wisdom, who speaks thus— 
“TI was by Him, as one brought up with Him and I was 
daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him.” Even as 
a boy He was filled with wisdom (Luke ii:40). Because 
He is God He was even in His humiliation omniscient. 
The disciples confessed it when they said “Thou knowest all 
things.” He knew what Solomon did not know, the 
thoughts of men. He knew every secret, whether it was the 
plottings of His enemies, or the troubles of those who fol- 
lowed Him. He had greater wisdom than Solomon for He 
made known the eternal counsels of the Godhead, revealed 
the unseen Father in His attributes, spoke the words of 
eternal life, so that even His enemies confessed that never 
did man speak as He spoke. Ever since He spoke His 
words of wisdom and life, in every generation, these words 
have been studied, searched and explained by some of the 
master-minds of the human race, but they have never been 
exhausted; they will never be exhausted. The last word 
of His words of wisdom will never be spoken. Heaven and 
earth will pass away, but His words will never pass away. 

Solomon had wisdom in God’s creation, but it was a 
limited knowledge. ‘The Lord Jesus Christ is greater than 
Solomon, because by Him and for Him were all things 
created. He knows the mysteries of all creation, the mys- 
teries of the heavens above and of the depths of the earth 
and the sea below. While Solomon knew about the fishes, 
he had not the power to command a fish to carry a coin 
and then bring that fish to Peter’s hook. Solomon probably 


104 The Christ We Know 


had wisdom about the storms, the sea and the weather 
(Eccles. i:6), but he could not command the wind and the 
sea, so that the storm was suddenly changed into a calm. 
While Solomon knew something about nature, the Lord 
Jesus had a perfect knowledge of all nature; and more 
than that, He had power over nature. 

Solomon's greatness also consisted in riches. His riches 
were inherited and also given to him. He had inherited 
immense riches from his father David, but there was also 
great wealth given to him. Hiram, the king of Tyre, gave 
him a fortune in valuable timber and all the gold he desired. 
The gold amounted to six score talents, in our money about 
three million dollars. But in 1 Kings x:14 we read “Now, 
the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was 
six hundred threescore and six talents of gold,” about twenty 
million dollars. The queen of Sheba’ also gave him one 
hundred and twenty talents of gold, besides a great store 
of spices and precious stones. The wealth of Solomon must 
have exceeded that of every contemporary monarch. 

But in comparison with the Lord Jesus Christ Solomon 
was but a pauper. 

He is greater than Solomon in His riches. The silver 
and gold of all the world are His. All the wealth of crea- 
tion is His. As the head of the new creation, the glorified 
Man Christ Jesus was made by His Father the heir of all 
things. ‘This includes more than the planet on which man 
lives, the earth. This includes more than all the riches, 
seen and unseen, deposited in and on the earth. It includes 
the universes. It includes every one of the billions of stars, 
every solar system, the depths of the heavens and its tenants, 
depths beyond the ken of the finite creature. Solomon 
with all his earthly riches fades into insignificance before 
Him who is greater than Solomon. 


“Greater Than Solomon” 105 


When Hiram and the queen of Sheba brought their 
presents to the feet of Solomon, it was but a faint pro- 
phetic picture of what will happen on this earth some future 
day. The true Solomon, the Prince of Peace, will receive, 
when He comes again, the throne of His father David. 
Then all kings will fall down before Him, all nations shall 
serve Him. ‘To Him shall be given the gold of Sheba, the 
kings of Tarshish and all the isles shall bring presents. All 
nations will worship and adore Him, and all nations will 
call Him blessed (Psa. Ixxii). 

Solomon was great as a King and as a Judge. He had 
great glory. We let the divine record speak. “The king 
made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the best 
gold. The throne had six steps, and the top of the throne 
was round behind, and there were stays on either side on 
the place of the seat, and two lions stood beside the stays. 
And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the 
other upon the six steps; there was not the like made in any 
kingdom. And all king Solomon’s drinking vessels were 
of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of 
Lebanon were of pure gold, none were of silver, it was 
nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon... . So king 
Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth for riches and 
for wisdom” (1 Kings x:18-23). Upon the throne he ruled 
in righteousness and in peace. The wisdom of God was in 
him to do judgment (1 Kings iii:28). “And Judah and 
Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his 
fig tree, from Dan even to Beer-sheba, all the days of Solo- 
mon (1 Kings iv:25). 

But the glory of his kingdom did not last and the wise 
man with all his wisdom, the great king with all his glory, 
became the fool he had pictured in his proverbs. ‘Fhe 
glorious kingdom passed away and disaster followed upon 


106 The Christ We Know 


Solomon’s sin. The promises made to David were not 
realized in Solomon, but will be realized in Him who, ac- 
cording to the flesh, is the son of David. He is greater than 
Solomon in His coming Kingdom and in His righteous rule 
as Prince of Peace over the nations of the earth. 

His throne will be more glorious than Solomon’s throne. 
While the coming King will have His throne on earth, He 
has also His throne in the New Jerusalem. Then will be 
fulfilled what is written in the last verse of the first chapter 
in the Gospel of John: ‘The angels of God will ascend and 
descend upon the Son of Man.” While Solomon built a 
wonderful house of the Lord, He who is greater than Solo- 
mon will build a more glorious temple. “He shall build the 
temple of the Lord, and He shall bear the glory, and shall 
sit and rule upon His throne, and He shall be a priest upon 
His throne” (Zech. vi:13). His judgments will be greater 
than Solomon’s. ‘He shall judge the people with righteous- 
ness, and thy poor with judgment. ... He shall judge the 
poor of the people. He shall save the children of the needy, 
and shall break in pieces the oppressor. . . . In His days 
shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace so long 
as the moon endureth” (Psa. Ixxii). 

Yes, our Lord Jesus Christ, our Redeemer, our Friend, 
to whom we belong, is greater than Solomon, and when the 
day arrives which will demonstrate all His greatness and 
reveal all His glory, we shall share in His glorious kingdom. 


THE Empty THRONE 


HE greatest message carried from heaven to earth is 
the message which the angel Gabriel brought to the 
Virgin of Nazareth. ‘‘Fear not, Mary, for thou hast found 


The Empty Throne — 107 


favour with God. And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy’ 
womb, and bring forth a Son, and shalt call his name Jesus. 
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the High- 
est; and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of 
His Father David; and he shall reign over the house of 
Jacob forever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.” 
(Luke i:30-33.) 

The promised One was born of the Virgin. His name 
was Jesus; He was great and was called the Son of the 
Highest. Every word has come true to the very letter. But 
what about the second half of this angelic message? Has 
the Lord God given to Him the throne of His Father 
David, does He reign over the house of Jacob now? Has 
He a kingdom? None of these things have come to pass. 
He does not sit upon the throne of David, nor does He 
reign over the house of Jacob, nor has He received the 
kingdom from God’s hand. 

Let us see what the Word of God has to say about that 
throne, the throne of David, what it has to say concerning 
the kingdom. The Person and work of Israel’s Messiah, 
our Lord Jesus Christ, is the subject of all prophecy. The 
Spirit of Christ testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, 
and the glory that should follow (1 Peter i:11). The 
sufferings of Christ, the rejection of Christ, the Cross of 
Christ, the resurrection of Christ are blessedly pre-written 
in the Old ‘Testament. Equally so the glory of Christ, His 
kingly throne and His Kingdom, are revealed by the proph- 
ets. Ihe golden line of royalty is even more marked in 
the Holy Scriptures than the red line of His atoning work. 

Melchisedec, the King of righteousness and peace, the 
priest of the Most High is a type of King-Messiah. So is 
Joseph in His exaltation. Dying Jacob spoke of Him, as 
the Shiloh of Judah to whom the gathering of the people 


108 The Christ We Know 


is to be. Balaam, the unwilling prophet, had to testify of 
Him, as the sceptre rising out of Israel, smiting the nations, 
that this One out of Israel shall have dominion. (Num. 
xxiv:17-19.) And Balaam also said, looking upon the camp 
of Israel, “The Lord His God is with him, and the shout 
of a king is among them.” ‘The Lord as King was in the 
midst of His people; His kingly glory dwelt in their midst. 
When later they demanded a king like other nations, the 
Lord told grieving Samuel, “They have not rejected thee, 
but they have rejected me, that I should not be king over 
them.” (1 Sam. viii.) 

Then He gave them a king such as they desired. Saul is 
the picture of the world’s last king, yet to come. After that 
the Lord chose His king, the man after His own heart, ob- 
scure, small, despised David. And Saul persecuted God’s 
anointed, tried to kill him, but could not touch the life of 
David. The conflict ends. Saul is overthrown; God’s king 
is enthroned and rules over all Israel. After that David 
desired to build the Lord a house, but that night Nathan 
received a message from God, that He would build David 
a house. He makes in infinite grace a covenant with David, 
concerning a Son who is to have a kingdom and a throne. 
That promised Son is He, who came from his loins and 
who is His lord as well. It is Christ. David’s son Solo- 
mon received the kingdom after David. He reigns in peace. 
He builds the house. Glory is seen on all sides; Gentiles 
from afar come to him. But it all ends in degradation of 
the king and the collapse of his famous kingdom. ‘The 
reign of Solomon demonstrates two facts. It is a faint type 
of the reign of the true Prince of Peace, He who is greater 
than Solomon and the Davidic covenant was not fulfilled in 
Solomon; another Son of David must get the throne of his 
father David and the promised world-wide kingdom. 


The Empty Throne 109. 


What visions the Holy Spirit gave to David concerning 
Him who is to have His throne and the kingdom He will 
get! The Spirit of God sweeps across the strings of his harp 
and he sings by revelation of that King and the glories of 
His kingdom. Listen to him! In the Second Psalm he 
sings of the King to be enthroned upon the holy hill of 
Zion, receiving the nations for his inheritance and the utter- 
most parts of the earth for His possessions. Then He sings 
again of Him as Son of Man, made a little lower than the 
angels, under whose feet all things are to be put. He de- 
scribes His glorious coming with the portals of heaven 
swinging open (Psa. xxiv). In the Forty-fifth Psalm the 
King is seen to execute judgment and to receive His throne, 
while in the Seventy-second Psalm His great and glorious 
kingdom, with all nations at His feet and kings doing Him 
homage, is wonderfully revealed. ‘Thus David sang in the 
Spirit of the king who is to fill his throne and receive the 
kingdom. 

And the Prophets! From Isaiah to Malachi we hear 
their continued testimony of that coming King to fill David’s 
throne. He is the King of Righteousness, the Prince of 
Peace. He will bring deliverance for Israel and regather 
His people. Nations will turn their swords into plow- 
shares; He will speak peace to them. He will rule over the 
nations in righteousness and His glory will cover the earth, 
so that the whole earth will be filled with His glory. Crea- 
tion itself will be blessed by the King when He occupies the 
promised throne. Such, and much more is the testimony 
of the Prophets, the holy men of God, who spake as they 
were moved by the Holy Spirit. 

The promised Son of David came. The angel’s message 
tells us that it is He who was born of the Virgin in Bethle- 
hem. When we open therefore our New Testament we 


-IIO The Christ We Know 


have in the first Gospel the picture of the King. His legal 
title to the throne of David is established. Gentiles come 
from afar seeking not a Saviour, but the new-born King of 
the Jews. A herald announceth His coming and the near- 
ness of His kingdom. The King appears and utters His 
royal proclamation in the sermon of the mount. That He 
is the King He manifests by His many miracles. The whole 
land hears the good news of the Kingdom. His messengers 
_were not sent to the Samaritans and to the Gentiles, but only 
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Everywhere the 
kingdom message is heard, “Repent, for the Kingdom of 
heaven is at hand!” He is David’s Son; the promised 
throne belongs to Him and His is the kingdom. And as His 
disciples asked Him to teach them how to pray He put as the 
first petition, ““Thy kingdom come.” What else did these 
Jewish disciples understand by this petition than the King- 
dom of which the Prophets so fully testified. But will the 
nation accept Him? Is He now to have the throne? He 
rides into Jerusalem for the last time. They cry before Him 
“Hosannah to the Son of David!”—“Blessed is the King 
of Israel who cometh in the name of the Lord.” All this 
was done that it might be fulfilled—‘Behold, thy king 
cometh unto thee.” 

And then His rejection. What the Prophets also fore- 
saw came to pass. No throne for Him, but the Cross! They 
do not want this man to reign over them. They put Him 
into the hands of the Gentiles. When Pilate reminds them 
of His Kingship they answered, “We have no King save 
Cesar.” And Pilate asked Him, “Art Thou a King then?” 
And he answered, “Thou sayest that I am a King.” His 
ewn people after that demanded the release of Satan’s man, 
Barabbas, and the crucifixion of their King. The awful 
choice is made. No throne for the King, the cross instead! 


The Empty Throne II! 


And after that the mockery; the platted crown, the purple 
robe, the frail reed, the marred visage! And all to mock 
His Kingship. We see Him on the cross, with the inscrip- 
tion which no hand could remove, “Jesus of Nazareth, 
the King of the Jews.” 

The throne is empty, and ever since the throne has been 
empty, and He who alone can fill the throne is rejected. 
The cry of the beginning of the age, is the cry of the end 
of the age, ‘“We do not want this man to reign over us!” 
Christ the King is no more wanted today than He was 
wanted when they chose Barabbas. ‘The world does not 
want Him; the world hates Him! 

The throne is empty. All the world’s misery, its want, 
its horrors, sorrows, sufferings, all the disorder, chaos and 
every other evil has its source in the rejection of Christ. 
As long as that throne is empty and not occupied by the 
Lord Jesus Christ, earth’s sorrows will continue, wars will 
continue; unrighteousness will rule; no permanent peace 
and no better world can come. ‘The world is even now 
tasting the bitter fruits of its unbelief; man is reaping the 
sorrowful harvest of the rejection of Christ. But the empty 
throne will not remain empty forever. The Throne which 
belongs to our Lord will be filled by Him. But who will 
put Him on that throne? Not man. Not the Jews! Not 
the nations! Not even professing Christendom. But it is 
written, “The Lord God shall give unto Him the throne of 
His father David.” God will enthrone His blessed Son. 
He will come back to earth again to receive the throne and 
the Kingdom. He will set Him upon the holy hill of Zion; 
He will give Him the nations for His inheritance. 

And when He fills the throne and rules with His Saints 
over the earth all will be changed. The night of sin and 


112 The Christ We Know 


death will be gone; the morning of glory breaks, the be- 
ginning of the Lord’s day, when the nightmare of horror, 
anarchy, war, famine and pestilence is forever banished. 

Oh! that the King might come back! It is the only Hope 
for the world. And with rejoicing, we His redeemed peo- 
ple may look forward to that day when the empty throne 
will be filled; for then we too shall occupy the throne with 
Him, “Even so, come, Lord Jesus,” 


“Wr Have SEEN THE LorRD” 


Cc E HAVE seen the Lord” (John xx:25). Such 

was the joyful message of the disciples after the 
Lord in resurrection glory had been in their midst. The 
doors of that room were shut for fear of the Jews, when 
suddenly “Jesus came and stood in the midst and said, Peace 
be unto you.” What joy theirs must have been when they 
went forth from that meeting with the testimony, “We have 
seen the Lord.” It was not the first time that the Lord of 
Creation had been seen by human eyes, nor was it the last 
time. ‘The manifestations of the Lord past, present and 
future, is an interesting theme which may be traced through- 
out the entire Word of God. ‘They may be grouped in 
seven distinct manifestations. 

1. The manifestation in Old Testament times. He 
walked in the garden and talked with Adam and his wife. 
He came to Abraham in the form of a creature and paid 
him a visit in the tent at Mamre. The Angel of Jehovah, 
appearing to the Patriarchs, to Moses, Joshua, Manoah and 
his wife, to Gideon and others was the Lord Himself. He 
appeared many times on earth, visiting chosen ones, mani- 


“We Have Seen the Lord” 114 


festing His grace and mercy, as well as executing judgment. 
All these manifestations foreshadowed His incarnation and 
His work. 

2. His visible manifestation in Incarnation. ‘The Lord, 
the Son of God, whose name is, Wonderful, Counsellor, 
the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of 
Peace (Isa. ix:6) took on the creature’s form and walked 
among men. “And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt 
among us, and we beheld His glory, the glory as of the only 
begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth” (John 
i:14). And beautiful is that other testimony of the Holy 
Spirit given through the beloved disciples. ‘That which 
was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we 
have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and 
our hands have handled, of the Word of life; for the life 
was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and 
show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father, 
and was manifested unto us” (1 John i:1, 2). The Cre- 
ator appeared on earth in the creature’s form. ‘The true 
God and the eternal life was manifested among men. And 
He finished the great work the Father gave Him to do, 
when He sent His Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 

3. His manifestation in Resurrection Glory. He came 
forth from the grave and appeared to His disciples. ‘He 
was seen of, Cephas, then of the twelve; after that, He was 
seen of above five hundred brethren at once; of whom the 
greater part remain unto this day, but some are fallen asleep. 
After that He was seen of James; then of all the Apostles.” 
Thus wrote the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians (1 Cor. 
xv:5-7). They beheld Him after His passion and knew it 
was the same Lord Jesus with whom they had talked and 
walked during the days of His humiliation, who had been 
crucified and was buried. He ascended upon high, where 


114 The Christ We Know 


God gave Him glory (1 Peter i:21). Stephen saw Him in 
that glory. So did Saul of Tarsus on the road to Damascus 
and John in the isle of Patmos. We also who believe on 
Him see Him with the eyes of faith in that glory. “We 
see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for 
the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor” (Heb. 
. i:9). “Whom having not seen, ye love, in whom, though 
now ye see Him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with joy 
unspeakable and full of glory” (1 Peter i:8). We know 
that He liveth in the highest glory. We enjoy His fellow- 
ship, we feel His power and His love in our lives. He 
heareth and answereth our prayers. 

4. The coming manifestation to His Redeemed. “Beloved, 
now are we the children of God, and it doth not yet appear 
what we shall be; but we know that, when He shall appear, 
we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is” (1 John 
ili:2). “We shall see Him as He is” this is the blessed, 
glorious goal of every Christian. To this we look forward; 
for this we long and pray. Nothing thrills the believer’s 
heart so much as this promise, “We shall see Him as He is.” 
What a sight it will be, when all the Saints of God are 
caught up in clouds to meet the Lord in the air! What a 
meeting that will be! And what a blessed, glorious moment 
when we shall gaze in His face for the first time. Face to 
face with Him who died for us, whose grace kept us and 
whose power brought us into the Father’s house. And 
when we shall see Him we shall be like Him, “conformed 
to the image of His Son, that He might be the first born 
among many brethren” (Rom. viii:29). What a precious, 
blessed Hope is ours! 

5. His visible and glorious manifestation to execute judg- 
ment and to receive the kingdom. His own will meet Him 
in the air and will be led by Him into the Father’s house. 


“We Have Seen the Lord” 115 


We shall see Him in a way as the world can never behold 
Him. But it is also written, ‘““Behold, He cometh with 
clouds, and every eye shall see Him, and they also which 
pierced Him, and all kindreds of the earth shall wail because 
of Him. Even so, Amen” (Rev. i:7). Such a visible com- 
ing He promised Himself (Matt. xxiv:29, 30). “And I 
looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud sat 
one like unto the Son of Man, having on His head a golden 
crown, and in His hand a sharp sickle” (Rev. xiv:14). 
Startling will it be when a world which rejected Him 
seeth Him coming back to earth again, crowned with many 
crowns. Israel will see Him then and own Him as Messiah 
and King. ‘Their house will no longer be left desolate. 
Then He will smite the earth with judgment and rule the 
nations with a rod of iron, while His power transforms this 
earth and righteousness reigns. 

6. His manifestation during the coming age. With His 
second, visible and glorious coming a new age begins for 
the earth and those who dwell on the earth. The Church 
is no longer on earth but is with Him in the heavenly Jeru- 
salem above the earth. But nations are on the earth as well 
as His people Israel. Jerusalem will be the capital of His 
world-wide kingdom, the city of a great king. The mani- 
festation of Himself and His glory will take place during 
that age when He is enthroned as King. Jerusalem and 
Mount Zion will be covered by His visible glory. He will 
be seen in His glory by human eyes. “Thine eyes shall see 
the king in His beauty” (Isa. xxxiii:17). The angels of 
God will ascend and descend upon the Son of Man (John 
i:51). The nations shall go up from year to year to Jeru- 
salem to worship the king, the Lord of hosts, and to keep 
the feast of tabernacles (Zech. xiv:16). “Yea, all kings 
shall fall down before Him, all nations shall serve Him” 


116 The Christ We Know 


(Psa. Ixxti:11). It seems at a stated time the King of 
Glory will appear in Jerusalem to receive the worship and 
homage of the Kings of the earth. His throne will be 
established upon the earth and over the earth. He shall 
reign and we with Him. 


7. An eternal Vision. Forever with the Lord. “And 
they shall see His face, and His name shall be in their fore- 
heads” (Rev. xxii:4). The fellowship of the Saints on 
earth is with the Lord Jesus Christ and this fellowship into 
which God hath called us will never end. We shall see 
His face from eternity to eternity. We shall be forever 
with Him, forever like Him, forever receiving the surpas- 
sing riches of God’s kindness, forever sharing all He has 
and He possesses. 


Thus He will be seen by all His creatures. The Re- 
deemed of all ages will see Him in Glory. His enemies 
will see the Lord, every knee must bow and every tongue 
confess (Phil ii:10, 11). The nations of the earth will see 
Him; Israel will behold Him and look upon Him whom 
they pierced. ‘The unsaved, the lost, will see Him when 
He occupies the great white throne. His coming is what 
this poor world needs) May we His people pray daily 
“Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” Ours is the first vision 
promised. | 


“O blessed hour! when all the earth, 
Its rightful heir shall yet receive; 
When every tongue shall own His worth 
And all creation cease to grieve. 


Thou, dearest Saviour! Thou alone 
Canst give Thy weary people rest; 
And, Lord, till Thou art on the throne, 

This groaning earth can ne’er be blest.” 


THE REVELATION OF THE LORD FROM HEAVEN 


if IS a solemn and a blessed message the Holy Spirit sent 

to the suffering Christians in Thessalonica to comfort 
and cheer their hearts. In the second epistle the Apostle 
sent to them we find that message: “And to you who are 
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed 
from heaven with His mighty angels, in flaming fire taking 
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the 
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with 
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and 
from the glory of His power; when He shall come to be 
glorified in His saints and to be admired in all them that 
believe (because our testimony among you was believed) 
in that day” (2 Thess. i:7-10). 

Here we have the solemn announcement that the Lord 
Jesus will be revealed from heaven. It will be “in that 
day.” ‘This is the day which God’s prophets in olden times 
saw in their visions and so often mentioned in their inspired 
messages. It is the day on which the long silent heavens 
will break their silence, when He who was on earth, who 
died and rose from the dead and who fills now the throne 
of God, will be manifested once more. It is a far different 
event from that which the Holy Spirit describes in the First 
Epistle to the Thessalonians. “There also He bears witness 
to the coming of our Lord. What we find in that grand 
and solitary revelation given to console the sorrowing hearts 
of the Thessalonians precedes the visible and glorious ap- 
pearing of the Lord Jesus from heaven. ‘‘For the Lord 
Himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God; and 
the dead in Christ shall rise first. ‘Then we which are 
alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in 


117 


118 The Christ We Know 


clouds, to meet the Lord in the air; and so shall we ever be 
with the Lord” (1 Thess. iv:17, 18). These are familiar 
words. But we do not err if we remind ourselves of them 
again and again. What is promised in this blessed revela- 
tion will also be fulfilled. And how often we forget these 
words, or mourn over the fact that while we know them, 
we lack the reality and power of this wonderful destiny 
Grace has bestowed upon us. The Lord Himself will 
descend from heaven to call His beloved saints to gather 
to Him. He will meet us in heaven’s appointed meeting 
place; not somewhere on this earth, but in the air. We 
shall meet Him and see Him in His Glory. Nothing is said 
in connection with this blessed event, the coming of the Lord 
for His saints, of angels with flaming fire. Not a word is 
written in this message of the homegoing of His redeemed 
people, of vengeance and judgment. All we read in this 
precious statement is, that He comes Himself, that together 
with the risen saints we shall be caught up in the clouds, 
that we shall meet the Lord in the air and be forever with 
Him. 
Before the visible manifestation of the Lord Jesus as 
the righteous Judge over this earth can take place, He must 
have called His own to Himself. It is after this wonderful, 
indescribable event has occurred, and after the days of 
appointed tribulation, so fully pictured in the last book of 
the Bible, that the glorious manifestation of the Lord Jesus 
will come. This “Apokalupsis,” unveiling of the Lord Jesus 
in His glory, and what is connected with it, is described in 
the verses we have quoted from Paul’s Second Epistle to the 
Thessalonians. ‘Three things stand out prominently: 
1. The revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven with 
His mighty angels. ‘This will be the most startling occur- 
rence in the history of the human race. It will be far greater 


The Revelation of the Lord from Heaven 119 


than His first Coming. Then the angel of the Lord ap- 
peared over the field of Bethlehem and the Glory of the 
Lord shone about them, while the multitude of the heavenly 
host praised God and uttered their great message. He was 
not seen in person; the angel but announced that He had 
taken on the creature’s form. When He is revealed from 
heaven He will come in person, “this same Jesus” (Acts 
i:11); “in the clouds of heaven with power and great glory” 
(Matt. xxiv:30). A darkened sun will add to this won- 
derful sight, when the Son of Man is thus revealed. Not 
just a few shepherds will behold the glory of the Lord, but 
He will be seen in all His majesty and glory by every eye. 
“Behold, He cometh with clouds; and every eye shall see 
Him” (Rev. i:7). “And I looked, and behold a white 
cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like unto the Son of Man 
having on His head a golden crown, and in His hand a 
sharp sickle” (Rev. xiv:14) ; “His eyes as a flame of fire and 
on His head many crowns” (Rev. xix:12). His mighty 
angels will be with Him. Angels are to be seen again. 
They were associated with Him while He was on earth. 
They ministered unto Him (Mark i:23); an angel came to 
Him in Gethsemane (Luke xxii:43) ; they were present at 
His resurrection and His ascension. But the larger mani- 
festation of the angels comes with His visible revelation 
from heaven. His mighty and holy angels will be with 
Him. They will attend His triumphal return as wor- 
shippers (Heb. i:6; Psalm xcvii:7). They will execute His 
judgments (Matt. xiii:39-41; xxiv:31). What a glorious 
sight that will be when these marvellous tenants of heaven 
appear! 

2. The execution of the vengeance of God and punish- 
ment of the ungodly. ‘This will be one of the purposes of 
His manifestation. While the redeemed have rest those 


120 The Christ We Know 


who troubled them will now be dealt with by the Lord. 
The statement, “and to you who are troubled rest with us,” 
does not mean that only then when He is manifested be- 
lievers will enter into rest. The Saints receive their com- 
plete deliverance and rest when He comes with the shout 
and we are caught up to meet Him. “In that day we 
shall be at rest while the wicked will find themselves in 
tribulation. The Lord will manifest against them His 
retributive justice. This change of condition is not men- 
tioned as though it were only accomplished at the Lord’s 
appearing; but the words by which it is expressed show 
what will be the respective condition of saints and un- 
believers at that moment.” Those who will be punished 
are described. Two classes are mentioned. Those who 
know not God and those that obey not the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. The first class includes all who refused 
the knowledge of God and lived on in sin, while the second 
class are those who heard the Gospel preached and rejected 
the Gospel. In disobedience they turned their backs upon 
the greatest message God ever gave to this world. One 
hears often the hope mentioned that people living now who 
hear the Gospel and do not accept it, will have another 
chance to believe during the great tribulation period. But 
there is no Scripture for such a hope. 2 Thessalonians 
11:10, II is against it. ‘The mass of people who reject the 
Gospel and harden their hearts will ere long be hardened 
and follow the delusion of the Man of Sin. 

What a judgment it will be when He comes! It is the 
person of Christ whom they reject, and now the rejected 
One, whom they would not, appears in all His glory. Every 
mouth will then be stopped. All the arguments about Him 
will be ended and they must face Him, through whom 
God spoke once to their hearts in love, and now He speaks 


The Revelation of the Lord from Heaven 121 


to them in His wrath. What a terror will strike ‘the 
ungodly, the deniers and rejecters of His Gospel, His per- 
son and His blood, when they behold Him! 

3. The Glory of Christ as revealed in His Saints. God 
brings with Him all His beloved, redeemed people. He 
brings His many sons in glory. He will be the leader of 
the redeemed host. All the Saints will follow Him in this 
great manifestation. Each will reflect His own glory. 
The holy union and close identification which exists between 
Him and those for whom He died, a union which we now 
contemplate in faith, will then be outwardly demonstrated. 
“When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye 
also appear with Him in glory” (Col. iii:4). His word He 
spoke once in the Father’s presence will then be seen accom- 
plished. “The glory which Thou hast given me I have 
given them” (John xvii:21). The great masterpiece of 
God accomplished in His Son will then be displayed in all 
its marvellous beauty and glory. Every Saint will be con- 
formed to the image of the Firstborn among many brethren. 
Glory beyond description, and even our present comprehen- 
sion, will cover the Saints of God in that day. And that 
will be glory to Him! He will be glorified in it all, and 
will be admired in all them that believed. What a spectacle 
it will be to the inhabitants of the world! What bitterness 
it will add to the eternal loss and shame of those who 
neglected so great salvation! 

And dear reader, what a powerful incentive this coming 
revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven ought to be in 
our lives! If such is our destiny to appear as the co-heirs 
of our Lord, clothed with our glory, what manner of men 
and women we should be! Daily we should pray that the 
Holy Spirit may keep this truth before our hearts and make 


122 The Christ We Know 


it a power in our daily lives. Then we shall be lifted above 
the turmoil and confusion of the darkening days in which 
our lot is cast. If we keep this blessed truth of the Coming 
of our Lord constantly in mind, it certainly will keep us. 
And what an incentive to service. All about us are those 
who know not God and who do not obey the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ. ‘They are hastening on to an awful 
doom. May we pray for them and increase our efforts to 
reach some of those who know Him not. 
And oh! the longing of hearts today that all that is 
written concerning His Coming may soon be fulfilled. 
“Lord Jesus, come! 
Let ev’ry knee bow down, 
And ev’ry tongue to Thee confess, 


The Lord of all, come forth to bless 
Lord Jesus, come! 


“Spirit and Bride, 
With longing voice, say, ‘Come’; 
Yea, Lord, Thy word from that bright home 
Is, ‘Surely, I will quickly come!’ 
E’en so, Lord, come.” 


THE MAN AT THE RIGHT HAND 


al ies thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon 
the Son of Man whom thou madest strong for thy- 
self” (Psa. Ixxx:17). ‘This is a prayer of a suffering people, 
who are fed with the bread of tears, who drink tears in 
great measure (verse 5). They cry to Him “that dwelleth 
between the Cherubim” (verse 1). They pray, “Turn us 
again, O God of hosts, and cause Thy face to shine, and 
we shall be saved.” It is the prayer of a God-fearing rem- 


The Man at the Right Hand 123 


nant of the Jewish people during the final great tribulation 
through which they pass, before their history of tears and 
sorrow is ended, and, their history of glory begins. And 
they expect their help and deliverance through One who is 
at God’s right hand, the Son of Man, whom God has ex- 
alted. Only through that Man at the right hand can come 
salvation and deliverance. 

At Ephrath dying Rachel called her son “Ben-oni,” which 
means “Son of suffering.’ But the father called him “Ben- 
jamin,’ which means translated, “son of the right hand” 
(Gen. xxxv:18). It is a beautiful type of Him who was 
born in Bethlehem Ephratah, the man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief, the son of suffering. But after He 
was rejected by His own, after His suffering and death, the 
Father raised Him from the dead, exalted Him, placed Him 
at His right hand, gave Him all power in heaven and on 
earth. He is now the Man at the right hand. Prophet- 
ically, the One-hundred-and-tenth Psalm speaks of this: 
“The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand 
until I make thine enemies thy footstool.” The rejected 
One is enthroned in the highest heaven and occupies the 
very throne of God. How abundantly the New Testament 
bears this witness. Our Lord quoted this prophecy before 
the Pharisees and applies it to Himself (Matt. xxii:41). 
The Holy Spirit made use of it on the day of Pentecost 
through Peter. ‘For David is not ascended into the heavens, 
but he saith himself, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou 
on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool. 
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that 
God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, 
both Lord and Christ” (Acts ii:34-36). In the Epistle to 
the Hebrews we find it again mentioned (Heb. i:13; x:12). 


124 The Christ We Know 


And this exalted One, the Man, who was here, who 
suffered and died for our sins, who now fills the throne and 
occupies the position of glory and authority, is the salvation 
and help of His people. From Him cometh our help, our 
_ strength, our joy and peace. Apart from Him we are 
* nothing and can do nothing. We must learn daily to look 
away from ourselves, from man, from earthly circumstances 
and conditions, and look to Him at the right hand of God. 
The life which is lived thus, which never loses sight of the 
exalted One and depends on Him, is a life of power and 
bears the blessed fruit of righteousness. Is not this the 
need of all of us? We need keeping, strength and power 
in the midst of increasing darkness. We need to be kept 
in perfect peace and calmness, All and every other need 
is supplied in Him who is at the right hand. “Thou wilt 
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed upon thee, 
for he trusteth in thee” (Isa. xxvi:3). All our need is sup- 
plied by God according to His riches in glory by Christ 
Jesus. (Phil. iv:19). This constant reminding God’s be- 
loved people to look to an exalted Christ, the Man at the 
right hand, He who is touched with the feeling of our 
infirmities, was Paul’s great testimony. He knew the need 
of this. He exhorted the Philippians to rejoice in the Lord 
and added “to write the same things to you, to me indeed 
is not grievous, but for you it is safe” (Phil. iii:1). 

But He who is at the right hand of God will not occupy 
that place forever. The Father’s throne is not His per- 
manent place. He must receive His own throne to which 
He is entitled. ‘Therefore we read in Psalm cx that He will 
be there at the right hand up to the time when His enemies 
are made His footstool. When the hour strikes in God’s 
purpose, when His enemies are to be humbled in the dust 
and He is to receive the promised kingdom, He will leave 


The Man at the Right Hand 125 


His place at the right hand of God. Of this Hebrews 
X:1I, 12 speaks. “But this man, after He had offered one 
sacrifice for sins forever, sat down on the right hand of 
God, from henceforth waiting till His enemies be made 
His footstool.” 


The Second Psalm describes our Lord as He looks upon 
the earth and beholds the nations banded together, hating 
Him and His laws. “Let us break their bands asunder, 
and cast away their cords from us.” ‘This open revolt hap- 
pens at the close of the present age. The nations which had 
the Gospel and rejected that Gospel, the nations we called 
“Christian nations,’ and who were engaged in the awful 
conflict, will take this God-defying attitude. What a testi-_ 
mony to the real character of this present age! And what 
does He do who sitteth in the heavens? ‘He that sitteth 
in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in 
derision” (Psalm ii:4). He witnesses all in silence. But 
suddenly the scene will change. “Then” when His enemies 
revolt, “then shall He speak unto them in His wrath, and 
vex them in His sore displeasure.” He will arise and exe- 
cute the wrath and vengeance of God. He will appear in 
person to judge the nations and the world in righteousness. 

“God hath appointed a day, with which He will judge 
the world in righteousness by that Man whom He hath 
ordained, whereof He hath given assurance unto all, in 
that He hath raised Him from the dead” (Acts xvii:31). 
Then He comes and answers the despairing cry of the rem- 
nant of His earthly, Jewish people and delivers them out of 
the great tribulation and from all their enemies. Then 
will they know that the “Benoni,” the once rejected Christ, 
whom they nailed to the cross, is the “Benjamin,” the Son 


of the right hand, their Deliverer and Lord. 


126 The Christ We Know 


But before He is manifested as the mighty victor over 
Satan and all His enemies, before He comes to claim His 
throne and His world-wide kingdom, He calls to Himself 
His redeemed to meet Him first of all in the sky. He leaves 
the place at the right hand to welcome and to receive His 
own dear people for whom He died and whom He kept by 
His priestly ministrations at the right hand of God. Before 
He acts in judgment upon His enemies, this ceatihy event 
will take place. 


And well it is to remember these familiar truths and not 
to lose sight of them a single day. The accomplishment of 
all these things hastens in our day. Let us lean more than 
ever upon the everlasting arms, let us look to Him for help 
and all we need, to Him, who is at the right hand. And 
looking to Him, let us look for Him to call us to Himself. 


a 
Mis 
~ 


> ae 
Dieara.. yt 

ibe hia! 
ay 


A 
ae 
LC 


LOGICAL > 


